VOL. XVI. NOVEMBER 1, 1895. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: 246 

Views from the Tower 247 

Colporteuring in Great Britain 248 

Pressing Toward the Mark 249 

St. Paul's Tears 251 

Shoot Upward and Root Downward 252 

Poem: Let Your Light Shine Out! 252 

Bible Study: Saul Chosen King 252 

Bible Study: Saul Rejected 253 

Encouraging Letters 255 

page 246 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



TRACTS Nos. 4 and 18 are out of print; others are in good supply; 
order freely. 



THOSE who send in changes of address will oblige us by stating 
whether it is only a temporary change or a permanent one. 

R1886 : page 246 

THE RECALLED INTRODUCTORY LETTERS. 

Some of these have not yet been returned; please send them in 
promptly. In this connection we wish to correct the misapprehension 
of some by explaining that the Introductory Letters were not recalled 
because they were seen to be wrong. Quite the contrary: we considered 



them entirely right and Scriptural; but since certain opponents 

of the cause miscalled them Letters of Authorization, etc., in total disregard 

of the facts and the statements of said letters, and since some of 

the beginners might thus be stumbled by the misrepresentation, it was 

deemed best to recall them; for no principle was involved or surrendered. 

As stated at the time, the Tract Society will no longer thus introduce 

anyone. But this in no degree curtails either readers or Editor 

of the TOWER from giving a letter of introduction whenever they 

think such a course advisable. 



R1883 : page 247 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



WE called attention recently to the fact that Methodism 
is being considerably shaken internally. The 
people, or, as they term them, the "laity," are getting 
awake to the fact that they are being ruled by a clerical 
oligarchy, whose wire-pulling for place and power and 
title among themselves much resembles the methods of 
political parties; while the people, the Church en masse, 
have almost no voice in the councils of the church, but 
all the expenses to bear. 

The following extracts are from a prominent article 
which appeared recently in the Chicago Chronicle, and 
which has excited considerable comment. It is headed— 

"METHODISM AND REFORM." 



"The old polity that was established in the time of Asbury, 
and that has been trimmed a little here and there by 
the general conferences, is as ungainly as a seventeenth 
century dress. Reform is abroad in the air.... 

"The laymen are evidently waking up to the fact that 
as they are payers they ought to have more voice in the 
matter of church government. 

"At present their voice, what they have, is so limited 
that a consciousness of it produces nausea and disgust. 
They are beginning to clamor for a "magna charta," and 
as England's king was compelled to grant the people's request, 
so here the general conference of '96 in Cleveland 
will be obliged to heed and obey. They demand that the 
church members elect their own officers and that they be not 
the tool of the pastor and a self-perpetuating official board. 
They realize that every member is a stockholder, and ought 
to have his stock represented by vote. This encroachment 
will be fought bitterly by the 'big ones' and the bishops. 

"It is hard to yield power once possessed. The 
bishops do not claim unlimited power, but it amounts to 
the same thing, and is so exercised as to bring about the 



results obtained.... 

..."The present mode is for the bishop to 
appoint [elders]. What does he know of men, except hearsay, 
or uncertain popularity? And yet they do this, in 
consultation with a cabinet of presiding elders, who piously 
declare the bishop appoints them. 

"If he does do so, in opposition to his cabinet, he is 
tyrannical. Any misfit is attributed to the bishop, who is 
in a position to snap his finger at impotent rage. Methodist 
ministers are loyal, or they would not stand such 
ridiculous assumption of power. The laymen are taking 
pity on the poor minister whose position is by the grace of 
his lordship, the bishop, and his cabinet. The laymen demand 
a free, untrammeled use of speech and action. Another 
step and we elect our pastors. At present, contrary to all 
law, a few churches do elect their pastors. This is demanded 
for all the churches. Election or selection of all 
churches in regard to their pastors is a settled fact. It is 
coming, it must come, or the earth will open and swallow 
us up.... 

"The spoken and unspoken actions and utterances of 
the laity were to curb the power— in fact to stop the "band 
wagon" long enough to climb in and ride. They already 
demand representation in equal numbers to all deliberations 
and conferences of the church. Their hitherto 
loyalty and devotion to their church has made them spectators 
rather than participants. Now they plan participation 
or alienation. No longer presiding elders and preachers 
ruled and controlled by bishops, and the laity in turn ruled 
and controlled by preachers. 

"The bones of John Wesley must almost turn in their 
grave to see it. The old lumber wagon is doing good 
work, but a more modern vehicle is demanded. The greatest 
church in Protestantism has arisen, and will put on her 
beautiful garments. It looks revolutionary, but reform is 
always that. It is a strange fact that British Methodism, 
triumphant, is more American by far than the church in 
America.... 

"A good shaking up is necessary and it is coming. 
We are now weak, where to-morrow we will be strong. Let 
us pray for the day when we get down to a basis we can 
commend to the people— our church free from the shackles 
of an imperial ecclesiasticism." 

R1883 : page 248 

The Church of Christ has probably suffered more from 
pride and ambition for leadership than from any other one 
cause. The disciples were reproved time and again for 
disputing which should be considered greatest, until finally 
our Lord told them plainly that such a spirit of self-exaltation 
would be sure to keep all who possessed it out of the 
promised Kingdom. He said, also, "Ye know that the 
princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and 
they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it 
shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great 



among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will 
be chief among you, let him be your servant, even as the 
Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Matt. 20:25-28. 

The highest position in Christ's Church was to be 
"servant," and he declared himself the chief servant or 
minister of the Church. And surely— if "all ye are 
brethren," then all the brethren should have an equal right 
to express their judgment of the Lord's will respecting the 
leadership of meetings, and all other matters related to 
the welfare of the Lord's cause. There should be no 
rulership, lordship or masteries amongst those whom the 
one Master, even Christ, has put upon a common level. 
The division of the Church in the dark ages into "clergy" 
and "laity" came not from the Lord and the Apostles, 

R1884 : page 248 

but from ambition, fostered by the great enemy, Satan. 

We trust that the brethren and sisters who rejoice in 
the present truth will be on guard against conditions which 
have done so much in the past to injure the Lord's cause, 
and which grow from almost imperceptible beginnings, until 
custom becomes a chain which perverts God's order and 
hinders the development of the talents of many of his 
children and permits one or two in the congregation to exercise 
lordship over God's heritage, without so much as 
recognizing the right of the Church to decide for themselves 
(under the guidance of the holy spirit) who are those who 
possess the qualifications for the service specified in God's 
Word. 

We urge upon all the brethren, in every place, possessed 
of zeal and qualifications for the service of God's flock, 
that they carefully avoid trenching upon the liberties 
wherewith the Lord has made free his people. We commend 
that modesty which in honor prefers one another, 
and seeks to help forward into active service every other 
one in proportion as he seems to have requisite talents; 
and which would refuse to lead even a small group except 
with the expressed desire that he do so, by at least a 
majority of those professing faith in the ransom and full 
consecration to the Lord's service. And this choice should 
not be perpetual: an opportunity to know the mind of 
God's people should be sought at least yearly, and oftener 
if there be reason to believe that a change would be desirable 
to the majority. Protect the liberties of the flock, because 
they are not yours but the liberties of Christ's cause. "One 
is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren." 



R1884: page 248 

COLPORTEURING IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



HERETOFORE this has not been successful to any 
considerable extent; but the friends of the 
truth will be glad to read the following interesting account 
of Brother Houston's two weeks' trip. It shows what can 
be done by the use of the right methods. We hope others 
will take courage and try it, if only for a week or two. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I was out a fortnight 
colporteuring, just as an experiment, and I liked it well. 
I got on splendidly. I took a return ticket to Edinburgh, 
with liberty to stop at every station. I took the 8 A.M. 
train to Helmsdale. At the first house I got an order for 
Vol. I. I called at every house up one side of the street 
and down the other, also hailing men who might be standing 
in little groups. I got orders for 35 volumes. Strange to 
say, the first order I took was cancelled, as well as some 
more, but in delivering I made some further sales, and so 
made up for all that were cancelled. 

I left Helmsdale next morning for Brora, where I 
sold and delivered about the same quantity. I had to stay 
here over the Sabbath. Was called upon by the Y.M.C.A. 
to take their meeting (a public one) on Sabbath 
night, and the Lord helped me to declare very fully the 
glorious gospel— with which they all seemed refreshed. A 
few of the leaders came with me to my lodging, to whom 
I declared more freely the truth of God. 

On Monday morning I left for Golspie, where I sold 
and delivered about 60 vols. About one-fourth of those 
who bought took all three volumes, which helped up the 
sales wonderfully. Golspie is one long street, very easy to 
work. I took the orders the one day and delivered them 
the next. Here my No. I books ran out, and not having 
any more I passed on to Inverness, as I did not wish to 
canvass towns near by until I would have the books to deliver. 
In this work above all works, I find it is true, that 
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy 
might." 

I started again at Buckie and thoroughly canvassed 
every house. Buckie is a very dead sort of place, about 
half of the population being Roman Catholics; hence the 
spiritual and mental deadness. Got about three dozen 
orders. Next day I went to Cullen, a very bright little 
town, where I got about forty orders. 

I passed on to Aberdeen, where I knew a commercial 
gentleman to whom I had loaned Vol. I. At his house I 
met a few friends, one from London, a notable evolutionist. 
We entered into friendly debate and very soon got into the 
thick of all the great questions of the day. From the 
knowledge of the "Plan of the Ages," I was enabled not 
only to confute the wrong theories, but to point out the 
true, and introduce M.D., all of which helped to confirm 
my commercial friend and his wife in the truth. Left Aberdeen 
next morning for Edinburgh, saw the friends there. 
Passed on to Glasgow and saw a number of friends there. 



R1884 : page 249 

Left Glasgow again on Monday and came back to 
Edinburgh. Began with Brother Montgomery to try what 
could be done there. For the day we got ten orders. 
Brother Montgomery was well pleased; he sold fully more 
than I did, and this gave him confidence. He is to spend 
one day in the week canvassing systematically over Edinburgh. 
Mr. Ballingall, an excellent young man, is to help 
him. Although large towns are stiffer, one gets over the 
ground easily, and you come in contact with a number of 
precious souls in a very short space of time; and a tract 
or a word of truth might get in and do good eventually. 

Next day I left for Perth. Was very tired and done 
up, but called upon a number of booksellers to see if they 
had ever seen or heard of that book (pointing out No. I), 
but not one of them had ever heard of it. I had not 
much time, but got a few orders. From Perth I started for 
home, and found every thing getting on very well. My 
average during the trip was 30 volumes per day. 

Yours, seeking to serve our blessed master more fully 
than ever, C. N. HOUSTON. 



R1884: page 249 

PRESSING TOWARD THE MARK. 



"I press toward the mark for the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus."— Phil. 3:14. 

THESE were the words of one of the most earnest and 
faithful runners for the prize of the high calling of 
the Gospel Church. The speaker was a man of faith, a man 
of understanding, a man of fixed and unwavering purpose 
and of dauntless courage— a wise man in the Scriptural 
sense, though a fool in the world's estimation. His course, 
as well as those of the other eleven apostles, we are assured 
was a successful one; for the Revelator in describing the 
heavenly Jerusalem says, "And the wall of the city had 
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve 
apostles of the Lamb." (Rev. 21:14.) And at the end 
of his course, the Apostle, in the full assurance of faith, 
left us this triumphant testimony: "I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: 
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me 
at that day." And then, ever mindful of the other members 
of the body still in the race, he added, "And not to 
me only, but unto all them that love his appearing."— 
2 Tim. 4:6-8. 

In reviewing the course of the successful runners of the 
past, there is much of encouragement and helpfulness to 



all those who are still endeavoring to make their calling 
and election sure; for even the Apostle Paul, strong and 
daring as he was, reminds us that he was a man of like 
passions with ourselves; that while still in the strife of the 
Christian warfare he counted not that he had already 
attained the mark for the prize, nor that he was already 
perfect. He tells us that he realized, as we all do, a law 
in his members warring against the law of his mind, and 
that he found it necessary to exert his will continually to 
keep the body under.-Acts 14:15; Phil. 3:12; Rom. 7:23; 
1 Cor. 9:27. 

If Paul and all the other apostles and beloved saints 
of the early church were men of like passions with ourselves, 
and similarly compassed with infirmities and adverse 
influences, besetments and allurements; and if they too 
were frequently assailed with temptations and trials which 
summoned all their fortitude to enable them to overcome, 
then, in their overcoming, we have the assurance that we 
also may overcome through the grace promised to us, as 
well as to them, if, like them, we avail ourselves of it. 

So assured was the Apostle of his own continuous 
faithfulness, and of that of the other apostles, and of his 
co-laborers, that he could say to the church, "You have us 
for examples."-Phil. 3:17; 2 Thes. 3:7-9; 1 Cor. 4:9. 

Noble examples they were— of faithfulness, of zeal, 
of patience, of endurance, and of true Christian fortitude 
and heroism. While many of those in more obscure positions 
in the church were doubtless as faithful in their 
spheres, the Apostle Paul, as a leader and pioneer of the 
faith among the Gentiles, comes very prominently to view. 
At the very beginning of his Christian course, the Lord 
said, "I will show him how great things he must suffer for 
my name's sake." (Acts 9:16.) Paul was not long in 
proving the truth of this prediction; but, instead of allowing 
the prospect of continual tribulation to depress him, 
he only rejoiced in the privilege thus afforded of testifying 
his love to the Lord. "And now," he says, "I go bound 

R1885 : page 249 

in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that 
shall befall me there, save that the holy Spirit witnesseth in 
every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. 
But none of these things move me, neither count I my life 
dear unto myself, so that I may finish my course with joy, 
and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, 
to testify the gospel of the grace of God."— Acts 20:22-24. 

Hear the Apostle's testimony of his own experience— 
"In labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons 
frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I 
forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, 
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and 
a day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in 
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own 
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, 
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 



among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in 
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in 
cold and nakedness. Beside those things that are without, 
that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, 
and I burn not?"~2 Cor. 11:23-33. 

Through all these tribulations the Apostle pressed toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling. The mark 
to be attained was holiness— that holiness which brings 

R1885 : page 250 

very thought into captivity to the will of God, the mind of 
Christ. (2 Cor. 10:5.) That was the grand ideal which 
Paul steadily pursued; and surely in his life he gave evidence 
of constant growth in grace. Under tests of great 
and ever-increasing severity his character developed into 
most graceful and beautiful proportions. The same is also 
manifest in the characters of the other apostles and saints, 
though their record has not come down to us as complete 
as that of the Apostle to the Gentiles. 

But it is specially important that we should observe 
how our beloved Brother Paul was enabled to run so steadily 
in a race so difficult. How was he able to steer so clear 
of the temptations and besetments to which he, as a man 
of like passions with us, was necessarily subject? His answer 
is— "Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: 
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things 
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things 
which are before, I press toward the mark," etc. 

Here are four considerations which we do well to 
ponder most carefully:— 

First. The Apostle made a humble, sober estimate 
of his spiritual standing and strength. He did not feel 
puffed up at being a chosen vessel of the Lord to bear his 
name before the Gentiles. He did not consider himself 
the Great Apostle, nor vaunt himself in any way. And so 
far was he from boasting of his spiritual attainments, that 
he humbly reminded the church of the possibility of himself 
being a castaway, even after he had preached to others, 
unless he continued to stand fast in his integrity and to grow 
in grace. (1 Cor. 9:27.) And while he held up before 
them Christ as the power of God and the wisdom of God, 
and the model for their imitation, he humbly declared that 
he, with them, was striving to follow the pattern, Christ, 
while trusting alone in the merit of his sacrifice to make up 
his own shortcomings. Thus he was relieved of that 
greatest hindrance to spiritual development— self-satisfaction; 
for if any man considers that he has attained a satisfactory 
spiritual state, from that very moment he may date 
the beginning of his spiritual decline. No present attainments 
can be satisfactory to a sincere follower of Christ 
who studiously endeavors to copy the perfect pattern. It 
is only when we turn our eyes away from Christ that self-complacency 
can be exercised; for, in full view of the 
pattern, our shortcomings are ever manifest. And if in 



pride of heart we do lose sight of them ourselves, they 
only become the more manifest to others. Only in the 
realization of a continual growth into the likeness of 
Christ should the Christian find satisfaction. Like the 
Apostle, let him consider, not that he has already attained, 
neither that he is already perfect, but that he is still in the 
race and making progress towards the goal. And no doubt 
it was the considering of himself as not having attained 
perfection, and as still subject to frailty, that led the 
Apostle to seek the Lord's grace, that kept him always in 
a humble attitude of mind and that gave him compassion 
for the weaknesses and failings of others. It is those who 
become high-minded and self-sufficient that strain to pull 
out the mote from their brother's eye and forget the beam 
in their own. 

Secondly, we observe the Apostle's singleness of purpose 
—"This one thing I do." He did not try to do several 
things: if he had, he would surely have failed. He 
devoted his life to the one purpose to which he was called, 
and to that end dropped every other aim in life. He did 
it, too, in view of the fact that all through the present life 
his chosen course would bring certain loss, privation, toil, 
care, persecution and continual reproach. In this singleness 
of purpose he was relieved of many temptations to 
turn aside to enjoy some of the good things of this present 
life, or to pursue some of its illusive bubbles. 

Thirdly, we observe that he determined to forget the 
things behind. Had he allowed his mind to return again 
and again to con over the treasures of the past which he 
had given up; to reconsider how great the sacrifice which 
he had made in thus devoting himself to the cause of the 
despised and crucified One, he might have been tempted 
first to despondency, and later to return and seek to recover 
the things behind. On the other hand, he might have 
carried before him the picture of his persecutions of the 
Christians and his consenting to their martyrdom, wondering 
whether the Lord had forgiven him, and continually 
condemning himself for his blindness, thus forfeiting his 
peace of mind and interfering with his usefulness. But, 
having accepted forgiveness in Christ, he put that away 
also, though he frequently referred to the matter with contrition, 
and the thought seemed to influence his whole life 
so that he labored the more diligently to testify to his 
appreciation of the grace bestowed, and to be long-suffering 
with others as God had been with him. (1 Cor. 15:9,10; 
Phil. 3:6; Eph. 3:8; Gal. 1:13; 1 Tim. 1:12-16.) 
Wise indeed was he to forget the things behind! 

Fourthly, he reached forward to the things that were 
before,— his faith took hold of the promises of God with 
such tenacity that to him they were living realities, inspiring 
zeal and faithfulness. Upon the heavenly themes 
he allowed his mind to dwell, as he also advised others, 
saying, "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good report; if there be any virtue and if there be any 



praise, think on these things." (Phil. 4:8.) This is the 
way he reached forward to the things before; and thus also 
we must gather our inspiration to holiness and our courage 
to endurance and preservering faithfulness, even unto 
death. The Christian's habit of thought has much indeed 
to do with his spiritual progress or retrogression, as it is 
also an index of his spiritual state, and good habits of 
thought need to be very carefully cultivated. 
By "habit of thought" we mean that normal 
condition to which the mind habitually returns in the 
moments of mental leisure. While engaged in the active 
duties of life we must of necessity bend our mental energies 

R1885 : page 251 

to the work in hand, for if we do any thing merely 
mechanically and without concentrating thought upon it, 
we cannot do it well: yet, even here, Christian principle, 
well established in the character, will unconsciously guide. 
But when the strain of labor and care are lifted for a time, 
the established habit of thought, like the needle to the pole, 
should quickly return to its rest in God. "Return unto 
thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully 
with thee." (Psa. 116:7.) Let not the mind thus temporarily 
released grovel and revel in earthly things, but let 
it return to its rest and refreshment in the contemplation 
of "whatsoever things are pure and lovely and of good report" 
—upon that beauty of holiness which is the mark 
or goal or end of our high calling, the attainment of which 
will be rewarded with the "prize"— glory, honor and 
immortality. As the poet has beautifully expressed it,— 

"Now let our thoughts on wings sublime 

Rise from the trivial cares of time, 

Draw back the parting veil, and see 

The glories of eternity." 
Let thoughts of God and Christ and the worthy saints 
of the past and present, of the heavenly inheritance, of 
the blessedness of our future work in cooperation with 
Christ, of the magnitude and benevolence of the divine 
plan, and of the glory and blessedness of our gathering 
together unto Christ when our work of the present life is 
finished, fill our minds and inspire our hearts. And to these 
contemplations let us also receive the additional comfort 
and blessedness of personal communion and fellowship 
with God through prayer and the study of the Word and 
the assembling of ourselves together for worship and praise. 

Fifthly, we note the Apostle's energetic zeal, which 
not only reached forward in contemplation of and desire for 
the beauty of holiness and the heavenly glory, but also 
earnestly pressed toward the mark for the prize. It is not 
enough that we consider and desire these things, we must 
also run for them, strive to attain them, and study and endeavor 

R1886 : page 251 

by the grace of God to so run as to obtain. In this 



connection we see a fresh beauty in the Apostle's admonition 
in another place— "strive [i.e., endeavor, labor] to 
enter into rest." The harder we work to accomplish the 
Lord's will in ourselves and that part of his work committed 
to us, the greater is our peace and true rest. Let 
all the faithful take courage, and also take instruction from 
the example and teaching of the faithful Apostle to us 
Gentiles, who himself ran so successfully to the end of his 
course; for the same grace is promised also unto us. 

There is one other thought suggested by the above 
words of the Apostle which we would do well to consider, 
and that is, that as his faithful and successful course was a 
worthy and safe example to the Church, so likewise should 
each disciple of Christ in turn consider that his example 
will have its influence upon others. Every Christian 
should strive to be a pattern worthy of imitation— a pattern 
of earnest, faithful endeavor to copy Christ in his 
daily life, and of active zeal in his service. Patterns of 
perfection, of the ultimate moral glory and beauty of holiness, 
we cannot expect to be in the present life. Such a 
pattern we have only in Christ our Lord. In no such sense 
did Paul ever say, Follow me, or Follow us; but he did 
say, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ." 
-1 Cor. 11:1. 

The Apostle was a grand example of earnest endeavor 
to attain perfection, but not of the ultimate perfection 
which was in Christ only; and it is his zeal and intense 
earnestness in striving to copy Christ and to accomplish his 
will that we should imitate. Let us mark all such worthy 
examples while we also "press toward the mark [of character] 
for [the attainment of] the prize of our high calling." 



R1886 : page 251 
ST. PAUL'S TEARS. 



NO reader of the Acts of the Apostles can have failed 

to notice the strong affection with which Paul 

inspired those who came to know him. We find it illustrated, 

for example, by their grief when called upon to 

part with him. When he bade farewell to the elders of the 

Ephesian Church "they all wept sore." (Acts 20:37.) On 

his leaving the Christians at Caesarea some time afterwards 

it is evident from his words in Acts 21:13 that some of 

them shed tears. And Paul himself records the tears of 

Timothy.— 2 Tim. 1:4. 

On these occasions it would seem that Paul himself retained 
his composure. No mention is made of his weeping 
like the friends whom he was leaving. And yet he has told 
us once and again of his being moved to express his feelings 
in this way. Thus he reminded the Ephesian elders, 
on the occasion already alluded to, that during his ministry 



among them he had served the Lord "with many tears." 
(Acts 20:19.) In his Second Epistle to the Corinthians he 
tells them that his first epistle to them, in which he had to 
rebuke them sharply for their carnality and toleration of 
gross evil in the Church, had been written "with many 
tears." (2 Cor. 2:4.) And amid the joy with which he 
wrote his Epistle to the Philippians the mention he made 
of those "whose end is destruction" caused him at once 
to give way to weeping.— Phil. 3:18,19. 

Thus we see that the tears of Paul's friends, however 
excusable or even laudable they may have been, were the 
expression of feelings far less noble than those which made 
him weep. Theirs were the tears of natural affection, 
mourning its own loss. His was the grief of an unselfish 
heart yearning over the salvation of others, and dreading 
lest they should be lost, or lamenting because the Christian 
profession of the Lord's people was marred and their Christian 
life hindered by their unholy walk. In this matter 
Paul resembled the Lord, whose tears were shed chiefly in 
sympathy on behalf of others (John 11:35; Luke 19:41), 
and who forbade others to weep for him. (Luke 23:28.) 
May he make us like himself in this also— strong to bear 
our own griefs and tender to feel the sorrows and sins of 
others.— Selected. 



R1886 : page 252 

SHOOT UPWARD AND ROOT DOWNWARD. 



LET me remind you all, ye faithful believers in Christ, 
that ye are compared to trees— trees of the Lord's 
right-hand planting. Seek to grow as the tree grows. Pray 
that this year ye may grow downward; that ye may know 
more of your own vileness, more of your own nothingness; 
and so be rooted to humility. Pray that your roots may 
penetrate below the mere topsoil of truth, into the great 
rocks which underlie the uppermost stratum; that ye may 
get a good hold of the doctrines of eternal love, of immutable 
faithfulness, of complete satisfaction, of union to Christ, 
of the eternal purpose of God, which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus before the world was. This will be a growth which 
will not add to your fame, which will not minister to your 
vanity, but it will be invaluable in the hour of storm; a 
growth, the value of which no heart can conceive when the 
hurricane is tearing up the hypocrite. As ye root downward, 
seek to grow upward. Send out the topshoot of your love 
towards heaven. As the trees send out their spring shoot 
and their midsummer shoot, and as you see upon the top 
of the fir that new green child of spring, the fresh shoot 
which lifts its hand towards the sun, so pant to have more 
love and greater desires after God, a nearer approach towards 
him in prayer, a sweeter spirit of adoption, a more 



intense and intimate fellowship with the Father and with his 

Son, Jesus Christ. This mounting upward will add to your 

beauty and to your delight. Then pray to grow on either 

side. Stretch out your branches; let the shadow of your 

holy influence extend as far as God has given you opportunities. 

But see to it also that ye grow in fruitfulness, for 

to increase the bough without adding to the fruit is to diminish 

the beauty of the tree. Labor this year by God's 

grace to bring forth more fruit unto him than ye have ever 

done. We would not be as the gleanings of the vintage 

when there is only here and there a cluster upon the uppermost 

bough, we would be as the Valley of Eschol, whose 

presses burst with new wine. 

This is to grow in grace; to root downward, to shoot 
upward, to extend your influences like far-reaching 
branches, and to bring forth fruit unto the Lord's 
glory.— C. H. Spurgeon. 



LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE OUT! 



Have you entered the race for the prize, brother, 

For the crown of Immortal Life? 
Are you pressing along the line, brother, 

Amid dangers, trials and strife? 

CHO.— Let your light shine out clear and bright, 
For you travel 'midst error and doubt; 
Of this dark world "ye are the light;" 
Christ has said let your light shine out. 

Does the pathway seem tedious and lone, brother, 
Are you weary, discouraged or faint? 

Courage! Christ is beside you to give, brother, 
Grace and comfort for ev'ry complaint. 

There are pilgrims who need cheering words, brother, 
Like our Lord, let us comfort and bless; 

Any where, any time, we may serve, brother, 
In this, find our own burdens made less. 

Time for winning the prize is but short, brother, 

Then so run that you surely obtain. 
Keep your eyes fixed on Jesus alone, brother, 

He will lead you, and make your way plain. 

Wondrous priv'lege is granted to us, brother, 
That of suffering with Jesus, our Head; 

As new creatures are we in God's sight, brother, 
To the world we are reckoned as dead. 

Then be vigilant, steadfast and true, brother; 
For the enemy "lieth in wait;" 



And put on the whole armor of God, brother, 
And for your feet make your paths straight. 
MRS. M. L. HERR. 



R1887 : page 252 

SAUL CHOSEN KING. 

--NOV. 10.— 1 SAM. 10:17-27.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord reigneth; 
let the earth rejoice."— Psa. 97:1. 

WHEN Samuel was well advanced in years he appointed 
his two sons as assistant judges in Beersheba; 
but their elevation to office proved detrimental to 
them in placing before them opportunities for dishonest 
gain. Instead of resisting this temptation, they yielded 
to it and "turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and 
perverted judgment."— Chap. 8:3. 

Under these conditions, with Samuel growing old and 
his sons reckless, and with powerful and threatening 
enemies on their frontier, the outlook for the national 
safety and prosperity of Israel was not hopeful from a human 
standpoint of view. And from the human standpoint it 
was only prudent forethought, in view of existing circumstances, 
to make provision for future necessities according 

R1887 : page 253 

to their own best judgment. The men of Israel, the leading 
men of the nation, thus reasoned; and accordingly, with 
respect and deference, they came to Samuel, the divinely 
appointed judge, and laid their case before him, with the 
request that the form of national government be changed, 
and that a king be appointed over them like the other 
nations. Thus they seemed to think that in the eyes of 
the other nations they would seem more formidable and 
more like a well organized nation; and the appearance of 
a well organized and powerful central government would 
reflect creditably, they thought, upon them as a people, 
and would give them a standing among the nations of 
the earth. 

All this would have been very commendable human 
prudence, and might be considered sound judgment in any 
other nation than the nation of Israel; but in their case it 
was not. They were forgetting, or rather ignoring, the 
fact that the Lord was their king, and that all their affairs 
present and future were in his hands; that so long as they 
were faithful to their covenant with him they should have 
peace and prosperity, and that no evil should befall them and 
no enemy could overcome them unless God permitted it as 
a punishment for national sins, as the Lord himself declared, 
saying, "Shall there be evil in a city, and I have 



not done it?" "I make peace and create evil. I the 
Lord do all these things." (Amos 3:6; Isa. 45:7.) This 
was not true of any other nation. Consequently Israel 
would have suffered no lack of prosperity or safety had they 
closely adhered to the Lord's leading. They had a powerful, 
though invisible, king, before whom none of their enemies 
could stand, and their only right course was to be 
loyal and obedient subjects. And if they were apprehensive 
of trouble in the future it was their privilege to draw 
near God; and in putting away sin and closely following 
him and committing themselves to his care, they would 
have been safe in every condition. 

Their course in requesting a king gave evidence (1) of 
a lack of faith in the power and love and faithfulness of 
God, notwithstanding the marvels of divine providence 
toward them in the past; (2) of weariness in well-doing— 
of only a slack hold upon those principles of righteousness 
in conformity to which alone could they enjoy the favor 
and blessings of God; and (3) of a desire to appear great 
themselves in the eyes of the other nations. 

In this they incurred the divine displeasure; nevertheless 
the Lord granted their request, but at the same time 
foretold the evils that would accompany their choice 
(8:11-22), which evils were realized in varying measure 
until God removed the diadem from the head of Zedekiah, 
their last king. 

The conduct of Samuel in this instance was most 
noble and unselfish. There was not a trace of selfishness 
or resentment in it. Grieved in spirit he took the matter 
to the Lord, evidently with that singleness of purpose 
which desired only to know and do his will. Then, with 
that dignity and grace which marked a high and noble 
nature, he humbly resigned his office in favor of the new 
king, and, like a tender father, kindly counselled and encouraged 
them to be faithful to God, closing his address 
with these touching words, "As for me, God forbid that I 
should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, but 
I will teach you the good and the right way. Only fear 
the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart; for 
consider how great things he hath done for you. But if ye 
still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your 
king."— Chap. 12. 

The choice of Saul was the Lord's choice of a king for 
Israel, the choice being indicated by lot. (10:19-22.) He 
was a God-fearing man of humble mind, of good ability 
and of noble bearing; and all Israel was well pleased with 
the choice. And Samuel, forgetful of himself and rejoicing 
to honor another, even one who was thenceforth to be 
his rival in the affections of the people, said to all the 
people, "See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that 
there is none like him among all the people? And all 
the people shouted and said, God save the king."— 
Verse 24. 

Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom 
—laying down the principles and limitations of the 
kingly power (Deut. 17:14-20), thus instituting a limited 



monarchy. 

After his anointing and acceptance by the people as 
king, Saul returned to his home in Gibeah accompanied by 
a band of godly men as his supporters and aids; and there, 
in retirement, he had time to make ready for the subsequent 
duties of his office. When he was despised and 
spoken against by some who neither feared God nor regarded 
man, Saul showed his good sense by simply maintaining 
a dignified silence and reserve, which was a severer 
rebuke than contention or threat. 

The golden text for this lesson, while it has no reference 
to the Lord's reign over Israel, but to the establishment 
of God's Kingdom in the earth in the dawn of the 
Millennial day, and hence calls upon the whole earth to 
rejoice, has nevertheless a fitness as applied to Israel. The 
Lord did graciously and righteously reign over that people; 
and, to the extent that they were able to appreciate his 
righteousness and justice and his love and care, it was a 
cause of rejoicing to them. 



R1887 : page 253 

SAUL REJECTED. 

--NOV. 17.-1 Sam. 15:10-23.- 

Golden Text— "To obey is better 
than sacrifice."—! Sam. 15:22. 



THAT the Lord expected of both the nation of Israel 
and the individuals of the nation strong confiding 
faith in him and implicit obedience to his commands is 
very manifest from the fact that the lack of such faith and 
obedience so often brought upon them severe penalties. As 
a nation they were punished with wars and captivities and 
plagues; and as individuals they were often severely chastised, 
as in the case before us. And God had a perfect 
right to require implicit faith and obedience of a people 
upon whom he had bestowed so many of his blessings, 
and to whom he had manifested himself in such wonderful 
ways. 

The case of Saul was one of those cases where much had 
been given, and of whom, therefore, much was required. 
God had chosen him and called him out from a position of 
obscurity and made him king over his chosen people; he 
had given him favor with the people, surrounded him with 
good assistants and co-laborers, and the wise and faithful 

R1887 : page 254 

counsel of his servant and prophet Samuel; and he had 
established him in the kingdom and given him victory 
over his enemies. But notwithstanding all these manifestations 
of divine favor, Saul was disobedient and slow to 



trust the Lord. Chap. 13:2-15 records his failure to 
trust God, and his presumptuous act in assuming the role 
of the priest and himself offering sacrifices, contrary to 
God's law and to his agreement with Samuel. He feared 
the enemy when he should have trusted in God, and he 
sinned presumptuously when he should have waited patiently 
for the deliverance which God alone could give. 

For this rash, presumptuous and faithless act, which 
proved Saul unworthy thenceforth of the great honor 
which God had conferred upon him in making him king 
over his people, God determined to withdraw that special 
favor and to appoint another to reign in his stead, and so 
instructed Samuel. "And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast 
done foolishly; thou hast not kept the commandment of the 
Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would 
the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever. 
But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath 
sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath 
commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou 
hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee."— 
13:13,14. 

Yet God did not take the kingdom from Saul at once. 
There was time left for repentance and reformation, which 
might have brought some mitigation of the penalty; and a 
measure of the divine favor still continued for his encouragement. 
But the season of grace was not improved, and 
by and by another test further proved Saul unworthy of 
his trust. On the southern borders of Palestine dwelt the 
Amalekites, a nomadic, warlike race, who roamed through 
the deserts between southern Judea and Egypt. They were 
a continual menace to the Israelites, often joining themselves 
to their other enemies and doing much damage. The 
iniquity of these enemies of the Lord's people now being 
full, God sent word to Saul by Samuel to destroy them utterly, 
to leave none of them alive, and also to destroy all 
their goods. 

This last feature of the command was hard for the 
acquisitive Israelites to obey, and, with Saul's permission, 

R1888 : page 254 

the best of the spoils were preserved, and Agag (their 
king) he saved alive. Then Saul sought to cover his 
sin with a lie; but the bleating of the sheep and the lowing 
of the oxen disclosed the truth, and the faithful 
prophet did not hesitate to inquire of the king, "What 
meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and 
the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" 

They meant that the king had disobeyed the command 
of the Lord, and the flimsy excuse that they were preserved 
for sacrifices unto the Lord was rejected as worthless. 
"And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in 
burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the 
Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to 
hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin 
of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." 



(Verses 22,23.) This is God's estimate of human wilfulness. 
It is like witchcraft in that it trusts to erring human 
judgment in preference to the infallible divine judgment; 
and it is like idolatry in that it adores and seeks to please 
self rather than God, who alone is worthy of supreme reverence, 
respect and obedience. 

Then Samuel delivered the Lord's message to the erring 
king, saying, "Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord 
hath said to me this night." "And Samuel said, When 
thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the 
head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee 
king over Israel?" and now, "Because thou hast rejected the 
word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being 
king." (Verses 16,17,23.) A few years previous to this 
a similar warning had been given, but Saul did not heed it 
nor repent, though the Lord was very slow to anger and 
plenteous in mercy. (Chap. 13:13,14.) And Samuel mourned 
for Saul: the young man that seemed so promising on the 
day of his inauguration had now departed from the right 
ways of the Lord; and Samuel grieved as a father over a 
wayward son.— Verse 35. 

But the Lord bade him arise and cease to mourn over 
Saul, seeing that he, the all-wise and holy One, who could 
not err, had rejected him from reigning over Israel. Then 
he directed him to David and told him to anoint him to 
reign in his stead.— Chap. 16:1. 

In the selection of both Saul and David we see that 
the Lord specially sought a meek and quiet spirit. Saul was 
at first little in his own eyes, and when the proposition was 
made to make him king, Saul answered, "Am not I a 
Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my 
family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? 
wherefore then speakest thou so to me?"— Chap. 9:21. 

That was just the spirit the Lord wanted to exalt, just 
the spirit that was fitted for his use; and had Saul maintained 
it throughout his course his reign would have been 
one of great prosperity; for behind his weakness was the 
might of Jehovah. The exaltation of Saul, alas! proved 
too great a temptation for him to pride, self-will and 
selfishness. He should have remembered ever to keep 
little in his own sight; for it is only the humble that God 
can exalt and use. 

The lessons of this narrative are important also to us. 
If much every way— of favor, of divine precept and promise 
and leading and instruction, and of special providences 
manifesting the divine favor and presence and blessing- 
was given to fleshly Israel, how much more is given to the 
Gospel church— the exceeding great and precious promises, 
the witness of the holy spirit with our spirits that we are 
sons and heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ if so be 
that we suffer with him, the leading of the holy spirit, the 
instructions of the inspired Apostles, and the wonderful 
manifestations of divine favor and providence to the Church 
both collectively and individually! 

And if implicit faith and reliance upon God were 
expected of fleshly Israel in view of their knowledge of 



God, how much stronger is the ground for such expectation 

on the part of the Gospel Church! The Lord does, and 

has a right to, expect much— a large return of faith 

and confidence and love and obedience— from those 

to whom he has given so much of the wealth of his favor; 

and if we are doubting and disobedient and wayward still, 

notwithstanding all his grace, we surely will not be counted 

worthy to be entrusted with the crown and the Kingdom 

which the Lord has prepared for them that love him. But 

as the Lord appointed another to take the place of Saul, so 

he will appoint others to take the crown and the Kingdom 

from those of the Gospel Church who prove themselves unworthy 

of it. 

Beloved, "Be not faithless, but believing," and "Hold 
that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." 

The lesson of meekness is also an important one. 
"When thou wast little in thine own sight," God could exalt 
thee and use thee. But beware that his goodness to thee 
harden not thy heart and incline thee to pride, ambition, 
self-righteousness or presumption. Mark the effects of 
these upon Saul, and beware; and by watchfulness and 

R1888 : page 255 

prayer strive to maintain a lowly mind, to think soberly, 

and to act wisely and prudently. Mark also the contrast 

of the effects of God's favor upon Samuel— the meek and 

quiet spirit, the beautiful self-forgetfulness and self-abandonment 

to the will of God, the noble heart that could even 

rejoice in the prosperity of a prominent rival, and that could 

lovingly and tenderly minister to the ungrateful and unappreciative. 

Such a character is one of the choicest 

flowers of earth. Such God appreciates and loves and seeks 

to cultivate by all the testings and trials of the present 

time (1 Pet. 5:10); and such he will exalt in due time 

("after that ye have suffered a while"). "Humble yourselves, 

therefore," beloved, "under the mighty hand 

of God." 



R1888 : page 255 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have been closely studying 
all the points you make in the three volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and in ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Churchianity has been an abomination to me from 
childhood, and the Church of Rome a system I feared and 
hated. Fox's Book of Martyrs, with its illustrations of 
torture and persecution of the saints, roused all the indignation 
of my boy's heart. All my life my heart's best 
sympathies have been on the side of oppressed humanity, 



and I have turned neither to the right hand nor to the left 
for frowns or favors. In the abolition of slavery I took my 
part in Massachusetts, where I was born in 1835, and fought 
for it in the army. I was actively engaged with my dear 
old father in the temperance cause, and we struck hard 
blows, so much so that hanging in effigy and threats of all 
sorts, even to life, were common to us. 

Some prejudice against the church and professed 
Christians was early engrafted into my mind by certain 
events of my youth. For instance, I saw a good man, 
who protested against fellowshiping men as brethren in 
Christ who held their fellow men in bondage, knocked down 
by the deacons and dragged by the hair of his head out of 
church. My mother had hard work keeping me from 
throwing the hymn-book at the deacons. I asked her why 
he did not stand up and fight. She replied that he was a 
true Christian, and believed in non-resistance. To my 
active, belligerent mind this was a strange principle. 
Senator Sumner of Massachusetts was another professor of 
this principle; and I remember well, when he was struck 
down in the Senate Chamber, how ready I was to avenge 
the blow if opportunity had permitted. 

But life has brought its lessons, and I too have had to 
learn that physical force is not the most powerful weapon. 
In the Labor reforms energy, talent and money have all 
been spent for twenty-five years with no expectation of 
reward of any sort; for, unlike many others, place nor 
profit was not in it for me. However, as I see things now, 
I hold no vain regrets as to this matter; for I recognize in 
this whole matter God's own good pleasure to me personally, 
and world wide. No blow could have been struck, 
not even war, that would have caused such general worldwide 
distress and trouble as this act of all the kingdoms 
of demonetizing silver and thus taking away from the 
people the use of half their money. Money, the blood of 
commerce and the power of civilization, is thus made the 
instrument of helping on the day of trouble. 

Excuse so much of personal history this time. I have 
written it as an introduction so you may the better judge 
what you think will be for my betterment. 

Yes, I see much of God's more excellent way of 
blessing the world through Christ, and I have been talking 
it at the firesides of my neighbors and have been writing it 
to my old co-laborers and urging them to send for the 
DAWN, and some have written me they have done so. I 
only regret that I have not the means to purchase a lot to 
send to friends. I recognize how hard the change of base 
will be; for I am well known to all the labor leaders and was 
active in the last campaign, speaking in school houses and 
elsewhere, free and without price. I see no way to prevent 
my falling into the temptation except to give the same zeal 
and effort to the instruction of others in the signs of the 
times and telling the story of the Resurrection and the 
Life, the overthrow of all earthly systems of government 
and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Prince of 
Peace. 



I have received the envelopes and am pleased with 
them, also tract No. 21 and the bound volumes of DAWN 

R1889 : page 255 

for my wife, who is talking as she visits of the old light in 
its new form. 

I notice in a late TOWER your excellent wife is having 
parlor meetings. They are the very best kind of 
meetings. I find fireside talks with my neighbors very 
useful in pointing out the truth. 

Wishing you and the cause success, I remain, 
Yours truly, BENJ. W. GOODHUE. 

[We sympathize greatly with the noble souls who, in 
one way and another, are striving and spending time, talent 
and means in the various reform movements of our day. 
They have the right spirit and we should not be surprised 
to find God granting them knowledge proportionate to 
their zeal. 

To turn your zeal into the Lord's work and help to 
prepare yourself and others for a place in the Bride company 
which by and by, as God's Kingdom, will institute 
all the gracious reforms promised, is certainly the only 
proper course, as well as a great privilege. We are always 
glad to cooperate with all such soldiers of Christ.— EDITOR.] 



DEAR BROTHER:— I have several things to write about. 
First: We are getting along nicely and harmoniously in our 
Circle gatherings. We have two a week, one Friday evening 
for the study of the Word in the light of the DAWN, and 
one Sunday P.M. for prayer and praise, taking some phase 
of the Christian life as part of the exercises. I have never 
attended any other meetings where there was such a unity 
of desire and purpose on the part of all to know the truth. 

Second. It would seem as though when a little company 
comes out from the nominal church on account of 
the truth, they have to meet and reject all the errors going 
as never before. We have just passed through a trial of an 
error which most of us had never met before.... [This 
is usually Satan's method. Those who sleep in Zion need 
not be disturbed, but as soon as they awake and come out 
into the liberty of the truth he is after them with "signs 
and lying wonders, and all deceivableness of unrighteousness. 

R1889 : page 256 

The only safety is in obeying 1 John 5:18 
and Jude 21. -EDITOR.] 

Third. The Wisconsin M.E. Conference has just 
closed its session here. I will send you some notes showing 
the drift of that Church. Dr. Payne, of New York, 
the General Secretary of the Board of Education of the 
M.E. Church, among other things said, "I am not an 
Adventist, and do not believe in a second advent. We 



have had one advent, and that is enough." This was 
loudly applauded. He held up Dr. Parkhurst's doings as 
the only kind of work necessary in connection with education, 
education being the prime factor. I have condensed 
Bishop Foster's sermon, using his words principally. 
Text: "For I reckon that the sufferings of the present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that 
shall be revealed in us." He said: 

"God is moving things along an ideal line and doing 
the best he can under the circumstances, has not reached 
the end and never can. He is trying to produce a race of 
beings which if they could be finished would be wonderful. 
In the first place he has created the great Universe, which 
includes our earth, and all of this is but a temporary affair, 
although it has taken millions and millions of years to do 
it, and it will be millions and millions of years before he 
can finish what is possible of his idea, for it is going to 
pass away as a scroll. The reason: After these millions of 
years of creation the earth had come into a condition in 
which he could use it for his idea; so he created man, and 
put him in a physical body on the earth for a time for a 
special purpose; i.e., that he might suffer a while in order 
to fit him for the next step in the process after he has left 
the body; that is, to go on from glory to glory forever in 
a constant upward progression." As the Bible says that at 
the resurrection we are to be like the Savior, what must we 
be at the end of millions of years! ! 

He said that no man has seen God at any time, neither 
can see him, neither can the angels; for God hath no body 
nor parts, and therefore cannot be seen; but the angels, 
living where he manifests his glory, can see that; and that 
we cannot see man: as he is a spirit we can see only the 
house he lives in while on the earth, and which he leaves 
when he dies; for man was not made to live on the earth. 
Consequently when he is through with the earth as a starting 
place for the race he is trying to produce, he will roll 
it up as a scroll. In closing he said we must have literary 
education, in order to form character; for our destinies are 
in our own hands and the place we shall occupy after 
death, whether in hell or heaven, depends on what characters 
we form here. We are all babes while on the earth, 
although some of us (Bishop Foster and the like) are a 
little precocious. 

I cannot see what use such men have for the Bible. 
He read 1 Cor. 15 for his morning lesson, though he has 
no use for the resurrection. He takes an indefinite number 
of millions of years for the creation, the Bible six definite 
periods of time; he says God is not a person, consequently 
no one can ever see him, the Bible says the Bride will; he 
says man is not a human but a spirit being, the Bible says 
the Word [our Lord] was made flesh and dwelt among us; 
he says we never will reach perfection, the Word says we are 
to be complete in Him; he says that he is working out an 
idea, while the Bible says God is working according to a 
definite and well arranged plan. 

Yours in the faith, A. A. GRAVES. 



DEAR BROTHER:-After so long a time, out of the 
abundance of my weakness and inability, I write of my 
success in the Master's vineyard. During ten month's work 
I have placed nearly fifteen hundred DAWNS to the Master's 
glory. I feel that I have done the best I knew. 

On beginning work in every town, I have prayed the 
Lord that I might be used of him to carry the glad tidings 
to those of his servants who are hungry for the truth. I have 
asked him that I might be able to find his true servants, 
and while talking that I might speak my words aright and 
in season, that I might show the spirit of the truth, giving 
none offence by my words. I am determined to lay aside 
every weight and besetting sin, and to labor with patience for 
the Master, until he in his own good time may remove all 
difficulties. In the meanwhile I trust that the fruit of my 
labor may continue in his favor, that it may be watered and 
nourished until the crown be won. The Lord's work is 
my all-absorbing theme, and I humbly ask a continuance 
of the favor until I may have laid down my life in his service. 

I can now more fully realize the blessing with which 
the Lord blesses those who enter his service. He has 
blessed me with a much plainer understanding of his Word 
and plan, and has shown me how to act my part, and given 
me a fuller appreciation of the joyful reward at the end. 

With gratitude and love, I remain, yours truly in the 
service of the Lord, E. L. BOOTH [Colporteur]. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-What a privilege 
it is to work for our God! As we study his character 
and the character of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
we cannot but worship and adore them, and seek daily to 
conform our characters more to theirs. We also want to 
express to you with the enclosed for the Tract Fund our 
love for the work and also for yourselves as humble servants 
in it. May the Lord daily guide and keep you in that 
attitude of meekness (toward Him) which shall be to the 
best interests of yourselves and the Church which you serve. 

The Lord has been very good to us ever since we consecrated, 
by his wonderful providences leading us in a way 
we did not know. Until this year we have come out a 
little behind in our finances; but now, though times are 
harder than ever, he seems to be willing, without our seeking, 
to trust us with a little more of "this world's goods;" 
so after paying our debts we are gladly putting the surplus 
into the work. 

Enclosed please find a letter from Miss Steel who is in 
the Sandwich Islands. It shows that she is reaping: even 
over there the sickle is being thrust in. We sent her the 
books requested and hope they are now doing their work. 

Yours in the love of Christ, C. C. & C. P. BELL. 



page 256 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with praise and 
gratitude to our dear Lord that I am enabled to give you an 
account of the Lord's dealing with us here. 

Some fifteen months ago, while praying and waiting 
that the Lord would open a door for me to give out the 
joyful news contained in the Plan of the Ages, He opened 
a door through a Church of England service on the subject 
of Immortality. Two dear brethren were very much upset 
over it. But when I asked them to meet at my house, and 
we would see what said the Word of God, they came and we 
had a most interesting meeting. More came the next week, 
and the Lord opened their minds to the truth as it is in Jesus. 
My heart is full of joy that he is using me to give out the truth. 

We are scattering "hail" where we think it will be received 
by thoughtful people. We always remember you and 
the brethren at the throne of grace. 

Your brother in service for the King, H. ASHTON. 



page 257 
