Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
▫ What practical help can be given to the sick and the elderly within a congregation today?
In the early Christian congregation, a list was kept of widows in need of material support. (1 Timothy 5:9, 10) Likewise today, the elders might make up a list of sick and elderly ones needing special attention. However, it should not be left to the elders alone to take the initiative in this area. All in the congregation must be aware of such needs. (1 Timothy 5:4-8)​—8/15, pages 28-9.
▫ Is the Bible story of Jonah being swallowed by a marine animal unbelievable?
No, either a sperm whale, a great white shark, or a whale shark can swallow a man. Further, Jesus himself confirmed that the account of Jonah is true. (Matthew 12:39, 40)​—8/15, page 32.
▫ What harm results from the superstitious use of amulets and charms?
Their use actually discourages people from intelligently facing up to their problems and encourages them to look to luck as a cure-all. They also give the user a false sense of security. More important, a person who puts faith in the power of magical amulets and good-luck charms may surrender the control of his life to unseen demonic forces.​—9/1, page 4.
▫ What are four elements that can help make a marriage last?
These are the willingness to listen, the ability to apologize, the capacity to provide consistent emotional support, and the desire to touch affectionately. (1 Corinthians 13:4-8; Ephesians 5:33; James 1:19)​—9/1, page 20.
▫ What is one way in which Jehovah supplies endurance to those who encounter trials?
Jehovah does this through the examples of endurance recorded in his Word, the Bible. (Romans 15:4) As we contemplate these, we are encouraged to endure, and we also learn much about how to endure.​—9/15, pages 11-12.
▫ What is godly devotion?
Godly devotion refers to devotion to Jehovah that moves us to do what is pleasing to him, even in the face of difficult trials, because we love God from the heart.​—9/15, page 15.
▫ How should we view God’s mercy?
We should never treat lightly God’s great mercy. We ought to be like Paul and show our appreciation by struggling against our own imperfections. (1 Corinthians 9:27) In this way we will demonstrate, even in the face of difficulties, that we have a genuine desire to do what is right.​—10/1, page 23.
▫ Why is it appropriate that Paul listed long-suffering as the first aspect of love?
It has been said that there can be no such thing as Christian fellowship without long-suffering, or without patiently putting up with one another. This is because all of us are imperfect, and our imperfections and shortcomings try others. Therefore, long-suffering is fundamental if love is to exist between brothers.​—10/15, page 21.
▫ Did the first Christians use God’s name?
The evidence says yes. Jesus taught his followers to pray to God: “Let your name be sanctified.” (Matthew 6:9) And at the end of his ministry, he prayed: “I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me out of the world.” (John 17:6) Besides, early copies of the Septuagint contained God’s name in the form of the Hebrew Tetragrammaton.​—11/1, page 30.
▫ What Bible examples show that the way we handle our mistakes can affect our lives?
King Saul stubbornly resisted counsel, and his mistakes multiplied, eventually culminating in his death in God’s disfavor. (1 Samuel 15:17-29) On the other hand, despite his mistakes and sins, King David repentantly accepted correction and remained faithful to Jehovah. These Bible examples show that admitting our mistakes helps us to maintain a good relationship with God and therefore to have the prospect of everlasting life. (Psalm 32:1-5)​—11/15, pages 29-30.
▫ How does Jehovah come to the aid of his people when they are in distress because of natural disasters or other causes?
Jehovah helps, not by miraculously reversing the forces of nature or by some other supernatural act, but by another force that most people do not truly comprehend​—love. Yes, Jehovah truly loves his people, and he has nurtured among them a love for one another that is so strong that he is able to accomplish for them what appears to be miraculous. (1 John 4:10-12, 21)​—12/1, page 10.

