VOL. XIII. DECEMBER 15, 1892. NO. 24. 

"HIS WAY IS PERFECT." 



"As for God, his way is perfect: the Word of the Lord 
is tried: he is a buckler to all those that put their trust 
in him. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock 
save our God?"— Psa. 18:30,31. 

God's way is his plan or purpose, that which 
he purposes to accomplish and which he is 
steadily working out according to the counsel 
of his own will. Men also have various plans 
and purposes of their own which they try to 
work out as nearly as possible. Some men 
purpose to amass a fortune; some to acquire a 
liberal education and vastly to increase their 
mental capacity and power; others to gain 
fame and popular applause, or social or political 
preferment, etc., etc. But to most men 
the way they choose proves unsatisfactory after 
a brief trial, and they turn restlessly from one 
way to another; and even when they pursue 
one way to the end they realize that it has been 
an unsatisfactory way and that the end is not 
worthy of the strife necessary to gain it. 

Then again men have their various ways or 
theories as to how God will or ought to accomplish 
the world's salvation. Some claim that 
it will be accomplished by a process of evolution, 
and that it is due to the race by right. 
Some of these blasphemously claim that the 
present degradation of the world is directly 
chargeable to God, who, they say, is the real 
author of all the sin and wickedness we see in 
the world— that he made men so, and is therefore 
bound in justice to bring them up to a 
better condition. Then there are others who 



claim that God has predestinated the vast majority 
of mankind to eternal torment without 
any will or choice of their own, their doom 
having been unalterably sealed before they were 
born, while a small minority were likewise 
unalterably elected to eternal salvation and 
happiness. 

But these and various other incongruous 
theories are only the ways of men, which have 
no foundation in the Word of God, except as 
men pervert that Word. It is a serious matter 
for any of God's children to accept or entertain 
such views of his character and plan when 
it is so clearly stated in his inspired Word; 
and any one who can hear our heavenly Father's 
character thus traduced without feeling 
or expressing his righteous indignation is disloyal 
to God and unworthy to bear the name 
of Christ. If we have so much regard for the 
friendship of those who advocate such views 
of God's character that we cannot reprove 
their course, we also rank ourselves with the 
enemies of the Lord, and he will surely so regard 
us. Such indifference to God and his 
truth shows clearly that there is something 
wrong at heart; and sooner or later such will 
drift into the outer darkness unless they promptly 
repent and resolutely determine to make no 
compromises with error and to cultivate no 
friendships with the enemies of the Lord. 

But, "As for God, his way is perfect;" and 
his Word clearly sets forth his way to all the 
simple minded ones who take him at his word 
and who have no fine-spun theories of their 
own to establish. In coming to God's Word 
it is always important to remember that our 
attitude should be that of the disciple, and not 

R1480 : page 372 

the teacher. Such an attitude is itself a long 
step in the direction of a knowledge of the 
truth; for it is written that God resisteth the 
proud, but giveth grace to the humble. (James 4:6.) 
If we come to his Word as reverent 
students, expecting to find therein the delineation 
of the pure and righteous character and 
plan of our God, that plan and character will 
be revealed to us; but if we come to it in a 
captious spirit and with impure and unholy 
thoughts and ambitions, we have just the kind 
of poor imperfect brains that can warp and 
twist the Scriptures to suit our own ideas. If we 
put on the colored glasses of prejudice we can 
read God's Word as seen through them only. 
And this is what the Psalmist implied when 



he said, "With the merciful thou wilt show 

thyself merciful; with an upright man thou 

wilt show thyself upright; with the pure thou 

wilt show thyself pure; and with the froward 

thou wilt show thyself froward. For thou wilt 

save the humbled people, but wilt bring down 

high looks." (Psa. 18:25-27.) And again we 

read, "A scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it 

not, but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth;" 

and, "There is a way which 

seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof 

are the ways of death."— Prov. 14:6,12. 

O! how we need to beware of "high looks" 
and of the pride that goeth before destruction 
and of the haughty spirit that precedeth a fall. 
(Prov. 16:18.) For if in pride we go about to 
establish our own ways, and do not fully submit 
ourselves to the right ways of the Lord, we 
will surely deceive ourselves and be led away 
by the error of the wicked, so that God's 
way or plan, as viewed through the colored 
glasses of our ambitions and prejudices, will 
seem to our distorted vision as the Psalmist describes 
—unmerciful, impure and perverse, instead 
of as it really is— merciful and holy and 
righteous altogether. There is nothing more 
dangerous than pride, whether it be manifested 
in a love of display or in ambitions to be great 
or to be thought well of by others. If we are 
ambitious to be more generous than God, and 
go about to establish the idea of the absolute 
certainty of the everlasting salvation of every 
individual, when God plainly speaks to the 
contrary; or if we ignore God's appointed 
means of salvation, which is by faith in the 
precious blood of Christ shed for the remission 
of sins, and endeavor to climb up to life by 
some other way, and to teach others to make 
the same effort; or if we repudiate the doctrine 
of the original perfection of man, who was 
created in the image of God, and also that of 
his own free will he fell into sin and thereby 
incurred its just penalty— death, and not eternal 
torment; or if we seek out any other human 
invention contrary to the Word of God, 
and go about to establish it, it is pride that is 
asserting itself; and if it is not promptly humbled 
it will surely and shortly end in complete 
alienation from God. 

Dearly beloved, let us fear lest a promise being 
left us of entering into God's rest— into 
the rest of abiding faith in his way, his glorious 
plan— any of us should come short of it, 
and instead of calmly and confidently resting 
in God's way and in the blessed hope of its 
glorious outcome, we be left in confusion and 



doubt upon the whole subject. 

But if you have thus far stood firmly in the 
faith of God's way, we are persuaded better 
things; and if with the Psalmist you can say, 
"My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed" 
(Psa. 57:7): if your heart is established in love 
and reverence and faith in the sure Word of 
God, then with the Psalmist you may also say, 
"For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my 
God will enlighten my darkness." (Psa. 18:28.) 
Yea, has it not been even so? Surely hitherto 
the Lord hath led us. The language of the 
prophet applies to all those humble and faithful 
ones whom the Lord has been leading— 
"For by thee I have run through a troop [of 
opposing enemies]; and by my God have I 
leaped over a wall" [of bondage, into the 
glorious liberty of a son of God].— Psa. 18:29. 

Beloved, have you been thus overcoming? 
have you been following the Lord's leading? 
have you found and are you still abiding in the 
sweet rest of faith in his plan, in his way, not 
your own? "As for God, his way is perfect:" 
it is just and merciful and benevolent and wise 
and practicable and sure of a glorious termination. 
"The Word of the Lord is tried:" 

R1480 : page 373 

when fully understood it will stand the test of 

every argument that could be formed against 

it as to its justice, its wisdom or its benevolence. 

Of this we are fully assured by our 

Lord, who prophetically declared that the testimony 

of those who come to a full knowledge 

of God's plan will be— "Great and marvelous 

are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and 

true are thy ways, thou King of saints."— 

Rev. 15:3. 

"The Lord is a buckler [a defence] to all 
those that trust in him; for who is God [is 
mighty] save the Lord? or who is a rock [a 
safe anchorage to our souls] save our God?" 
There is no other one to whom we may anchor 
our faith and hope; but, securely anchored to 
him, we may trust and not be afraid, and may 
sweetly rest under the shadow of his wing. 
"The Lord liveth; and blessed be our rock; 
and let the Lord of our salvation be exalted." 



R1480 : page 373 

FAITH VERSUS SUPERSTITION. 



There is a vast difference between these two 
principles which is not always discerned among 
the children of God, so that a superstition 
based upon a fundamental error of doctrine 
often passes current for superior and wonderful 
faith. And such persons are often lionized 
among their brethren as saints of remarkable attainments, 
while the more logical and thoughtful, 
who exercise a more real faith, are often far 
less esteemed among their brethren, though 
doubtless more approved of God. 

Real faith always has a good, sound, reasonable 
basis. It is simply an established confidence. 
You have faith in your friend because, 
you say, you have known him for years: you 
have observed and mentally noted his principles 
of action, and have found them uniformly 
the same; he has always been just, true, benevolent 
and kind; for many years and under 
many tests you have observed his steady faithfulness 
to these principles, and so your confidence 
or faith has been so established that you 
never think of doubting him. You know, judging 

R1481 : page 373 

from the past, that he will always be true 
to these principles, and hence can often tell 
just what his future course will be in various 
contingencies that may arise wherein these principles 
may be involved. 

Just so it is with those who have become acquainted 
with God through his Word and his 
providences. From year to year their confidence 
or faith has grown and taken deeper and 
deeper root, until every promise of God is now 
to them yea and amen in Christ Jesus. They 
know that what he has promised he is able to 
perform and that he will do it, and they make 
all calculations accordingly and live and work 
in this confident hope. Such a faith is a real 
faith: it has been real from the beginning, but 
it has matured and strengthened with the proofs 
of passing years. Such a faith is not mere surmise, 
imagination or guesswork: it has a sound, 
logical basis. You have drawn certain positive 
conclusions from a logical argument based upon 
an infallible and undeniable premise; and 
consequently you have full faith in those 
conclusions. 

But superstition, unlike faith, has no substantial 
basis; nor are its conclusions reached 
by logical deductions. Superstitions originate 
in the diseased brains of fallible men, and upon 



no subject are they so prevalent as upon religious 

subjects. Here they are legion. They 

are in direct opposition to true faith and should 

be carefully avoided by every sincere child of 

God. 

And not only should we avoid the superstitions 
themselves, but we should be careful to 
so frame our conversation that our true faith, 
minus all superstition, may be apparent to all. 
As instances of the lack of such care, we often 
hear such expressions as, The Lord told me 
thus and so, or, The Lord showed me this or 
that, or, The Holy Spirit taught or showed me 
thus and so, when the more careful Christian, 
who has a true faith and who is carefully instructed 
in the Word of God, often sees that 
this supposed or claimed teaching of the Lord 
or of the Holy Spirit is a fundamental or dangerous 
error, which is being thus put forth with 

R1481 : page 374 

the stamp of divinity forged upon it. Thus to 
stamp and send out error, if done intelligently 
and with a purpose to deceive, would be willfully 
to counterfeit the truth— a very criminal 
offence against God; but many very good people 
do it quite ignorantly. And what we are 
saying now is merely a caution and exhortation 
for such to greater carefulness in this respect. 

Let us not be sure the Lord has shown us 
this or that item of doctrine or course of conduct 
unless we are able to put our finger on the 
testimony of the Lord which has borne this 
witness to us, so that the faith of our friends, 
as well as our own faith, may stand, not in 
the questionable wisdom of fallible humanity, 
but in the power of God's own sure testimony. 
The Lord reproves very sharply some who recklessly 
use the expression "The Lord hath said" 
to give weight to their own imaginings or opinions. 
-Ezek. 22:28. 

Beloved, let us not cultivate the habit of 
speaking in that irreverently familiar way of 
the Lord which is becoming more and more 
common among many of the subtle adversaries 
of the truth, of saying, The Lord told me, as 
though he had spoken to you face to face, or 
through some medium other than he has appointed 
for all his saints. Let us do all things 
with a view to edifying, and not in a manner 
to "darken counsel by words without knowledge." 
(Job 38:2.) "Except ye utter by the 
tongue words easy to be understood, how shall 
it be known what is spoken?" (1 Cor. 14:9.) 
And "Let no man deceive you with vain 



words; for because of these things cometh the 
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." 
-Eph. 5:6. 

And, further, do not aspire to be a man or 
woman of "wonderful" faith: just be contented 
with a simple, child-like faith that believes 
every thing God says and refuses to believe 
what he does not say on matters of divine revelation. 
There is nothing wonderful or specially 
praiseworthy about a real faith. On the 
common principles of reasoning we ought to 
have full confidence in every item of God's 
Word, and should continually act upon it. Let 
our rejoicing be in the testimony of our conscience, 
that with the greatest simplicity and 
sincerity (not with fleshly wisdom, but by the 
grace of God) we have spent our lives in this 
world. Especially should we be sincere toward 
the household of faith, whose development and 
perfecting should be our deepest concern. 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1480 : page 374 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

SECRETARY'S REPORT. 

FROM DECEMBER 1ST, 1891, TO DECEMBER 1ST, 1892. 



Nothing, perhaps, furnishes so sure an indication 
of love for the truth as zeal to serve it— 
financially and otherwise. Judged from every 
standpoint, the past year has been one of great 
refreshment and of great spiritual development 
among our readers. Not, of course, with all— 
for, like other years, it has witnessed the turning 
of some from the light into the "outer 
darkness" of this world's wisdom— but to those 
who have been earnestly running the race it 
has been one of deepening experience. Undoubtedly 
the following of the Apostle's instruction, 
to lay by on the first day of the week 
according as the Lord hath prospered each 
(1 Cor. 16:2), has had its beneficial influence 
in the direction of this heart-warming mentioned: 
and the increase financially, and the 
increased effort made for the blessing of others, 
are clearly seen in the report following. The 
spiritual tone, as indicated by the wonderful 
letters we receive daily, is fully in harmony, and 
the fact is that the warmest letters are from 



those who joyfully share in one way or another 
the burden and heat of the day. 

Cash receipts from "Good Hopes" and other 
donations, including sale of Olive-wood Mementoes, 
$8298.31. 

Amount expended in forwarding the truth 
in various ways— tracts, postage, etc., etc., 
$8298.31. 

Since these sums are exactly alike, it becomes 
proper to explain that the Fund had really spent 

R1480 : page 375 

more money than its receipts, and would have 
shown an indebtedness had not a deeply interested 
friend of the cause learned of the situation 
and made up the deficiency, enabling us to 
start the new year free from debt. 

The following is a summarized statement of 
what was done with the above money in circulating 
the truth in the way of tract distribution. 

Total number of Old Theology Tracts and 
Sample TOWERS circulated free, by mail and 
otherwise, 536,503. 

As tracts are usually reported by pages we 
will so state the circulation. 

Total Amount in tract pages, 18,569,392. 

Besides this large showing in Tract distribution, 
the fund supplied large numbers of the 
Lord's children, too poor to buy, with DAWNS 
and TOWERS free, over 70,000 copies of the 
WATCH TOWER going to our regular poor list. 

It will be noticed that the above report 
makes no mention of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
work being prosecuted chiefly through colporteurs. 
The reason is that, so far as possible, 
the DAWN is made to pay its own way— the 
price at which it is supplied to colporteurs just 
about covering cost of publishing and postage 
and incidental expenses. The Tract Fund 
therefore needs not to be hindered for this great 
and important part of the work, except that it 
supplies a credit account to enable some of the 
Brethren and Sisters to get a start in this work. 

Trusting that the year beginning may be as 
blessed and prosperous as the one just closed, 
I have the honor to subscribe myself your servant 
and the Lord's, 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Secretary. 



R1481 : page 375 

OBEDIENCE BETTER THAN SACRIFICE. 



How necessary it is that we all hear and 
obey the voice of our good Shepherd. "My 
sheep hear my voice, and they follow me," was 
the Master's pointed statement of the case. 
And it is all in vain that any ignore his words, 
and yet hope to abide in his love and favor. 
An illustration of this truth came forcibly to 
our attention during the past six weeks, and 
we relate it here, not for the sake of the one 
vitally concerned, but for the benefit of others 
who may have similar besetments, and to whom 
this narrative may prove "a word in season," 
cautioning that obedience is better than 
sacrifice. 

One of the Colporteurs, an earnest, devoted 
sacrificer, but whose spiritual state had for 
some time caused us anxiety, recently wrote to 
us that the peace of God no longer ruled his 
heart; that he had lost that communion with 
the Lord which is so essential to a Christian's 
happiness and welfare. Some extracts from 
his letters at the time will show his deplorable 
state, and give cause for the greater rejoicing 
that he has since been restored to divine favor. 
On receipt of his first letter, telling of his 
plight and asking for help, we felt greatly relieved, 
knowing that it was a hopeful sign to 
see him realizing his position and longing for 
divine favor, and so we wrote. In reply he 
said:— 

Dear Brother Russell:— Your kind letter received. 
It both surprised me and made me 
feel ashamed. The surprise was that you say 
I was nearer to God and nearer to his blessing 
when I wrote my last letter than for a long 
time before; while in reality I feel as if God is 
now far from me. The more I try to lay hold 
on his promises the less I seem to realize them 
as mine. The Lord knows what is in my heart, 
anyhow, so I might as well reveal it. I have 
kept the matter to myself long enough and 
found that it did not change my wretched condition 
of heart. The shame is that I should 
need such advice as you gave me— to "lay 
aside my proud, know-it-all spirit," etc. I feel 
the full force of that advice, as I am indeed 
guilty of just such a spirit. I always knew that I 
had a strong self-will, and therefore hesitated 
almost two years to be immersed, because I 
knew it symbolized the death of self, the death 
of my own will. 

I had always tried to keep self under but 
failed, till at last, considering God's promise, 
that his grace is sufficient for us, I took the 



step and made outwardly the confession that I 
would reckon myself dead, and accept God's 
way and will instead of my own. Looking back 
now, I see that I again failed; for I by no means 
"paid unto the Most High my vow." In my 

R1481 : page 376 

case the words of Paul seem to be fulfilled: 
"If a man strive for the masteries, yet is he 
not crowned, except he strive lawfully." Surely 
I have been striving, but, considering the 
effects, it had brought me almost to despair 
and made me look with dread to meet the Lord 
instead of with joy and confidence. I must 
have been striving unlawfully. 

I almost believe that, as you state in your letter, 
it is "pride and self-will" that have made the 
wall that separates between God and me. Your 
kind letter throws some light on my trouble, 
showing me just why I could not "enter into his 
rest." How highly I prize those promises made 
to the "meek and lowly of heart." I now realize 
that God shows favor only to the humble, 
and see that I could not claim his promises for 
the very reason that he has not made any promises 
to such as I have been. "Oh, to be nothing, 
nothing," shall henceforth be my prayer. 
How very thankful I feel towards you for pointing 
out to me just where I failed. Sorry that 
you no sooner dared to put me on my guard: 
it would have saved me many a tear. I am 
glad to know that you remember me in prayer, 
and especially that you prayed for me even before 
I wrote you of my wretched condition of 
heart. It was perhaps your prayers on my behalf 
that helped me to overcome my pride to 
the extent of this confession. 

While I always felt humble before God, it 
had seemed impossible for me to be humble 
before fellow men. None but myself knows 
how great a struggle it was for me to write to 
you in the way I did. Even after the letter 
was written I hesitated to send it, but I now 
feel that to overcome even in so small a matter 
as this brings a certain amount of blessing. I 
feel much more free to write this letter than 
the former one, because I ignored my own will, 
and contrary to my own inclination humbled 
myself, no matter what the opinion of others 
might be. I shall once more start out, relying 
upon God's help to overcome that which hinders 
me from entering into rest. I have just 
opened my heart before you that you might be 
better able to judge just why it was impossible 
to overcome. Any advice will be gratefully 



accepted. I feel fearful and beclouded, because 
of my previous failures to overcome. 

I clearly see that if I do not overcome I can 
never fall back on a restitution; for I have in 
the past made a definite consecration of all 
human hopes and aims, and of human rights 
and privileges. Nor do I desire to go back; for 
I know what it is to be in harmony with God. 
I know something of the joy and peace which I 
once had. If I had not had a taste of it, I 
would not now know of what I was void. 

R1482 : page 376 

Another trouble with me, I think, is that I am 
not filled with the Spirit of love. If I were I 
should have no trouble in overcoming. "To 
will is present, but how to perform I find not:" 
this seems to be my experience continually. 
Can you wonder that I feel distressed and helpless 
when I look at myself in the light of the 
past, feeling that I was never able fully to carry 
out my consecration. How much more imperfect 
must have been my effort before God? I 
feel really unworthy to be a worker in this 
"harvest." I am condemned when speaking 
about the truth. I hear continually the reproof 
of our Lord to those devils which said that 
they knew he was the Son of God, but our 
Lord forbade them. This shows clearly to me 
that he wants only such as are truly his. I lack 
all evidence now that I am his. I speak to 
others about this "rest," but I am myself unable 
to enter. Oh, that the Lord once more 
would show mercy to me! 

I will now conclude this report, whereof a 
mere nominal Christian should be ashamed, 
but how much more I, who claim to have come 
out from among them into higher light. Pray 
earnestly with me for complete deliverance. 

I remain sincerely yours, trusting in the precious 
blood of Christ as the only hope, 



The above letter was answered and the following 
came quickly:— 

Dear Brother Russell:— Yours of the 24th 
inst. received. Your letter sounds very hopeful, 
and would perhaps six months ago have filled 
me with joy, but now it only increases my sorrow. 
After reading it carefully I looked up all 
the passages in the Bible to which you alluded, 
to see whether there was such hope for me or 
not. The passage in 1 John 1:7, which you 
show me to mean that Christ not only justifies 
us from past sins, but that he also justifies us 



from our daily short-comings, reads to me very 
different. I wish I could make it read so. To 
me it reads: If you walk in the light, then you 
have fellowship, and then the blood of Christ 
cleanses you from all sin. Can I, under those 
limitations, claim that promise? Have I walked 
in the light? If I had, I would not now need 
to ask you which be the first principles— how 
to obtain peace with God— which every one 
ought to know. The Apostle (1 John 4:4) says: 
"Ye are of God, and have overcome." It is 
clear to be seen from such limitations that my 
case could not be covered. 

You also quote, from Psalm 103, that God has 
mercy upon all who come to him. But here 
he also limits it to a certain class (verse 18), to 
which I can not belong, however much I may 

R1482 : page 377 

desire it. I have never kept my covenant with 

God (even when I tried hard) to my own satisfaction 

—how much less to God's pleasing. 

Next you quote Heb. 4:15. This of course 
shows that our dear Lord can sympathize with 
us in temptation, but whether he can or will 
sympathize with us after we have yielded to it 
I can not see in that text. I would need a 
high priest who could sympathize with one who 
has given way to temptation. The next text, 
1 John 2:1, gives me some little hope, but so 
very slight that I scarcely dare trust in it, because 
the context seems to show that the sins 
referred to are not the kind that I have reference 
to— pride and self-will. 

It appears to me that the Scriptures teach 
that after we have once accepted Christ as 
our justification we must walk in the increasing 
light, and that as soon as anything is revealed 
in us being contrary to God's will we must at 
once put it away. If we would continue to go 
on in that way, putting evil away just as quickly 
as it is brought to our attention, we would 
never live in any conscious sin: and consequently 
all those promises of forgiveness of our 
faults unknown to us would be verified. We 
would even then continually need the blood of 
Christ to cleanse us from the sins which we 
commit from lack of knowledge. My trouble 
is that even after I see my faults I cannot rid 
myself of them and get into harmony with 
God's will. 

I shall rejoice if I ever succeed in living up 
to the best of my knowledge. To this end I 
have been praying for the last month, but all 
effort seems vain. I have never before felt the 



depravity of my nature so fully as for this last 
month. Before, I always knew it as a theory; 
but still I had thought that we could bring ourselves 
into subjection to God's will if we only 
tried. After examining the Bible closely, I 
awoke to the fact that I myself was altogether 
out of harmony with God's will. My first 
thought was to secure his forgiveness for my 
great error, and to get into harmony with his 
will. When I began the study of God's will, 
I verily thought I could learn his will from the 
Bible, and then do it. But the result of this 
was to lead me into greater despair, for I found 
myself unable to do his will. I had never seen 
the greatness of God's will as I now see it, and 
I never saw so fully that I am as a worm which 
has nothing at all of which to glory. I had 
heretofore thought I was some one, and could 
do so and so, but now I see that I am a slave 
to self and can do nothing, not even carry out 
my own desires when I have no one with me 
to hinder me. 

I feel no nearer to God now than I did when 
I first wrote to you about my trouble: it rather 
gets darker all the time. Oh, I do feel 
wretched! I feel just as if I had been a deceiver 
because I pretended before the Brethren 
and Sisters with whom I met to have the same 
joy and peace which they had, when in reality 
I felt far from God. In their presence (if I was 
called on to pray) I would address God from 
their standpoint and thank him for things which 
I myself did not realize. Perhaps a few hours 
later I would address God privately, in my 
closet, and tell him how much I was in need 
of those things, for which a few hours before I 
had publicly thanked him, as if I possessed 
them. How abominable my course must have 
been to the Lord! No wonder he has abandoned 
me from having communion with him. The 
more I think of the past the worse I feel about it. 

Until lately I never thought of its being 
wrong, and asked God to give me rest, when 
in reality I was in my own way, and therefore 
could not receive it. I never really knew what 
was the cause of my not "entering into his 
rest," until my distress was so great that I 
thought of writing to you about it. I shall 
ever be thankful to you for pointing out to me 
that my own pride was in the way of receiving 
God's blessing. I have at last so far learned 
from my brief experience to humble myself 
under the mighty hand of God. 

No longer do I feel self-sufficient nor, as you 
expressed it in your first letter, that I "know it 
all." Continue to pray for me: it may be the 



Lord will yet in mercy remember me again, and 
give peace to my soul. Let me hear from you 
soon. Correct me if you find that this is not the 
way to find peace. Yours in Christ, 



Poor heart! it was indeed in a wretched 
plight. But those are valuable lessons for all 
to learn— of the deceitfulness of our own hearts 
and of our inability to commend ourselves to 
God; and happy are those who can learn them 
from the Word of the Lord so as not to require 
to experience them thus. 

Still longing for God, the Colporteur came 
to us several hundred miles, for further counsel 
and assistance in seeking that peace which is 
beyond all price, which the world can neither 
give nor take away, but which each can so easily 
forfeit for himself by disobedience to the voice 
of our Shepherd. 

In personal conference we pointed out the 
necessity for honesty with the Lord, how pride 
and self-will are the deadliest foes of all who 
have consecrated themselves wholly to the Lord. 

R1482: page 378 

This brought forth a confession of how the 
darkness seemed to get into the troubled heart 
—about as follows:— 

In meeting with others, I have somewhat the 
gift of debate, and can argue whatever side of 
a question I choose to take up. The Brethren 
and Sisters generally gave heed to the warnings 
of the Lord, called to attention in the 
WATCH TOWER, to the effect that when we have 
proved to ourselves that any theory, teacher 
or publication is astray on the great fundamental 
doctrine of Christianity— the death of Christ 
as the ransom (corresponding price) for all— we 
should thenceforth have nothing whatever to 
do with such (Eph. 5:11; Rom. 16:17; 2 John 10,11; 
Gal. 1:8-10); but I took a different 
course. It was after seeing the evil effects my 
liberality had upon me that I began to look the 
subject up, and then pride came in and would 
not permit me to confess my error, but rather 
said: "Hold on to the position you have taken." 
In my effort to justify the liberal position which 
I had taken, I became the defender of doctrines 
which I knew were untrue— doctrines at variance 
with the truth; and I tremble as I reflect 
how I endangered others by my wilful course. 

This came about gradually; and I now see 
that I was losing the Lord's favor gradually, 
although I did not notice for some time, nor 
realize the cause, until in my despair I wrote 



to you. When once I realized that pride was 
at the bottom of it, I was enabled to trace the 
matter to its true source, as well as to see the 
horribleness of my own position. Indeed, while 
I see the truth clearly, in harmony with its 
presentation in the DAWNS, I confess that in 
my restless state I began to look around for 
something else— seeking rest and finding none. 
Truth began to get valueless. It lost its powerful 
influence over me. I verily believe that I 
was nearing the condition mentioned in the 
parable as "outer darkness." But now, since 
I see and confess my error and am earnestly 
seeking the Lord, the truth again has a powerful 
influence over me; but I fear so much that 
I have been so unfaithful that the Lord will 
never own or use me again. 

The Lord graciously blessed us in pointing 
out to the troubled one the way of peace. We 
pointed out that while the sin was great, the 

R1483 : page 378 

confession showed that, though it was a sin 

worthy of stripes, it had features which clearly 

showed that it was not the sin unto death, of 

which the Apostle warns us (Heb. 6:4-6; 4:26-51); 

for now, under full knowledge, the sin is 

not continued as a sweet morsel, but is despised 

and confessed and abandoned. We showed 

that the measure of wilfulness had already had 

stripes— divine disfellowship— that a portion 

of the sin can clearly be traced to Adamic 

weakness, and that this portion therefore is 

forgivable through the merit of our Great Redeemer's 

sacrifice— made once for all the race, 

and for all sins and weaknesses entailed upon 

us directly or indirectly as children of Adam. 

We pointed out that not only the ambitious 

pride was in part an inherited weakness, but 

the weaknesses of others which served as a 

temptation was also a result of the fall; and 

that it is because we cannot do perfectly what 

we learn of God's perfect Law that we need a 

compassionate High Priest and an abundant 

sin-sacrifice, and that we have such a sacrifice 

and such a High Priest— Jesus our Lord and 

Redeemer, by whose stripes we are healed. 

The realization of his own helplessness 
clinched this Scriptural argument, and Jesus was 
seen as our Savior, in a grander, completer sense 
than ever before; God's favor was gratefully accepted 
and we knelt and thanked the Lord for 
the light (he promising thenceforth to walk in 
it, and to confess the error as publicly as it had 
been committed); giving thanks for the leading 



of his providence which had recovered a 

straying sheep when it had realized its lost condition, 

and cried out again for a place in the 

fold. And, above all, we thanked him for the 

lengths and breadths of the loving provision 

made for covering all our sins and weaknesses 

when fully acknowledged, repented of and forsaken; 

and there the covenant of full consecration, 

even the giving up of self-will and self -pride, 

was renewed. Thus the troubled one 

began to enter into REST. That same (Sunday) 

evening the opportunity was embraced 

for confessing publicly to the Church at Allegheny 

the error, the darkness which had followed, 

the humiliating route back to God and 

R1483 : page 379 

peace, the forgiveness, the returned peace of 

God's favor, and the determination that henceforth, 

while continuing to offer himself a sacrifice 

in God's service, obedience, which is still 

more acceptable to God, should have first attention. 

It was also stated that hereafter, instead 

of feeling more benevolent than God and the 

apostles toward those in error, the effort would 

be to take their prescribed course, rejecting 

hereafter all teaching, oral or printed, that does 

not rest squarely upon the ransom-price given 

and finished at Calvary, obeying the injunctions 

of the apostle, that if any bring another 

gospel, to receive it not, and to have no fellowship 

with the unfruitful works of darkness, but 

rather to reprove them; for he that biddeth 

God-speed to an evil doer, an evil teacher or 

an evil doctrine is a partaker in the evil. 

So far from despising the Colporteur, we all 
loved and esteemed him more than ever; for 
it is only a true and noble soldier of the cross 
who can thus shatter the idol of his own pride 
and self-will, and lift up the royal banner of 
his Redeemer. He has since returned to his 
field of labor and made similar confession to 
those whose faith and rest he once endangered, 
and he is now rejoicing in the peace of God 
which passeth worldly understanding. 

This report has been seen by him and approved 
before publication, and is published as 
a testimony of God's forgiving love, and that 
it may help in bearing up the "feet" of the 
body of Christ— lest any should stumble utterly 
over the stumbling-stone, the ransom, and 
that all might be planted the more securely 
thereon. 



page 379 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1483 : page 379 

RETURNING FROM THE CAPTIVITY. 



I. QUAR., LESSON 1., JAN. 1, EZRA 1:1-11. 

Golden Text— "The Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, 
and have compassion upon thee."— Deut. 30:3. 

The events of this lesson are located at the 
close of the seventy years desolation of the 
land of Israel and of the captivity of the people 
of Israel in Babylon. The cause of this long 
exile and this utter desolation of their land is 
stated to be their failure to let their land enjoy 
its sabbaths (2 Chron. 36:21), according to the 
command of the Lord, who, by this typical observance 
of sabbath or jubilee years, purposed 
to prefigure the blessed Times of Restitution, 
in which time the continually recurring cycles 
were ultimately to terminate. But though the 
people were negligent of the command of the 
Lord, and only partially observed this requirement, 
God did not permit their indifference 
to mar his typical prophecy, but turned 
even this circumstance to account in making 
the prediction still more emphatic by showing 
the exact number of typical jubilees which 
culminated in the grand antitype or "times 
of restitution of all things," and thus pointing 
out the exact date, both of the times of restitution 
and also of the Lord's second advent, 
which is due at that time. (Acts 3:19-21.) See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter vi., also 
Lesson X. in our issue of Feb. 15th.) 

And not only had Israel neglected to observe 
properly the typical Jubilees, but they had 
lapsed into idolatry and had polluted the house 
of the Lord, and they had mocked his messengers 



and despised his words and misused his 
prophets until the wrath of the Lord rose against 
them with the sword and with captivity and 
with the destruction of their temple and with the 
utter desolation of their land for seventy years. 
See 2 Chron. 36:14-21. 

But when God had served his purpose of 
chastising Israel and of completing his typical 
prophecy— when the three score and ten years 
of desolation of the land, in which the land 
had enjoyed her sabbaths, had expired, the 
return of the captives was due. The great 
clock of ages pointed to the time for the return 
of the exiles, and, like every other feature of 
God's plan, the deliverance of Israel from 
Babylon was promptly on time, and the agent 
for the accomplishment of their deliverance 
was on the spot. God had him marked out 
by the Prophet Isaiah for this very purpose, 
calling him by name and specifying the work 
he was to do. See Isa. 44:24,28; 45:1-6. 

It is pleasing also to note that in the land of 
their captivity Israel (with some exceptions) 

R1483 : page 380 

were reclaimed from idolatry so thoroughly as 

never to return to it again; and then, without 

the temple and its services, they learned to appreciate 

what was left to them still— the Word 

of God and the teaching and counsel of some 

of the faithful ones among them, such as Daniel, 

Ezra and Nehemiah; and thus for a time the 

forms of worship gave place to a more real heart-worship 

of the one true God; and they were led 

to a fuller appreciation of the privileges they 

had enjoyed, as manifested in Psalm 137. 

When Israel was restored, however, it was 
not as masters of the land, but as servants of 
Cyrus and his successors; for, according to the 
words of the Prophet Ezekiel (21:25-27), they 
were never again to possess the land as an independent 
nation until he should come whose 
right it is to rule— even their long-promised 
Messiah. The reference here is evidently to 
the Lord's second advent; for at his first advent 
he did not come to rule, nor did they at 
that time, nor ever since, gain full possession 
of their land. They were always tributary to 
other nations until they were finally— A. D. 70 
—dispersed among all the nations; and so they 
have continued until the present time, when, 
the time having come, their regathering has 
begun. 

The "golden text" of this lesson has reference, 
not to the return of Israel from this captivity 



in Babylon, nor from any of the minor 

captivities, but to the great regathering from 

among all the nations whither the Lord had 

scattered them. (See Deut. 30:3-5; also Jer. 32:37-42.) 

This is a deliverance which will 

need no repetition; for they shall be firmly 

planted and established in their everlasting possession. 

(See Jer. 24:6,7; 31:28.) This deliverance 

is already beginning and shall be fully 

accomplished by the close of "The Times 

of the Gentiles." See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 

III., Chapter viii. 

The story of the deliverance of Israel from 
the captivity in Babylon is not only a historic 
fact, but it has also its typical aspect. The captivity 
of Israel after the flesh in literal Babylon 
represented the subsequent captivity of spiritual 
Israel in "Babylon the Great"— the great 
Antichristian nominal church; and the deliverance 
of fleshly Israel by Cyrus, whose name 
signifies sun or brightness, represents the deliverance 
of spiritual Israel out of "Babylon 
the Great" by the bright shining of the Sun 
of Righteousness. 

And as Cyrus commanded the faithful people 
in Israel to return to the land of promise 
and to rebuild the waste places and to take 
possession of and replace in the temple the 
golden and silver vessels which the king of 
Babylon had profaned (Dan. 5:1-4), so the 
light from the rising Sun of Righteousness now 
indicates to the faithful children of God who 
are still in "Babylon," the great nominal 
church, the duty and privilege of returning to 
the blessed inheritance of the saints— the exceeding 
great and precious privileges of the 
sons and heirs of God— and of replacing in his 
spiritual temple, which is the true Church, all 
the golden and silver vessels— the divine and 
the natural truths or doctrines— so long perverted 
in "Babylon" during the dark ages of 
bondage and superstition. As to the progress 
of this work, see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., 
Chapter iv. 

R1484 : page 380 

REBUILDING THE TEMPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON II., JAN. 8, EZRA 3:1-13. 

Golden Text— "They praised the Lord, because the 
foundation of the house of the Lord was laid."— Ezra 3:11. 



The narratives of the building and the rebuilding 
of the temple, as mere matters of history, 
would be of little importance or interest 
to us were it not also for the fact of its typical 
character. Viewing it thus, there is still in the 
history of that temple and in its prophetic 
teachings that which should enkindle in our 
hearts greater enthusiasm, zeal and joy than 
was ever expressed by those who saw its material 
glory. 

In the light of the teachings of the apostles 
we see that the antitype of that temple was the 
one true Church of the living God, whose 
names are written in heaven (1 Cor. 3:16,17; 
Luke 10:20)— that it is a spiritual temple built 
up with living stones, of which Jesus Christ is 
himself the chief corner stone, the sure foundation. 
He became the foundation of this 
spiritual house when he gave his life a ransom 
for many, and thus made possible the building 
up of other living stones upon this foundation 
until the wonderful structure shall reach its 
glorious completeness.— 1 Pet. 2:4-7. 

When this foundation of the spiritual temple 
was laid, all who came to a realization of 
the importance of the great work thereby accomplished 
rejoiced and praised the Lord. 
And this rejoicing in the strength and security 
of the foundation of our hopes never ceases. 
Praise the Lord! wells up from every heart that 
realizes the redemption accomplished by the 
precious blood of Christ, shed for many for the 
remission of sins. Upon this sure foundation 
the temple structure has been gradually and 
steadily progressing. The living stones are 
taken out of the quarry (the world), and, by 
the experiences and discipline of the present 
life, they are shaped and chiseled and polished 

R1484: page 381 

and thus fitted for their places in the temple 

which, during the time of the presence of the 

Lord— viz., since 1878, when he took his great 

power as king— is being noiselessly put together, 

as in the type, without the sound of a 

hammer— by the resurrection of the dead in 

Christ and the change of the living in a moment, 

in the twinkling of an eye; for "Blessed 

are the dead who die in the Lord from 

henceforth [from 1878];. ..they rest from 

their labors [from the toil and weariness of labor], 

but their works follow with them." They 

shall not sleep, but they shall be changed instantaneously 

from the human to a glorious 

spiritual body. -Rev. 14:13; 1 Cor. 15:51,52. 



But, while the Church glorified with Christ 
the Head will be the temple complete and 
glorious, it is in a less complete sense regarded 
as the temple of God now, and the various 
members as its builders, all having something 
to do in building each other up in the most 
holy faith, and thus contributing to the structure 
of the temple or Church as a whole. This 
work of building up the Church is very clearly 
set forth in the building of the typical temple; 
and the rebuilding of the temple after the captivity 
in Babylon is very suggestive of the rebuilding 
of the Church after the long captivity 
in Babylon the Great— which is generally known 
as the Great Reformation. And truly there 
has been a great Re-formation of the Church 
since the dark ages of bondage under the papal 
yoke. 

The work of re-formation has gone steadily 
forward and, like that of the typical temple, 
in the midst of great opposition. (See Ezra 4:1 1-24; 
5:3-5; Neh. 4:7-23, and compare 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., Chapter ix, and 
Vol. III., Chapter iv.) From the multitudes 
who had been enslaved under the papal rule 
some of the living stones of the true temple 
were gathered out and the work of setting them 
in order for the rebuilding of the New Jerusalem 
and its temple began. History records 
the opposition which these re-formers or builders, 
encountered; and truly, as in the type, 
"the builders, every one had his sword [the 
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God] 
girded by his side, and so builded." (Neh. 4:18.) 
Nor may this attitude ever be relinquished 
until the work is all complete and the glory 
of the Lord has filled his temple. The enemies 
of the Lord's people and the Lord's work are 
always active in opposition, and none the less 
so when their methods are subtle and their 
course not easily discernible. Hence the necessity 
for continued vigilance against every 
encroachment of the adversary, whether he 
come as a roaring lion or as a wily serpent. 

To all who are laboring in the great work of 
building up the true temple and city of God, 
the success of Ezra and Nehemiah and their 
co-workers should be regarded as an encouraging 
prediction of the final completeness and 
glory of the Church built upon the one true 
and only foundation, Jesus Christ our Redeemer 
and Lord. -1 Cor. 3:11. 

R1484: page 381 

ENCOURAGING THE PEOPLE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON III., JAN. 15, HAGGAI 2:1-9. 

Golden Text— "Except the Lord build the house, they 
labor in vain who build it."— Psa. 127:1. 

Again we are led to view the rebuilding of 
the temple in its typical character. In our 
previous lesson we saw that the foundation was 
re-laid amidst great rejoicing, and that then, 
on account of the opposition of their enemies, 
the work was for a long while abandoned. 
Having been thus hindered in the great work, 
Israel gradually became indifferent and indisposed 
to encounter again the difficulties necessary 
to its further prosecution, and became more 
and more engrossed with their own affairs, 
leaving the house of the Lord still in ruins. 

As a consequence of this growing indifference 
to the house of the Lord, God's favor was 
measurably withdrawn from Israel and they 
were visited with drought and threatened with 
famine. Then came a message of reproof from 
the Lord to them, chiding them for neglecting 
the important work of rebuilding the temple 
and giving themselves up to their own pursuits. 
(Hag. 1:1-11.) When the Lord thus stirred 
them up to a sense of duty and privilege in the 
matter, the people and their leaders obeyed his 
voice and again began to build, and the Lord 
encouraged and helped them.— Hag. 1:12-15. 

In all this what a vivid type we have of the 
great reformation work which began in the sixteenth 
century with the preaching of Luther 
and his contemporaries, briefly noted in the 
preceding lesson. We call to mind that the 
one great work accomplished at that time was 
the laying again of the foundation doctrine of 
"justification by faith" in the one "continual" 
sacrifice of Christ, in contradistinction to 
the papal dogma of "the mass," which had set 
aside the "continual." (Dan. 11:31.) Thus 
again Christ Jesus became the recognized foundation 
of his temple, which is the Church. 
This done, there was great rejoicing among 
those interested and engaged in the work. 
While the re-laying of the foundation progressed 
the builders were greatly opposed, so 
that they were obliged to keep themselves continually 
armed with the sword of the Spirit 
against their enemies. But, as in the type, 

R1484: page 382 



when the foundation was laid they began to 
grow weary in well-doing and weary of contending 
against opposition, and so, with a few 
exceptions, abandoned the work, and spiritual 
drought and famine followed. Protestantism 
ceased to be a protest against the iniquitous 
system that gave it birth, and for a time made 
no further progress beyond the re-laying of the 
foundation of the temple of God. 

But by and by the message of the Lord was 
impressed upon some faithful souls, who still 
longed to see the completion of the temple of 
God, to arise again and build, to clear away 
the rubbish of false doctrine and establish the 
faith of the Church in the truth— that they 
might be living representatives of the truth, 
not error, and thus be recognized of God as 
living stones in his temple. Since the re-awakening 
the work has been going forward (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., Chapter iv.); 
and the Word of the Lord to all the workers is 
the encouraging promise that, when it is completed, 
it shall be filled with glory.— Hag. 2:7. 

And not only so, but it is also written that 
"The glory of this latter house shall be greater 
than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: 
and in this place will I give peace, saith the 
Lord of hosts." (Hag. 2:9.) That this was not 
said with reference to the temple of Zerubbabel, 
which did not excel nor equal the former temple, 
is manifest, and therefore the expression 
must be regarded as a prophecy of the glory of the 
antitypical temple of God— the glorified Church. 

Let those, therefore, who are zealously engaged 
in the work of the Lord— in building up 
the Church, the temple of God, in the most 
holy faith— hear the Word of the Lord by the 
Prophet Haggai (2:4-9). 

VERSE 4. "Be strong, and work, for I am 
with you, saith the Lord of hosts." 

VERSE 5. "My spirit remaineth among you: 
fear ye not." 

VERSES 6,7 remind us of the similar promise 
of Malachi 3:1. "Behold, the Lord shall 
suddenly come to his temple," his Church; and 
it is his glory that shall fill it— the glory of his 
presence, his power, his righteousness and his 
authority; and the whole Church shall be imbued 
with the same, as his worthy joint-heirs in 
the kingdom. And when the Lord thus comes 
to his temple the whole earth will see his glory 
—will recognize his authority and power. And 
when he is thus recognized and the blessings 
of his kingdom begin to be experienced, he will 
indeed be, as the Prophet expressed it, "The 
Desire of all nations;" for it is also written that 



he is the "Prince of peace" and that he will 

speak peace unto the nations" (Hag. 2:9; Zech. 9:10), 

and that "In this place [by means of his 

temple] will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts." 

The shaking of all nations— the heavens [the 
present ecclesiastical powers] and the earth 
[the whole civil organization of human society], 
the sea [the lawless elements] and the dry 
land [the more settled and law-abiding of mankind] 
—reminds us also of the expression of 
Malachi (1:2), "Who may abide the day of his 
coming?" and of the predicted judgments of 
verse 5 against all evil-doers; as well as the explanation 
of the Apostle Paul (Heb. 12:26,27) 
that "This word, 'Yet once more' signifieth the 
removing of those things that are shaken,... 
that those things which cannot be shaken may 
remain." 

Praise the Lord! the things that are to be 
removed are the unsatisfactory things of the 
present order, and that which is to remain is 
the Kingdom of righteousness and peace, under 
Christ the Prince of peace, whose glorious reign 
when fully inaugurated and manifested will indeed 
be "the desire of all nations." 



R1486 : page 382 
CREED-MAKING IN JAPAN. 



According to a recent issue of the Missionary 
Review, the native Presbyterian Christians in 
Japan have taken the matter of creed revision 
into their own hands. The synod of the Church 
of Christ in Japan, composed of the various 
Presbyterian bodies, has refused to adopt the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, or any other 
similar doctrine. They have fallen back upon 
the Apostles' Creed: 

"In the Confession of Faith will be observed 
a significant silence upon the subject of retribution 
and of the future state. It reads thus: 
'The Lord Jesus Christ, whom we worship as 
God, the only begotten Son of God, for us men 
and for our salvation was made man and suffered. 
He offered up a perfect sacrifice for 
sin; and all who are one with him by faith are 
pardoned and accounted righteous, and faith 
in him working by love purifies the heart. 

'"The Holy Ghost, who, with the Father 
and the Son, is worshiped and glorified, reveals 
Jesus Christ to the soul, and without his grace, 



man, being dead in sins, cannot enter the kingdom 
of God. By him the prophets and the 
apostles and holy men of old were inspired, and 
he, speaking in the Scriptures of the Old and New 
Testaments, is the supreme and infallible judge 
in all things pertaining unto faith and living. 

'"From these Holy Scriptures the ancient 
Church of Christ drew its Confession; and we, 
holding the faith once delivered to the saints, 
join in that Confession with praise and 
thanksgiving.'" 



page 383 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XIIL, 1892. 



JANUARY 1. 

Vol. II. in German, DAWN agency in London, etc., Page 2 

View from the TOWER, Home and Foreign Missions 3 

Poem— "The Voice is Nigh Thee." 10 

The Evil which God Creates 10 

Bible Study: The King and the Kingdom 13 

" " A Song of Triumph 15 

JANUARY 15. 

Thanks! to Subscribers 18 

View from the TOWER, Things to Come 19 

Poem— "The Reformer." 26 

Bible Study: Overcome with Wine 27 

" " Hezekiah's Prayer 29 

" " Who Hath Believed Our Report? 30 

FEBRUARY 1. 

Special Items: "Good Hopes," Reading for Friends 34 

Until the Lord Come 35 

Presbyterian Revision of Faith 38 

Poem— "The Present and the Future." 39 

An Ancient and Interesting Document 41 

The Resurrection of Damnation 42 

Bible Study: The Gracious Call 43 

" " The New Covenant 45 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 47 

FEBRUARY 15. 

Special Items: Harvest Laborers— Pray for them 50 

An Ancient and Interesting Document (Concluded) 51 



Philanthropic Versus Humanitarian 53 

Poem— "In the Wine-Press Alone." 54 

Views Abroad 54 

Bible Study: Jehoiakim's Wickedness 59 

" " Jeremiah Persecuted 60 

" " The Downfall of Judah 60 

" " Promise of a New Heart 62 

MARCH 1. 

Special Items: Germany, Annual Gathering, etc 66 

The Doctrinal Test in Methodism 67 

Baron Rothschild Purchasing Land in Palestine 68 

Poem— "Peace Be Upon Thee." 69 

In Due Time 69 

Views Abroad 70 

Bible Study: Quarterly Review 75 

" Comfort Ye My People 76 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 78 

MARCH 15. 

Travels in the Holy Land 83 

Believers' Convention 86 

The Memorial Supper 87 

Poem— "He Careth for You." 89 

The Deliverance 89 

Bible Study: The Way of the Righteous 90 

" " The King of Zion 91 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 93 

Book Notices 95-96 

APRIL 1. 

Special Items: Palestine Mementoes, Memorial, etc 98 

The Bride, the Lamb's Wife 99 

Travels in the Holy Land 107 

Bible Study: God's Works and Word 110 

APRIL 15. 

Special Items: Bible-Study Convention, Remittances 114 

Was It not Necessary? 115 

The Methodist Revolt 118 

Poem— "Calvary." 119 

Travels in the Holy Land 119 

We have no King but Caesar 122 

Bible Study: The Lord My Shepherd 123 

" " The Prayer of the Penitent 123 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 1 25 

MAY 1. 

Special Items: The Syriac New Testament, etc 130 

Echoes from the Believers' Convention 131 

Who is Worthy? 134 



Travels in the Holy Land 137 

Preparing for the Image of the Beast 140 

Bible Study: Our House of Many Mansions 142 

" " Praise Ye the Lord 143 

" " Quarterly Temperance Lesson 144 

Consecration to a Work 144 

MAY 15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 146 

The Glory that Excelleth 147 

Journalistic Responsibility 150 

Poem— "O! the Depth of Divine Wisdom!" 151 

The Epistle of James 151 

Jewish Items of Interest 155 

To Whom Should We Pray? 156 

Bible Study: Nebuchadnezzar's Dream 158 

" " The Fiery Furnace 158 

" " The Den of Lions 160 

" " Quarterly Review 160 

JUNE 1-15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 162 

To Us there is One God 163 

Bible Study: Messiah's Reign 189 

" " Our Lord's Ascension 190 

" " The Spirit of Adoption Shed Forth 192 

JULY 1. 

Items: More Laborers, Our Booklets, Foreign Tracts 194 

Pulpit Infidelity of To-day 195 

Bible Study: The Early Church 205 

" " The Lame Man Healed 207 

JULY 15. 

Providing for Colporteurs' Expenses 210 

View from the TOWER, The Homestead Strike 211 

Poem— "The Faithful Servant." 214 

Bible Study: Peter and John Before the Council 215 

" " The Apostles' Confidence in God 216 

" " Ananias and Sapphira 218 

" " The Apostles Persecuted 218 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 219 

AUGUST 1. 

Glean Carefully. Yet There is Room 226 

Under His Wings 227 

Poem— "Resignation." 230 

The Royal Priesthood 230 

Bible Study: The First Christian Martyrs 234 

" " Philip Preaching at Samaria 234 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 237 



Book Notices 240 

AUGUST 15. 

Young's Concordance in Great Britain— also Index 242 

Enoch, Elijah and the Sentence 243 

One Hope 245 

Universal Salvation (I) 250 

All in Adam and All in Christ 252 

Bible Study: Philip and the Ethiopian 253 

" " Quarterly Review 254 

Only One Christ in History 254 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 255 

SEPTEMBER 1. 

Faith and Works 258 

View, Behold, I stand at the Door and Knock 259 

They shall be Mine 260 

Poem— "God's Burdens." 263 

Universal Salvation (II) 263 

Faith and Feeling 267 

Bible Study: Temperance Lesson 268 

" " Saul of Tarsus Converted 269 

A Word to Colporteurs 270 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 271 

SEPTEMBER 15. 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 273 

View from TOWER, Seventh-Day Adventists' Fears 275 

Moses and Elias 280 

Who is Wise among You? 281 

Future Probation for the Dead 282 

Bible Study: Dorcas Raised to Life 285 

" " Salvation Reaches the Gentiles 287 

Poem— "Perfect through Suffering." 288 

OCTOBER 1. 

Immigration of Jews 290 

Other Laborers Wanted 290 

View from the TOWER, Zeal according to Knowledge 291 

Pay Thy Vows unto the Most High 294 

Universal Salvation (III) 296 

The Thief in Paradise 299 

Bible Study: The Gospel at Antioch 300 

" " Peter's Deliverance 301 

Colporteurs' Weekly Reports 301 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 302 

OCTOBER 15. 

The Newberry Bible, Index, and Syriac Testament 306 

The Nature and Methods of God's Elections 307 

The Prodigal's Return 313 



Poem— "Prodigal, Return!" 315 

Grow in Grace 315 

Bible Study: The First Christian Missionaries 318 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 319 

NOVEMBER 1. 

Items: Brother Mitchell's Free Circular and others 322 

The Law of God 323 

Palestine and the Jews 328 

Poem— "Father, Glorify Thy Name." 330 

Christian Fellowship 330 

Bible Study: Paul's First Missionary Sermon 332 

" " The Apostles Turning to the Gentiles 334 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 335 

NOVEMBER 15. 

Meetings in New York. Protestants no Longer 338 

Purgatory: Is It a Romish, a Prot. or a Bible Doctrine? 339 

Bear Ye One Another's Burdens 345 

A Mighty Force 347 

Poem-"As the Father Loveth Me." 348 

Bible Study: Work among the Gentiles 348 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters.) 35 1 

DECEMBER 1. 

Special Items: Binders, "Good Hopes" successful 354 

View, Preparing to Give Life to the Image 355 

Thou Preparest a Table before Me. (Psalm 23.) 358 

What a Disturbance May Do 359 

Consequents of Divine Judgment 360 

Bible Study: The Birth of Christ 365 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 366 

DECEMBER 15. 

Old Theology Tracts, Our Booklets, TOWER for 1893 370 

His Way is Perfect 371 

Faith Versus Superstition 373 

Obedience Better than Sacrifice 375 

Bible Study: Returning from Captivity 379 

" " Rebuilding the Temple 380 

" " Encouraging the People 381 

Creed-Making in Japan 382 

Supplement of four pages added, mentions New Bibles, 
Bible-Study Helps, Motto Cards and Good Hopes for 1893. 


