
August
Friday, August 1

Many are the hardships of the righteous one, but Jehovah rescues him from them all.​—Ps. 34:19.



Note two important points in the above psalm: (1) Righteous people face problems. (2) Jehovah delivers us from our trials. How does Jehovah deliver us? One way is by helping us to have a realistic view of life in this system of things. While Jehovah does promise that we will have joy in serving him, he does not guarantee a worry-free life now. (Isa. 66:14) He urges us to focus on our future​—the time when we will have the life that he wants us to enjoy forever. (2 Cor. 4:16-18) In the meantime, he helps us to keep going each day. (Lam. 3:22-24) What can we learn from the examples of faithful worshippers of Jehovah, both in Bible times and in our day? We may face unexpected problems. But when we lean on Jehovah, he will never fail to sustain us.​—Ps. 55:22. w23.04 14-15 ¶3-4




Saturday, August 2

Be in subjection to the superior authorities.​—Rom. 13:1.



We can learn from the examples of Joseph and Mary, who were ready to obey the superior authorities even when it was inconvenient. (Luke 2:1-6) When Mary was about nine months pregnant, she and Joseph faced a test of obedience. Augustus, who ruled the Roman Empire, called for a census. Joseph and Mary had to travel to Bethlehem, a journey of up to 150 kilometers (93 mi) through hilly country. That trip would be uncomfortable, especially for Mary. The couple may have worried about her safety and that of their unborn baby. What if she were to go into labor while traveling? She was carrying the future Messiah in her womb. Would that excuse them from obeying the government? Joseph and Mary did not allow any of those concerns to influence whether they would obey the law. Jehovah blessed their obedience. Mary arrived safely in Bethlehem, gave birth to a healthy baby, and even helped to fulfill Bible prophecy!​—Mic. 5:2. w23.10 8 ¶9; 9 ¶11-12




Sunday, August 3

[Encourage] one another.​—Heb. 10:25.



What if the very thought of commenting at meetings makes you nervous? You may find it helpful to prepare well. (Prov. 21:5) The more familiar you are with the material, the more at ease you will feel about volunteering to comment. Also, make your comments brief. (Prov. 15:23; 17:27) A short answer gives you less to worry about. By making a brief comment in your own words, you will show that you have prepared well and that you have a clear understanding of the material. What if you try some of these suggestions but still feel too anxious to comment more than once or twice? Be assured that Jehovah will appreciate your sincere efforts to do what you can. (Luke 21:1-4) Giving your best does not mean putting an unbearable strain on yourself. (Phil. 4:5) Determine what you can do, set a goal to do it, and pray for a calm heart. Initially, that goal may be to make one brief comment. w23.04 21 ¶6-8




Monday, August 4

Put on the breastplate . . . and the . . . helmet.​—1 Thess. 5:8.



The apostle Paul compares us to soldiers who are alert and dressed for battle. A soldier on active duty is expected to be prepared for battle at all times. It is similar with us. We remain ready for Jehovah’s day by wearing a breastplate of faith and love and a helmet of hope. A breastplate protected a soldier’s heart. Faith and love protect our figurative heart. They will help us to keep serving God and following Jesus. Faith assures us that Jehovah will reward us for seeking him with all our heart. (Heb. 11:6) It will move us to remain loyal to our Leader, Jesus, even if we have to endure hardships. We can build the faith to face life’s challenges by noting modern-day examples of individuals who maintained integrity despite persecution or economic hardship. And we can avoid the snare of materialism by imitating ones who simplified their life to put Kingdom interests first. w23.06 10 ¶8-9




Tuesday, August 5

The one who looks at the clouds will not reap.​—Eccl. 11:4.



Self-control is the ability to control one’s feelings and actions. It is required in order to move us to reach our goals, especially if a goal is difficult to reach or if we do not feel motivated. Remember, self-control is part of the fruitage of the spirit, so ask Jehovah for holy spirit to help you cultivate that important quality. (Luke 11:13; Gal. 5:22, 23) Do not wait for perfect circumstances. In this world, we will likely never have ideal circumstances. If we wait for them, we may never reach our goal. We may lack motivation because our goal seems very hard to achieve. If this is true in your case, could you break down your goal into smaller ones? If your goal is to cultivate a quality, why not first work on displaying it in small ways? If your goal is to read the entire Bible, could you start by scheduling shorter periods of reading time? w23.05 29 ¶11-13




Wednesday, August 6

The path of the righteous is like the bright morning light that grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.​—Prov. 4:18.



Throughout the last days, Jehovah has used his organization to provide a steady flow of spiritual food to help all of us to keep traveling on “the Way of Holiness.” (Isa. 35:8; 48:17; 60:17) We might say that whenever someone accepts a Bible study, he has an opportunity to step onto “the Way of Holiness.” Some travel only a short distance and then leave the highway. Others are determined to keep traveling on it until they reach their destination. What is that destination? For those with a heavenly hope, “the Way of Holiness” leads to “the paradise of God” in heaven. (Rev. 2:7) For those with an earthly hope, that highway leads to perfection at the end of the 1,000 years. If you are traveling on that highway today, do not look back. And do not leave it until you have completed your journey to the new world! w23.05 17 ¶15; 19 ¶16-18




Thursday, August 7

We love, because he first loved us.​—1 John 4:19.



The decision to dedicate yourself to Jehovah is only natural when you think of all that he has done for you. (Ps. 116:12-14) The Bible rightly calls Jehovah the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present.” (Jas. 1:17) The greatest of those gifts is the sacrifice of his Son, Jesus. Just think! The ransom has made it possible for you to have a close relationship with Jehovah. And he has given you the prospect of living forever. (1 John 4:9, 10) Dedicating yourself to Jehovah is a way to show your appreciation for that greatest expression of love ever made, along with all the other blessings Jehovah has given you.​—Deut. 16:17; 2 Cor. 5:15. w24.03 5 ¶8




Friday, August 8

The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah.​—Prov. 14:2.



Regarding the moral standards promoted by this world, we feel as did righteous Lot. He “was greatly distressed by the brazen conduct of the lawless people,” knowing that our heavenly Father hates bad conduct. (2 Pet. 2:7, 8) Fear of God and love for him moved Lot to reject the low moral standards of the people around him. We too are surrounded by people who have little or no respect for Jehovah’s moral standards. Despite that, we can remain morally clean if we maintain our love for God and cultivate a healthy fear of him. To that end, Jehovah provides loving encouragement and motivation by means of the book of Proverbs. All Christians, men and women, young and old, can truly benefit from considering the wise counsel found there. When we fear Jehovah, we are careful not to excuse bad behavior. w23.06 20 ¶1-2; 21 ¶5




Saturday, August 9

If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake day after day and keep following me.​—Luke 9:23.



Perhaps you have faced opposition from family members, or perhaps you have sacrificed certain material pursuits to put Kingdom interests first. (Matt. 6:33) If so, you can be certain that Jehovah has noticed your faithful works. (Heb. 6:10) Likely, you have experienced the truthfulness of Jesus’ words: “No one has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for my sake and for the sake of the good news who will not get 100 times more now in this period of time​—houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and fields, with persecutions—​and in the coming system of things, everlasting life.” (Mark 10:29, 30) The blessings that you have received are truly greater than any sacrifices that you have made.​—Ps. 37:4. w24.03 9 ¶5




Sunday, August 10

A true friend shows love at all times, and is a brother who is born for times of distress.​—Prov. 17:17.



When Christians in Judea experienced a great famine, the brothers in the congregation in Antioch were “determined, each according to what he could afford, to send relief to the brothers living in Judea.” (Acts 11:27-30) Although the brothers affected by the famine lived some distance away, the Christians in Antioch were determined to help them. (1 John 3:17, 18) We too can show compassion today when we learn that fellow worshippers have been affected by a disaster. We readily respond​—perhaps by asking the elders if we can assist on a project, by donating to the worldwide work, or by praying for those affected by the disaster. Our brothers and sisters may also need help to meet their basic needs. When our King, Christ Jesus, comes to execute judgment, may he find us showing compassion and invite us to “inherit the Kingdom.”​—Matt. 25:34-40. w23.07 4 ¶9-10; 6 ¶12




Monday, August 11

Let your reasonableness become known to all men.​—Phil. 4:5.



Jesus imitated Jehovah’s reasonableness. He was sent to earth to preach to “the lost sheep of the house of Israel.” But he showed reasonableness in carrying out that assignment. On one occasion, a non-Israelite woman begged him to heal her daughter who was “cruelly demon possessed.” Jesus compassionately did as the woman asked and healed her daughter. (Matt. 15:21-28) Consider another example. Earlier in his ministry, Jesus declared: “Whoever disowns me . . . , I will also disown him.” (Matt. 10:33) But did he disown Peter, who denied him three times? No. Jesus took into account Peter’s repentance and faith. After being resurrected, Jesus appeared to Peter and very likely assured him of his forgiveness and love. (Luke 24:33, 34) Both Jehovah God and Jesus Christ are reasonable. What about us? Jehovah expects us to be reasonable. w23.07 21 ¶6-7




Tuesday, August 12

Death will be no more.​—Rev. 21:4.



What assurances can we share with those who doubt that God’s promise of Paradise will come true? First, Jehovah himself makes the promise. The book of Revelation states: “The One seated on the throne said: ‘Look! I am making all things new.’” He has the wisdom, the power, and the desire to make his promise come true. Second, the fulfillment of his promise is so certain that from Jehovah’s viewpoint, it has already happened. He rightly says: “These words are faithful and true. . . . They have come to pass!” Third, when Jehovah starts something, he brings it to its successful conclusion, as confirmed by the expression: “I am the Alpha and the Omega.” (Rev. 21:6) Jehovah will prove that Satan is a liar and a failure. So when someone says, “This sounds too good to be true,” read and explain Revelation 21:5, 6. Show how Jehovah has guaranteed his promise by signing it, as it were, with his own signature.​—Isa. 65:16. w23.11 7 ¶18-19




Wednesday, August 13

I will make you a great nation.​—Gen. 12:2.



Jehovah made that promise to Abraham when he was a childless 75-year-old man. Did Abraham see that promise fulfilled? Not completely. After crossing the Euphrates River and waiting 25 years, Abraham did see the miraculous birth of his son Isaac, and after another 60 years, his grandsons Esau and Jacob were born. (Heb. 6:15) But Abraham never saw his descendants become a great nation and inherit the Promised Land. However, that faithful man did enjoy a close friendship with his Creator. (Jas. 2:23) And when Abraham is resurrected, how thrilled he will be to learn that his faith and patience resulted in blessings for all nations! (Gen. 22:18) What is the lesson? We personally may not see all of Jehovah’s promises fulfilled right away. However, if we are patient like Abraham, we can be sure that Jehovah will reward us now and even more so in His promised new world.​—Mark 10:29, 30. w23.08 24 ¶14




Thursday, August 14

During the time he was searching for Jehovah, the true God made him prosper.​—2 Chron. 26:5.



As a youth, King Uzziah was humble. He learned “to fear the true God.” And Jehovah blessed him for most of his 68 years. (2 Chron. 26:1-4) Uzziah defeated many of the nation’s enemies and strengthened Jerusalem’s defenses. (2 Chron. 26:6-15) Uzziah was surely happy with all that God had helped him to do. (Eccl. 3:12, 13) King Uzziah was accustomed to having others follow his instructions. Did that make him think he could do anything he wanted? Well, one day Uzziah decided to enter Jehovah’s temple and presumptuously tried to burn incense on the altar, which kings were not allowed to do. (2 Chron. 26:16-18) High Priest Azariah tried to correct him, but Uzziah got very angry. Sadly, Uzziah ruined his record of faithful service and was punished with leprosy. (2 Chron. 26:19-21) How different his life would have turned out had he remained humble! w23.09 10 ¶9-10




Friday, August 15

He . . . separated himself, fearing those of the circumcised class.​—Gal. 2:12.



Even after he became an anointed Christian, the apostle Peter had to deal with his weaknesses. In 36 C.E., Peter was present when the uncircumcised Gentile Cornelius was anointed with holy spirit, which was clear evidence that “God is not partial” and that Gentiles could be part of the Christian congregation. (Acts 10:34, 44, 45) Peter thereafter felt free to share meals with Gentiles, something he would never have done earlier. However, some Jewish Christians felt that Jews and Gentiles should not eat together. When some who had that viewpoint came to Antioch, Peter stopped eating with his Gentile brothers, likely out of fear of offending Jewish Christians. The apostle Paul saw this hypocrisy and rebuked Peter publicly. (Gal. 2:13, 14) Despite this setback, Peter persevered. w23.09 22 ¶8




Saturday, August 16

He will firmly ground you.​—1 Pet. 5:10.



An honest self-examination may reveal that you have certain weaknesses, but do not be discouraged. “The Lord is kind,” and he will help you to improve. (1 Pet. 2:3) The apostle Peter assures us: “God . . . will himself finish your training. He will make you firm.” Peter once felt unworthy to be in the presence of God’s Son. (Luke 5:8) But with the loving support of Jehovah and of Jesus, Peter persevered as a follower of Christ. Peter thus was approved to gain “entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.” (2 Pet. 1:11) What a reward! If you persevere as Peter did and allow yourself to be trained by Jehovah, you too will receive the reward of everlasting life. You will “attain the goal of your faith, your salvation.”​—1 Pet. 1:9. w23.09 31 ¶16-17




Sunday, August 17

Worship the One who made the heaven and the earth.​—Rev. 14:7.



The ancient tabernacle had one courtyard​—a fenced, open area where the priests performed their duties. The large copper altar of burnt offering was located in the courtyard, along with a copper basin of water that the priests used to cleanse themselves before performing their sacred service. (Ex. 30:17-20; 40:6-8) Today, the remnant of Christ’s anointed brothers faithfully serve in the earthly inner courtyard of the spiritual temple. The presence of the large basin of water is an important reminder for them, as it is for all Christians, to remain morally and spiritually clean. Where, then, do the “great crowd” offer their worship? The apostle John saw them “standing before the throne,” in what corresponds on earth to the outer courtyard, where “they are rendering [God] sacred service day and night in his temple.” (Rev. 7:9, 13-15) How we cherish having a place in Jehovah’s arrangement for pure worship! w23.10 28 ¶15-16




Monday, August 18

Because of the promise of God, . . . he became powerful by his faith.​—Rom. 4:20.



One way that Jehovah supplies power to us is through the elders. (Isa. 32:1, 2) So when you feel anxious, share your concerns with the elders. When they offer you help, accept it gratefully. By means of them, Jehovah can make you strong. Our Bible-based hope of everlasting life​—either in an earthly Paradise or in the heavenly Kingdom—​can also fill us with power. (Rom. 4:3, 18, 19) Our hope strengthens us to endure trials, preach the good news, and carry out various assignments in the congregation. (1 Thess. 1:3) That same hope strengthened the apostle Paul. He was “hard-pressed,” “perplexed,” “persecuted,” and “knocked down.” His life was even in danger. (2 Cor. 4:8-10) Paul gained the strength to endure by focusing on his hope. (2 Cor. 4:16-18) Paul focused on his future hope of eternal life in heaven. Paul meditated on that hope, and as a result, he felt “renewed from day to day.” w23.10 15-16 ¶14-17




Tuesday, August 19

Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.​—Ps. 29:11.



When praying, consider if it is Jehovah’s time to grant your request. We may feel that we need an immediate answer to our prayers. Really, though, Jehovah knows the best time to help. (Heb. 4:16) When we do not receive what we ask for right away, we may think that Jehovah’s answer is ‘No.’ But his answer could in effect be ‘Not yet.’ For example, a young brother prayed to be cured of his illness. But his health did not improve. If Jehovah had miraculously cured him, Satan could have argued that the brother continued serving Jehovah only because he had been healed. (Job 1:9-11; 2:4) Additionally, Jehovah has already set the time to cure all sicknesses. (Isa. 33:24; Rev. 21:3, 4) And until then, we cannot expect miraculous cures. So the brother could ask Jehovah to give him the strength and the peace of mind to endure his illness and to continue serving God faithfully. w23.11 24 ¶13




Wednesday, August 20

He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.​—Ps. 103:10.



Samson had made a serious mistake, but he did not give up. He looked for an opportunity to fulfill his God-given assignment against the Philistines. (Judg. 16:28-30) Samson begged Jehovah: “Let me take revenge on the Philistines.” The true God answered Samson’s plea and restored his miraculous strength. As a result, Samson was more successful against the Philistines on this occasion than ever before. Although Samson experienced the painful consequences of his mistake, he did not stop trying to do Jehovah’s will. Even if we make a mistake and need reproof or lose a privilege, we must not give up. Remember, Jehovah does not give up on us. (Ps. 103:8, 9) Despite our mistakes, we can still be useful to Jehovah, just as Samson was. w23.09 6 ¶15-16




Thursday, August 21

Endurance [produces] an approved condition; the approved condition, in turn, hope.​—Rom. 5:4.



Your endurance brings Jehovah’s approval. This does not mean that Jehovah is pleased that you are experiencing trials or problems. What God approves of is you. Your endurance results in an approved condition. What an amazing blessing! (Ps. 5:12) Recall that Abraham endured tests and enjoyed divine approval. Jehovah viewed him as His friend and counted him as righteous. (Gen. 15:6; Rom. 4:13, 22) The same can be true of us. God does not base his approval on the amount of work we do in his service or on the privileges we enjoy. He grants his approval because of our faithful endurance. And no matter what our age, circumstance, or ability is, all of us can endure. Are you faithfully enduring a trial right now? If so, take comfort in knowing that you have God’s approval. Realizing that we have God’s approval can have a powerful effect on us. It can strengthen our hope. w23.12 11 ¶13-14




Friday, August 22

Prove yourself a man.​—1 Ki. 2:2.



A Christian man must learn to communicate well. A man who is a good communicator listens to and acknowledges the thoughts and feelings of others. (Prov. 20:5) He can learn to read another person’s tone of voice, facial expressions, and body language. You cannot learn to do this without spending time with people. If you constantly use electronic tools to communicate, such as email and texting, your ability to communicate with people in person could weaken. Therefore, create opportunities to talk with others in person. (2 John 12) A mature Christian man must also be able to support himself and his household. (1 Tim. 5:8) It is good to learn a skill that will help you to find employment. (Acts 18:2, 3; 20:34; Eph. 4:28) Gain the reputation of being someone who works hard and who sticks to a task until it is completed. If you do, you will be more likely to get a job and keep it. w23.12 27 ¶12-13




Saturday, August 23

Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.​—1 Thess. 5:2.



When the Bible speaks of “Jehovah’s day,” it refers to the time when Jehovah judges his enemies and brings salvation to his people. In the past, Jehovah at times carried out judgments. (Isa. 13:1, 6; Ezek. 13:5; Zeph. 1:8) In our time, “Jehovah’s day” begins with the attack on Babylon the Great and culminates in the battle of Armageddon. To survive that “day,” we need to prepare now. Jesus taught that we must not only get ready for the “great tribulation” but also “keep ready” for it. (Matt. 24:21; Luke 12:40) In his first inspired letter to the Thessalonians, the apostle Paul used a number of illustrations to help Christians keep ready for Jehovah’s great day of judgment. Paul knew that Jehovah’s day would not come right then. (2 Thess. 2:1-3) Still, he urged his brothers to prepare for that day as if it were coming tomorrow, and we too can apply his counsel. w23.06 8 ¶1-2




Sunday, August 24

My beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable.​—1 Cor. 15:58.



In the late 1970’s, a 60-story skyscraper gradually rose above the skyline of Tokyo, Japan. Observers wondered how it would be able to withstand the frequent earthquakes in that city. The secret? Engineers designed the building to be rigid yet flexible enough to absorb seismic shocks. Christians are like that skyscraper. In what way? A Christian must maintain a balance between steadfastness and flexibility. He needs to be strong and immovable when it comes to upholding Jehovah’s laws and standards. He is “ready to obey” and does not compromise. On the other hand, he needs to be “reasonable,” or flexible, when the situation allows for it or even requires it. (Jas. 3:17) A Christian who has learned to have this balanced view will avoid the extremes of being either excessively rigid or overly permissive. w23.07 14 ¶1-2




Monday, August 25

Though you never saw him, you love him.​—1 Pet. 1:8.



Jesus had to stand up to temptations from Satan the Devil, including direct attacks on his loyalty to God. (Matt. 4:1-11) Satan was determined to make Jesus sin so that he would not be able to pay the ransom. During his earthly ministry, Jesus endured further tests. He faced persecution and threats to his life. (Luke 4:28, 29; 13:31) He had to deal with the imperfections of his followers. (Mark 9:33, 34) When he was on trial for his life, he was tortured and ridiculed. Then he was executed in an extremely painful and humiliating way. (Heb. 12:1-3) He had to endure the final part of his trial on his own, without Jehovah’s protection. (Matt. 27:46) Clearly, the ransom cost Jesus a great deal. Do we not feel deep love for Jesus when we reflect on how he willingly sacrificed so much in our behalf? w24.01 10-11 ¶7-9




Tuesday, August 26

All who are hasty surely head for poverty.​—Prov. 21:5.



Patience helps us in our dealings with others. It helps us to listen attentively when others speak. (Jas. 1:19) Patience also promotes peace. It protects us from reacting too quickly and saying something unkind when we are under stress. And if we are patient, we will be slow to anger when someone hurts our feelings. Instead of retaliating, we will “continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely.” (Col. 3:12, 13) Patience can also help us to make better decisions. Instead of being hasty or impulsive, we will take the time to research and evaluate the options that we have. For example, if we are looking for work, we might be inclined to accept the first offer we receive. However, if we are patient, we will take the time to consider the impact the job could have on our family and spiritual life. By being patient, we may avoid making a bad decision. w23.08 22 ¶8-9




Wednesday, August 27

I see in my body another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my body.​—Rom. 7:23.



If you feel discouraged by your sinful tendencies, thinking about the promise you made to Jehovah when you dedicated yourself to him will strengthen your resolve to fight against temptation. How? When you make a dedication to Jehovah, you disown yourself. This means that you say no to personal desires and ambitions that would displease Jehovah. (Matt. 16:24) So when you face a test, you will not need to spend time debating what to do. You will have already shut the door on all options except one​—faithfulness to Jehovah. You will remain firmly resolved to please Jehovah. You will in that sense be like Job. Even though he faced extremely difficult trials, he resolutely stated: “I will not renounce my integrity!”​—Job 27:5. w24.03 9 ¶6-7




Thursday, August 28

Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, to all who call on him in truth.​—Ps. 145:18.



Jehovah, “the God of love,” is with us! (2 Cor. 13:11) He is interested in us personally. We are convinced that we are “surrounded by His loyal love.” (Ps. 32:10) The more we meditate on how he has shown us his love, the more real he becomes and the closer we feel to him. We can approach him freely and tell him how much we need his love. We can share all our worries with him, confident that he understands and that he is eager to help us. (Ps. 145:19) Just as we are drawn to a warm fire on a cold day, we are drawn to Jehovah’s warm love. Although Jehovah’s love is powerful, it is also tender. So welcome Jehovah’s warm love in your life. And may we all respond to his love by exclaiming: “I love Jehovah”!​—Ps. 116:1. w24.01 31 ¶19-20




Friday, August 29

I have made your name known.​—John 17:26.



Jesus did more than just inform people that God’s name is Jehovah. The Jews whom Jesus taught already knew God’s name. But Jesus took the lead in being “the one who . . . explained Him.” (John 1:17, 18) For example, the Hebrew Scriptures reveal that Jehovah is merciful and compassionate. (Ex. 34:5-7) Jesus made that truth clearer than ever when he related the parable of the wayward son and his father. When we read about that father catching sight of his repentant son “while he was still a long way off,” running to meet him, embracing him, and forgiving him wholeheartedly, we see a most vivid picture of Jehovah’s mercy and compassion. (Luke 15:11-32) Jesus revealed his Father as He truly is. w24.02 10 ¶8-9




Saturday, August 30

Comfort others . . . with the comfort that we receive from God.​—2 Cor. 1:4.



Jehovah brings refreshment and comfort to those who are distressed. How can we imitate Jehovah in feeling compassion and in providing comfort to others? One way we can do so is by cultivating qualities in our heart that are related to giving comfort. What are some of these qualities? What will help us to maintain the love that we need in order to “keep comforting one another” from day to day? (1 Thess. 4:18) We need to cultivate such tender qualities as fellow feeling, brotherly affection, and kindness. (Col. 3:12; 1 Pet. 3:8) How will these qualities help us? When feelings of compassion and related qualities become part of our personality, we cannot help but give comfort to those in distress. As Jesus stated, “out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. The good man out of his good treasure sends out good things.” (Matt. 12:34, 35) Giving comfort to our brothers and sisters in need is truly an important way in which we express our love to them. w23.11 10 ¶10-11




Sunday, August 31

Those having insight will understand.​—Dan. 12:10.



We need to ask for help if we are to understand Bible prophecy. Consider this illustration. Imagine that you are visiting an unfamiliar place but a friend who is traveling with you is well-acquainted with the area. He knows exactly where you are and where each road leads. No doubt you would be glad that your friend agreed to come with you! In a similar way, Jehovah knows where we are in the stream of time and what is on the road ahead of us. So to understand Bible prophecy, we must humbly ask for Jehovah’s help. (Dan. 2:28; 2 Pet. 1:19, 20) Like any good parent, Jehovah wants his children to have a happy future. (Jer. 29:11) But unlike any human parent, Jehovah can foretell the future with complete accuracy. He had prophecies recorded in his Word so that we can know about important events before they happen.​—Isa. 46:10. w23.08 8 ¶3-4




