
February
Saturday, February 1

I will listen to you.​—Jer. 29:12.



When King Hezekiah was extremely sick, he begged Jehovah to help him recover. In response, Jehovah healed him. (2 Ki. 20:1-6) On the other hand, when the apostle Paul pleaded with Jehovah to remove his “thorn in the flesh,” Jehovah did not remove the problem. (2 Cor. 12:7-9) The apostles James and Peter both faced death at the hands of King Herod. James was put to death, while Peter was miraculously rescued. (Acts 12:1-11) We may wonder, ‘Why did Jehovah save Peter but not James?’ The Bible does not say. What we can be sure of is that Jehovah’s ways are “never unjust.” (Deut. 32:4) At times, we may be faced with an outcome we did not expect. But because we trust that Jehovah’s answer to our prayers will always be loving and just, we do not question the way he chooses to answer us.​—Job 33:13. w23.11 21 ¶6




Sunday, February 2

The wisdom from above is . . . ready to obey.​—Jas. 3:17.



The inspired writer James said that wise people are “ready to obey.” Think of what that means. We should be eager and willing to obey those whom Jehovah has entrusted with a measure of authority. Of course, Jehovah does not expect us to obey someone who asks us to ignore His commands. (Acts 4:18-20) We may be more inclined to obey Jehovah than to obey a human. After all, Jehovah always gives perfect direction. (Ps. 19:7) That is hardly the case with humans who have authority. Even so, our heavenly Father has given a measure of authority to parents, government officials, and elders. (Prov. 6:20; 1 Thess. 5:12; 1 Pet. 2:13, 14) When we obey them, we are really obeying Jehovah. w23.10 6 ¶2-3




Monday, February 3

These words are faithful and true.​—Rev. 21:5.



One way to strengthen our faith is by contemplating Jehovah’s power. He has the power to fulfill everything he promises to do. He is, after all, Almighty God. (Job 42:2; Mark 10:27; Eph. 3:20) He assured Abraham and Sarah that they would have a son in their old age. (Gen. 17:15-17) He also told Abraham that his descendants would be given the land of Canaan. During the many years that Abraham’s descendants, the Israelites, were slaves in Egypt, it must have seemed as if that promise would never come true. But it did. He told Mary, a virgin, that she would give birth to his own Son, whose arrival Jehovah had promised thousands of years earlier in the garden of Eden​—another promise fulfilled! (Gen. 3:15) We strengthen our faith in Jehovah’s power to bring about the new world by reflecting on his record of making and fulfilling his promises.​—Josh. 23:14; Isa. 55:10, 11. w23.04 28 ¶10-12




Tuesday, February 4

O Jehovah, hear my prayer; listen to my plea for help.​—Ps. 143:1.



Jehovah answered David’s prayers for deliverance. (1 Sam. 19:10, 18-20; 2 Sam. 5:17-25) We too can have that assurance. (Ps. 145:18) Jehovah may not answer our prayers in the way that we expect. Paul asked God to remove “a thorn in the flesh.” On three occasions, Paul prayed specifically about this difficult problem. Did Jehovah answer those prayers? Yes, but not in the way that Paul had hoped. Instead of removing the problem, Jehovah gave him the power that he needed to keep serving Him faithfully. (2 Cor. 12:7-10) We too may at times receive an answer that differs from what we expect. We can be sure that Jehovah knows exactly how best to help us. He can even “do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.” (Eph. 3:20) For that reason, his answer to our prayers could come at a time or in a way that we do not anticipate. w23.05 8-9 ¶4-6




Wednesday, February 5

The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out.​—John 5:28, 29.



From time to time, we all do well to reflect on the Bible’s promise of a future resurrection. Why? Because we never know when we might face a life-threatening illness or suddenly lose someone we love in death. (Eccl. 9:11; Jas. 4:13, 14) Our resurrection hope can help us endure such challenges. (1 Thess. 4:13) The Scriptures assure us that our heavenly Father knows us well and loves us dearly. (Luke 12:7) Think of how well Jehovah God must know us in order to re-create us with our personality and memories intact. And how loving of Jehovah to give us the opportunity for everlasting life, even by resurrecting us if necessary! Why can we believe in the resurrection promise? Because we are convinced that the One making the promise has the desire as well as the power, or ability, to fulfill it. w23.04 8-9 ¶2-4




Thursday, February 6

[Joseph and Mary] were accustomed to go from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the Passover.​—Luke 2:41.



Joseph and Mary worked together to keep their relationship with Jehovah strong. They understood the importance of worshipping Jehovah together as a family. (Luke 2:22-24; 4:16) What an excellent example for married couples today! If you have children, as did Joseph and Mary, it may be challenging to attend meetings or to schedule time for family worship. It may be even harder to coordinate time to study or pray together as a couple. Yet, remember that when you worship Jehovah together, you draw closer to him and to each other. So make worship a priority. If your marriage is strained, the idea of being together for family worship may not seem appealing. If so, begin by considering something short and enjoyable. This step can strengthen your relationship and your desire to do spiritual things as a couple. w23.05 22 ¶7-8




Friday, February 7

Obadiah greatly feared Jehovah.​—1 Ki. 18:3.



How did wholesome fear affect Obadiah? For one thing, it made him honest and trustworthy; hence, the king put him in charge of the royal household. (Compare Nehemiah 7:2.) Obadiah’s godly fear also gave him extraordinary courage​—a quality that he surely needed. He lived during the reign of wicked King Ahab. (1 Ki. 16:30) Also, Ahab’s Baal-worshipping wife, Jezebel, hated Jehovah so much that she tried to wipe out true worship in the northern kingdom. She even killed many of God’s prophets. (1 Ki. 18:4) When Jezebel began hunting down God’s prophets to put them to death, Obadiah took 100 of them and hid them “by groups of 50 in a cave and kept supplying them bread and water.” (1 Ki. 18:13, 14) If discovered, courageous Obadiah would surely have been executed. Of course, Obadiah was human, and he did not want to die. But Obadiah loved Jehovah and those who served Him more than he loved his own life. w23.06 16 ¶9-10




Saturday, February 8

I, Jehovah, am . . . the One guiding you.​—Isa. 48:17.



Jehovah continues to lead his people today as he did in the past. He has been doing so by means of his Word and his Son, the head of the congregation. Can we see evidence that God has also continued to use human representatives? Yes. Consider, for example, certain developments that took place in the late 1800’s. Charles Taze Russell and his associates began to discern that the year 1914 would mark a turning point regarding the establishment of God’s Kingdom. (Dan. 4:25, 26) In reaching that conclusion, they depended on Bible prophecy. Was Jehovah guiding their Bible research? He clearly was. In 1914 world events confirmed that God’s Kingdom had begun to rule. World War I broke out, followed by pestilences, earthquakes, and food shortages. (Luke 21:10, 11) Jehovah was indeed using those sincere Christian men to help his people. w24.02 22 ¶11




Sunday, February 9

Many are the hardships of the righteous one, but Jehovah rescues him from them all.​—Ps. 34:19.



As Jehovah’s people, we know that he loves us and that he wants us to enjoy the best life possible. (Rom. 8:35-39) We are also convinced that Bible principles always benefit us when we apply them. (Isa. 48:17, 18) What, though, if we face challenges that we did not expect? For example, a family member might disappoint us in some way. We may have serious health issues that limit what we can do in Jehovah’s service. We might experience the devastating effects of a natural disaster. Or we may be persecuted for our beliefs. When we face such trials, we may wonder: ‘Why is this happening to me? Have I done something wrong? Does this indicate that Jehovah is not blessing me?’ Have you ever felt that way? If so, do not be discouraged. Many of Jehovah’s loyal servants have struggled with similar feelings.​—Ps. 22:1, 2; Hab. 1:2, 3. w23.04 14 ¶1-2




Monday, February 10

I have resolved to obey your regulations at all times.​—Ps. 119:112.



When we face temptation, we immediately reject any thought or action that could damage our friendship with God. Jehovah expects us to be “obedient from the heart.” (Rom. 6:17) His guidance is always in our best interests, and his laws are nonnegotiable. (Isa. 48:17, 18; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10) The Devil uses physical and emotional attacks in an effort to weaken our resolve. His aim is “to devour” us, to destroy our relationship with Jehovah. (1 Pet. 5:8) Christians in the first century were threatened, beaten, and killed because of their determination to stand firm. (Acts 5:27, 28, 40; 7:54-60) Satan continues to use persecution today. This is evident in the brutal treatment of our brothers and sisters in Russia and other countries and in the personal attacks by opposers. Satan also uses “crafty acts” in addition to blatant frontal attacks.​—Eph. 6:11. w23.07 15-16 ¶6-9




Tuesday, February 11

Let us by love grow up in all things.​—Eph. 4:15.



The more you study God’s Word, the more your love for Jehovah will grow. That love motivates you to apply what you learn. You make better decisions based on Bible principles. You improve your attitude and conduct because you want to please God. Just as a child imitates a loving parent, you try to imitate your heavenly Father. (Eph. 5:1, 2) We might ask ourselves: ‘Is my love for Jehovah stronger now than when I first became a Christian? Since my baptism, is my way of thinking and acting more like Jehovah’s way​—especially in showing love to my brothers and sisters?’ If “the love you had at first” has cooled off somewhat, do not be discouraged. Something similar happened to Christians in the first century. Jesus did not give up on them, and he does not give up on us either. (Rev. 2:4, 7) He knows that we can rekindle the love we felt when we first learned the truth. w23.07 8 ¶2-3




Wednesday, February 12

You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive.​—Ps. 86:5.



The apostle Peter made a series of mistakes. First, Peter displayed overconfidence, boasting that he would prove faithful even if the other apostles abandoned Jesus. (Mark 14:27-29) Next, Peter repeatedly failed to keep on the watch. (Mark 14:32, 37-41) Then, Peter abandoned Jesus to a mob. (Mark 14:50) Finally, Peter denied knowing Jesus three times, even swearing to this lie with an oath. (Mark 14:66-71) How did Peter react when he realized the gravity of his sin? He broke down and wept bitterly. (Mark 14:72) Instead of rebuking Peter for his failings, Jesus told his friend that he would receive greater responsibilities. (John 21:15-17) Peter knew that he had sinned gravely, but he did not give up on himself. Why? Because he was convinced that his Master, Jesus, had not given up on him. What is the lesson? Jehovah wants us to be convinced of his love and forgiveness.​—Rom. 8:38, 39. w24.03 18-19 ¶13-15




Thursday, February 13

Those she has killed are numerous.​—Prov. 7:26.



Sexual immorality can cause shame, a sense of worthlessness, unwanted pregnancies, and broken families. Clearly, it is the course of wisdom to avoid the stupid woman’s “house.” In addition to facing spiritual death, many immoral people contract diseases that lead to a premature literal death. (Prov. 7:23) Verse 18 of Proverbs chapter 9 concludes: “Her guests are in the depths of the Grave.” Why, then, do many accept her deceptive invitation that leads to tragedy? (Prov. 9:13-18) A common trap is pornography. Some think that viewing pornography is harmless. On the contrary, pornography is harmful, degrading, and addictive. Immoral images have staying power; they are difficult to erase from the mind. What is more, pornography does not deaden wrong desires; it inflames them. (Col. 3:5; Jas. 1:14, 15) Yes, many who view pornography go on to commit immoral acts. w23.06 23 ¶10-11




Friday, February 14

It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever.​—Dan. 2:44.



Even though other nations may at times challenge the Anglo-American World Power, they will not replace it. We know that because “the stone” representing God’s Kingdom will crush the feet, the part of the image that depicts the Anglo-American alliance. (Dan. 2:34, 35, 44, 45) Are you convinced that Daniel’s prophecy regarding the feet of iron and clay is true? If so, that will affect the way you live your life. You will not seek material security in a world that will soon be crushed out of existence. (Luke 12:16-21; 1 John 2:15-17) Understanding this prophecy will also help you see the importance of the preaching and teaching work. (Matt. 6:33; 28:18-20) After studying this prophecy, why not ask yourself this question, ‘Do the decisions I make show that I am convinced that God’s Kingdom will soon put an end to all human governments?’ w23.08 11 ¶13-14




Saturday, February 15

Each of us will render an account for himself to God.​—Rom. 14:12.



Modestly accept that your age, health, and circumstances may limit what you can now do. Like Barzillai, be willing to decline privileges when physical limitations become a problem. (2 Sam. 19:35, 36) Like Moses, accept help and delegate responsibilities to others when appropriate. (Ex. 18:21, 22) Such modesty will prevent you from setting unrealistic expectations that could wear you out. We must also not feel responsible for the poor decisions that others make. We cannot make decisions for others; nor can we always shield them from the consequences of the bad choices they make. For example, a son or a daughter may eventually decide to stop serving Jehovah. That decision can cause untold grief to the parents. However, parents who blame themselves for their child’s poor decision take on a heavy burden. It is not a weight that Jehovah expects them to bear. w23.08 29 ¶11-12




Sunday, February 16

[Samson] fell in love with a woman . . . whose name was Delilah.​—Judg. 16:4.



Samson was imperfect like us, so at times he made bad choices. One decision in particular that he made led to tragic consequences. After Samson had served as judge for a while, he “fell in love with a woman in the Valley of Sorek whose name was Delilah.” Previously, Samson had been engaged to a Philistine woman, but that union “was from Jehovah,” who “was looking for an opportunity against the Philistines.” Later, Samson stayed in the house of a prostitute in the Philistine city of Gaza. On that occasion, God empowered Samson to carry away the doors of the city gate, weakening the city. (Judg. 14:1-4; 16:1-3) The case of Delilah may have been different, though, because she was likely an Israelite. Delilah accepted a large sum of money from the Philistines in return for betraying Samson. w23.09 5 ¶12-13




Monday, February 17

The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger.​—Prov. 19:11.



Insight can help us to be mild. An insightful person shows restraint when challenged about his beliefs. Some questions or challenges are like icebergs, the greater part lying below the surface. For example, a hidden motive or concern may prompt a person to ask a question. So before answering, we do well to realize that we may not know what has moved the person to raise the issue. (Prov. 16:23) Consider how Gideon responded to the men of Ephraim. They angrily challenged him as to why he did not call them earlier to join him in the fight against Israel’s enemies. Was there an underlying reason for their contentious attitude? Hurt pride, perhaps? Whatever the case, Gideon wisely respected their feelings and gave them a mild answer. The result? Disarmed, “they calmed down.”​—Judg. 8:1-3. w23.09 16 ¶8-9




Tuesday, February 18

I was the one he was especially fond of day by day.​—Prov. 8:30.



Jehovah and Jesus have the closest bond that can exist between a father and a son. No doubt it greatly pained Jehovah to see his Son mistreated, rejected, and tested. Any parent who has lost a child in death knows all too well the intense feelings of grief that such a loss brings. We have strong faith in the resurrection, but that does not erase the pain we feel when a loved one dies. This example helps us to understand how Jehovah must have felt when he watched his beloved Son suffer and die on that spring day in 33 C.E. (Matt. 3:17) Between now and the Memorial, why not do a personal study project or a Family Worship project that focuses on the ransom? And on the day of the Memorial, do not forget to watch the special Morning Worship program. When we prepare our own heart for the Memorial, we will be in a good position to help others benefit from it too.​—Ezra 7:10. w24.01 11 ¶10-12




Wednesday, February 19

He will make you strong.​—1 Pet. 5:10.



One way that we can receive power from Jehovah is by approaching him in prayer. In response to our prayers, Jehovah can give us “the power beyond what is normal.” (2 Cor. 4:7) We can also be strengthened when we read his Word and reflect on it. (Ps. 86:11) Jehovah’s message to us in the Bible “exerts power.” (Heb. 4:12) When you pray to Jehovah and read his Word, you will receive the strength you need in order to endure, to maintain your joy, or to accomplish a difficult assignment. Note how Jehovah strengthened the prophet Jonah. Jonah had run away from a challenging assignment that Jehovah had given him. As a result, he almost lost his life in a violent storm and he put the lives of his shipmates in jeopardy. When he was thrown overboard, he found himself in a place he had never been before​—the dark belly of a great fish. What did Jonah do to receive strength in that lonely, isolated place? He prayed.​—Jonah 2:1, 2, 7. w23.10 13 ¶4-6




Thursday, February 20

The end of all things has drawn close.​—1 Pet. 4:7.



Although the apostle Peter addressed his letters to the first-century Christians, Jehovah made these writings part of His Word. So we can now benefit from those letters. (Rom. 15:4) We are surrounded by people who have no faith in Bible prophecy. Opposers may mock us because we have eagerly anticipated the end for many years. Some critics claim that it will never come. (2 Pet. 3:3, 4) If we hear such comments from a householder, a workmate, or a family member, our faith could be shaken. Peter explained what can help us. It may seem to some that Jehovah is slow to end the present wicked system. Peter’s words can help us to keep the right perspective, reminding us that Jehovah’s view of time is vastly different from that of humans. (2 Pet. 3:8, 9) To Jehovah a thousand years are like one day. Jehovah is patient, not wanting any to be destroyed. When his day arrives, though, this system will end. w23.09 26-27 ¶2-5




Friday, February 21

It is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things we have heard, so that we never drift away.​—Heb. 2:1.



Why did the apostle Paul write his letter to the Hebrew Christians in Judea? Likely, for two main reasons. First, to give them encouragement. Most of them had been raised in the Jewish religion. Their former religious leaders may have ridiculed them for becoming Christians. Why? Because Christians had no impressive temple to go to for worship, no physical altar on which to make sacrifices to God, and no priests to minister to them. This could have discouraged Christ’s disciples and caused their faith to weaken. (Heb. 3:12, 14) Some of them might even have been tempted to go back to Judaism. Second, Paul pointed out to those Hebrew Christians that they were not making the effort to understand new or deep spiritual teachings, the “solid food” found in God’s Word. (Heb. 5:11-14) Evidently, some of them were still holding on to the Mosaic Law. w23.10 24-25 ¶3-4




Saturday, February 22

[Treat] younger women as sisters, with all chasteness.​—1 Tim. 5:2.



Some women choose not to marry. (Matt. 19:10-12) Be assured that Jehovah and Jesus do not look down on single Christians. Around the world, single sisters are a positive influence on the congregation. Their love for and sincere interest in others motivate these Christian women to become spiritual sisters and spiritual mothers to many. (Mark 10:29, 30) Some have become full-time servants. Christian women have a tremendous impact on the worldwide preaching work. (Ps. 68:11) Can you plan now to enter the full-time ministry? You might serve as a pioneer, a construction volunteer, or a Bethelite. Pray about your goal. Talk to others who have reached such a goal, and find out what you need to do to qualify. Then make a realistic plan. Reaching your goal will open up many exciting opportunities for you in Jehovah’s service. w23.12 22 ¶16-17




Sunday, February 23

The good news has to be preached first.​—Mark 13:10.



As the great tribulation draws close, we realize more than ever how urgent it is to obey the command to share in the preaching work. We may, however, find it difficult to focus on our ministry if we have suffered a financial setback or if we are facing opposition to our preaching work. What can help us to put Kingdom interests first? Remaining confident that “Jehovah of armies” is on our side. He will support us if we continue to put Kingdom interests ahead of our own. So we have nothing to fear. (Hag. 2:4) Jehovah wants us to focus on the lifesaving work of making disciples. Haggai urged Jehovah’s people to make a fresh start in their sacred service, as if they were laying the temple’s foundation again. If they did, Jehovah promised to “send a blessing.” (Hag. 2:18, 19) We too can be assured that Jehovah will bless our efforts if we give priority to the work he has assigned us to do. w23.11 16 ¶8; 17 ¶11




Monday, February 24

All have sinned.​—Rom. 3:23.



In his letter to the Romans, the apostle Paul stated that all humans are sinners. How, then, can anyone be viewed as righteous or blameless and thus gain God’s approval? To help all sincere Christians answer that question, Paul pointed to Abraham. Jehovah declared Abraham righteous while he was dwelling in the land of Canaan. Why could Jehovah declare Abraham righteous? Was it because Abraham perfectly kept the Mosaic Law? Certainly not. (Rom. 4:13) That Law was delivered to the nation of Israel more than 400 years after God declared Abraham righteous. Essentially, then, on what basis did God declare Abraham righteous? In His undeserved kindness, Jehovah declared Abraham righteous because of his faith.​—Rom. 4:2-4. w23.12 3 ¶4-5




Tuesday, February 25

Do whatever is in your heart.​—1 Chron. 17:2.



On the very night that the prophet Nathan spoke the above to King David, Jehovah told Nathan that David would not be the one to build the temple. (1 Chron. 17:3, 4, 11, 12) How did David react when he received this message? He focused on gathering the funds and the materials that his son Solomon would need for the project. (1 Chron. 29:1-5) Immediately after informing David that he would not be the one to build the temple, Jehovah made a covenant with him. Jehovah promised David that one of his descendants would rule forever. (2 Sam. 7:16) In the new world, imagine how happy David will be to learn that he is enjoying life under the Thousand Year Reign of Jesus, a King from his own family line! This account helps us to see that even if we cannot do all that we had hoped to do for Jehovah, our God may have other blessings in store for us that we could never have anticipated. w23.04 16 ¶8-10




Wednesday, February 26

Jehovah will not forsake his people.​—Ps. 94:14.



You may find that specific portions of the Bible can be particularly comforting when you are afraid. For example, you may find encouragement in the books of Job, Psalms, and Proverbs as well as in Jesus’ words found in Matthew chapter 6. As you pray to Jehovah and read his Word, you will feel his comfort. We can have confidence that Jehovah will be there for us during dark times in our life. We will never be alone. (Ps. 23:4) Jehovah promises to guard, stabilize, support, and comfort us. Regarding Jehovah, Isaiah 26:3 says: “You will safeguard those who fully lean on you; you will give them continuous peace, because it is in you that they trust.” So trust in Jehovah, and take advantage of the means he uses to help you. If you do, you will regain strength even during difficult times. w24.01 25 ¶16-17




Thursday, February 27

No weapon formed against you will have any success.​—Isa. 54:17.



The inspired words of the scripture above are being fulfilled today. The following comforting words also apply to our time: “All your sons will be taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant. You will be firmly established in righteousness. . . . You will fear nothing and have no cause for terror, for it will not come near you.” (Isa. 54:13, 14) Even “the god of this system of things,” Satan himself, is powerless to stop the educational work that Jehovah’s people are carrying out. (2 Cor. 4:4) Pure worship has been restored, and it will never be corrupted again. It is here to stay, for all eternity. No weapon formed against us will succeed! w24.02 4 ¶10




Friday, February 28

Whoever has greater affection for father or mother than for me is not worthy of me.​—Matt. 10:37.



As Christians, we take our dedication vow to Jehovah seriously. This affects our decisions and actions regarding family matters. We diligently care for our Scriptural family responsibilities, but we never put the desires of our family members ahead of what Jehovah requires of us. (Matt. 10:35, 36; 1 Tim. 5:8) Sometimes, that may mean sacrificing a measure of peace with relatives in order to please Jehovah. He created the family arrangement, and he wants us to have a happy family. (Eph. 3:14, 15) If we want to be truly happy, we need to do things Jehovah’s way. Never doubt that Jehovah cherishes your self-sacrificing efforts to worship him as you care for your family and treat them with love and respect.​—Rom. 12:10. w24.02 18 ¶11, 13




