
January
Wednesday, January 1

There was a dead man being carried out, the only son of his mother. Besides, she was a widow.​—Luke 7:12.



Jesus “caught sight of” the grieving mother and then “he was moved with pity for her.” (Luke 7:13) But Jesus did not just feel pity for the mother; he showed his compassion for her. He spoke to her, no doubt with a reassuring tone, and said: “Stop weeping.” Then he took the initiative to do something. He brought her son back to life and “gave him to his mother.” (Luke 7:14, 15) What can we learn from Jesus’ miracle of resurrecting the widow’s son? We learn a lesson in showing compassion to those who grieve. Like Jesus, we can cultivate compassion for bereaved ones by being observant. We can take the initiative to show compassion by saying and doing what we can to help them and comfort them. (Prov. 17:17; 2 Cor. 1:3, 4; 1 Pet. 3:8) Even simple words and small gestures can mean a lot. w23.04 5-6 ¶13-15




Thursday, January 2

This sickness is not meant to end in death, but is for the glory of God.​—John 11:4.



Even though Jesus knows that his friend Lazarus has just died, he remains where he is for two more days and then he makes the trip to Bethany. So by the time Jesus arrives, Lazarus has been dead for four days. Jesus intends to do something that will benefit his friends and glorify God. (John 11:6, 11, 17) We learn a lesson about friendship from this account. Consider: When Mary and Martha sent the message to Jesus, they did not ask him to come to Bethany. They simply said that his dear friend was sick. (John 11:3) When Lazarus died, Jesus could have resurrected him from a distance. Yet, Jesus chose to go to Bethany to be with his friends Mary and Martha. Do you have a friend who will come to your aid without being asked? Then you know that you can count on him for help in “times of distress.” (Prov. 17:17) Like Jesus, may we be such a friend to others! w23.04 10 ¶10-11




Friday, January 3

The one who promised is faithful.​—Heb. 10:23.



When undergoing a trial, we may feel that Jehovah’s new world will never come. Does this mean that our faith is weak? Not necessarily. Consider an illustration. In the middle of a brutally cold winter, we may feel that summer will never come. And yet summer does come. Likewise, when we are deeply discouraged, we might feel that the new world will never come. If our faith is strong, though, we know that God’s promises will be fulfilled. (Ps. 94:3, 14, 15; Heb. 6:17-19) With that confidence, we can continue putting our worship of Jehovah first in our life. Consider one more area in which strong faith is required​—the preaching work. Many people feel that the “good news” about God’s coming new world is too good to be true. (Matt. 24:14; Ezek. 33:32) Never allow their skeptical attitude to rub off on us. To prevent that from happening, we must keep strengthening our faith. w23.04 27 ¶6-7; 28 ¶14




Saturday, January 4

We know that we are to have the things we ask for, since we have asked them of him.​—1 John 5:15.



Have you ever wondered whether Jehovah is answering your prayers? If so, you are not alone. A number of brothers and sisters have voiced this concern, especially when going through a difficult time. If we are suffering, we too may find it harder to discern how Jehovah is answering our prayers. Why can we be confident that Jehovah answers the prayers of his worshippers? The Scriptures assure us that Jehovah loves us deeply and that we are precious to him. (Hag. 2:7; 1 John 4:10) That is why he invites us to ask for his help in prayer. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) He wants to help us to stay close to him and to deal successfully with the difficulties we are facing. In the Bible, we often read that Jehovah answered the prayers of his worshippers. Can you think of an example? w23.05 8 ¶1-4




Sunday, January 5

Mary said: “My soul magnifies Jehovah.”​—Luke 1:46.



Mary had her own relationship with Jehovah; her faith did not depend on what Joseph did. She knew the Scriptures well. She also made time for meditation. (Luke 2:19, 51) No doubt, Mary’s spirituality made her an excellent wife. Today, many wives strive to do as Mary did. For example, a sister named Emiko says: “When I was single, I had my personal spiritual routine. But after getting married, I realized that because my husband prayed for us and took the lead in worship, my faith had become dependent on what he did. I came to see that I needed to carry my own load regarding my relationship with Jehovah. So now I set aside time to be alone with my God​—praying, reading the Scriptures, and meditating on his thoughts.” (Gal. 6:5) Wives, as you continue strengthening your friendship with Jehovah, your husband will have even more reason to praise you and love you.​—Prov. 31:30. w23.05 22 ¶6




Monday, January 6

I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.​—Ps. 34:11.



We are not born with a fear of Jehovah; we must cultivate it. One way we can do that is by examining creation. The more we see God’s wisdom, his power, and his deep love for us as expressed in “the things made,” the deeper our respect and love for him will be. (Rom. 1:20) Another way we can develop our fear of God is by praying regularly. The more we pray, the more real Jehovah becomes to us. Each time we ask him for strength to endure a trial, we are reminded of his awesome power. When we thank him for the gift of his Son, we remind ourselves of Jehovah’s love for us. And when we supplicate Jehovah for his help with a problem, we impress on our heart just how wise he is. Such prayers deepen our respect for Jehovah. And they strengthen our resolve to avoid doing anything that would damage our friendship with him. w23.06 15 ¶6-7




Tuesday, January 7

Jehovah is our Lawgiver.​—Isa. 33:22.



Jehovah has consistently conveyed clear laws to his people. For example, the first-century governing body identified three ways in which Christians must remain firm: (1) by rejecting idolatry, worshipping only Jehovah, (2) by respecting the sanctity of blood, and (3) by adhering to the Bible’s high moral standards. (Acts 15:28, 29) How can Christians today maintain a firm stand in these three specific ways? By worshipping and obeying Jehovah. He commanded the Israelites to give him exclusive devotion. (Deut. 5:6-10) And when tempted by the Devil, Jesus clearly indicated that we must worship only Jehovah. (Matt. 4:8-10) Therefore, we do not worship religious idols. We also do not idolize humans​—whether they are religious leaders, political rulers, or stars in the world of sports and entertainment—​treating them like gods. We worship only the one who “created all things.”​—Rev. 4:11. w23.07 14-15 ¶3-4




Wednesday, January 8

By fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.​—Prov. 16:6.



Satan’s world is obsessed with immoral sex and pornography. (Eph. 4:19) So we must cultivate godly fear and turn away from bad. In Proverbs chapter 9, we read about wisdom and foolishness, personified as two women. Each is described as extending an invitation to the inexperienced​—those “lacking good sense.” Each says, as it were, ‘Come into my house and have a meal.’ (Prov. 9:1, 4-6) But there is a vast difference in the results, or outcomes, presented. Consider the invitation from the “stupid woman.” (Prov. 9:13-18) She boldly calls out to those lacking good sense, “Come in here” and feast. With what result? “Those powerless in death are there.” We are warned about “the wayward” and “immoral woman.” We are told: “Her house sinks down into death.” (Prov. 2:11-19) Proverbs 5:3-10 contains an alert about another “wayward woman” whose “feet descend into death.” w23.06 21-22 ¶6-7




Thursday, January 9

Let your reasonableness become known to all men.​—Phil. 4:5.



Elders must set a good example in being reasonable. (1 Tim. 3:2, 3) For instance, an elder should not expect that his opinions will always be accepted simply because he is older than the other elders. He realizes that Jehovah’s spirit can move any member of the body to make an expression that contributes to a wise decision. And if no Bible principle is violated, reasonable elders willingly support the decision of the majority on the body, even if they had preferred a different decision. Christians reap many blessings by being reasonable. We enjoy better relationships with our brothers and sisters, and the congregation enjoys peace. We find delight in the beautiful variety of personalities and customs among Jehovah’s united worshippers. Above all, we have the satisfaction of knowing that we are imitating our reasonable God, Jehovah. w23.07 25 ¶16-17




Friday, January 10

Those having insight will understand.​—Dan. 12:10.



Daniel approached prophecy with the right motive, to know the truth. Daniel was also humble, recognizing that Jehovah will give understanding to those who know him and who live by his clean standards. (Dan. 2:27, 28) Daniel proved that he was humble by relying on Jehovah for help. (Dan. 2:18) Daniel was also thorough. He researched the inspired Scriptures that were available to him. (Jer. 25:11, 12; Dan. 9:2) How can you imitate Daniel? Examine your motives. Is your study of Bible prophecy motivated by a strong desire to know the truth? If it is, Jehovah will help you. (John 4:23, 24; 14:16, 17) Some may do so in hopes of finding evidence that the Bible is not inspired by God. In that way, they feel that they can justify setting their own standards of right and wrong and living by those standards. However, we need to have the proper motivation. w23.08 9 ¶7-8




Saturday, January 11

If you become discouraged . . . , your strength will be meager.​—Prov. 24:10.



We can burden ourselves with unrealistic expectations when we compare ourselves with others. (Gal. 6:4) If we do so, we could become envious and competitive. (Gal. 5:26) In an effort to accomplish what others have achieved, we may push ourselves beyond what our abilities and circumstances reasonably permit. And if “expectation postponed makes the heart sick,” how much more disheartening it is to set expectations that we can never meet! (Prov. 13:12) Doing so can sap our strength and slow us down in our race for life. Do not expect more of yourself than what Jehovah requires. He never expects you to give what you do not have. (2 Cor. 8:12) Be assured that Jehovah does not compare what you do with what others do. (Matt. 25:20-23) He treasures your whole-souled service, your faithfulness, and your endurance. w23.08 29 ¶10-11




Sunday, January 12

Am I to die of thirst?​—Judg. 15:18.



Jehovah answered Samson’s cry for help by miraculously creating a source of water. When Samson drank from it, “his strength returned and he revived.” (Judg. 15:19, ftn.) Apparently, this new water source still existed years later when the prophet Samuel was inspired to write the book of Judges. The Israelites who saw that flowing water may have been reminded that Jehovah can be relied on to help his faithful worshippers in their time of need. We too need to look to Jehovah for help no matter what talents or abilities we may have or what we have accomplished in his service. We should modestly accept the fact that true success is possible only when we rely on Jehovah. Just as Samson was energized when he drank the water that Jehovah provided, we will be spiritually strengthened when we take advantage of all the provisions Jehovah makes available to us.​—Matt. 11:28. w23.09 4 ¶8-10




Monday, January 13

A mild answer turns away rage, but a harsh word stirs up anger.​—Prov. 15:1.



What can we do when we are facing a tense situation, such as when someone slanders the name of our God or ridicules the Bible? We should ask Jehovah for his spirit and for his wisdom to respond in a mild way. What if we later realize that we did not respond as well as we should have? We can pray again about the matter and think of how we can do better the next time. In turn, Jehovah will grant us his holy spirit so that we can control our temper and show mildness. Some Bible verses can help us to control our speech when confronted with difficult situations. God’s spirit can bring those texts to mind. (John 14:26) For example, the principles we find in the book of Proverbs can help us to be mild. (Prov. 15:18) That Bible book also reveals the benefits of showing restraint in tense situations.​—Prov. 10:19; 17:27; 21:23; 25:15. w23.09 15 ¶6-7




Tuesday, January 14

I intend always to remind you of these things.​—2 Pet. 1:12.



The apostle Peter knew his life would soon end. During his decades of faithful service, he walked with Jesus, opened up new fields for preaching, and served as a member of the governing body. But Peter’s service was not over. In about 62-64 C.E., he was inspired to write two letters​—the Bible books of 1 and 2 Peter. (2 Pet. 1:13-15) Peter composed his inspired letters at a time when his fellow believers were “distressed by various trials.” (1 Pet. 1:6) Wicked men were trying to introduce false teachings and unclean conduct into the congregation. (2 Pet. 2:1, 2, 14) Christians living in Jerusalem would soon face “the end of all things”​—the destruction of that city and of the Jewish systems of things by Roman armies. (1 Pet. 4:7) No doubt Peter’s letters helped Christians to see what they could do to endure present trials and to prepare for future trials. w23.09 26 ¶1-2




Wednesday, January 15

[Christ] learned obedience from the things he suffered.​—Heb. 5:8.



Like Jesus, we often learn obedience under challenging circumstances. For example, during the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic when we were asked to stop meeting at our Kingdom Halls and to suspend our house-to-house ministry, did you struggle to obey? Yet, your obedience protected you, united you with fellow believers, and pleased Jehovah. All of us are now better prepared to obey any instructions we receive during the great tribulation. Our lives may depend on it! (Job 36:11) We choose to obey Jehovah primarily because we love him and we want to please him. (1 John 5:3) We can never repay Jehovah for all that he has done for us. (Ps. 116:12) But we can obey him and those who have authority over us. If we obey, we show that we are wise. And the wise make Jehovah’s heart rejoice.​—Prov. 27:11. w23.10 11 ¶18-19




Thursday, January 16

Worship the One who made the heaven and the earth.​—Rev. 14:7.



If an angel were to speak to you, would you listen to what he had to say? Well, today, an angel is speaking “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” What is he saying? “Fear God and give him glory . . . Worship the One who made the heaven and the earth.” (Rev. 14:6, 7) Jehovah is the only true God whom everyone should worship. How thankful we can be that he has given us the precious opportunity to worship him in his great spiritual temple! What exactly is the spiritual temple, and where can we find the details that explain it? The spiritual temple is not a literal building. It is Jehovah’s arrangement for offering acceptable worship based on Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. The apostle Paul explained this arrangement in the letter that he wrote to the first-century Hebrew Christians living in Judea. w23.10 24 ¶1-2




Friday, January 17

“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah.​—Zech. 4:6.



In 522 B.C.E., the enemies of the Jews succeeded in having a ban placed on the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple. But Zechariah assured the Jews that Jehovah would use His powerful spirit to remove any obstacles. In 520 B.C.E., King Darius lifted the ban on the temple work and even provided the Jews with funds and official support. (Ezra 6:1, 6-10) Jehovah promised his people that they would have his backing if they gave priority to the rebuilding of the temple. (Hag. 1:8, 13, 14; Zech. 1:3, 16) Encouraged by the prophets, the repatriated Jews resumed the temple work in 520 B.C.E. and finished rebuilding it in less than five years. Because the Jews gave priority to doing God’s will despite uncertainties, they received Jehovah’s support. As a result, they worshipped Jehovah with joy.​—Ezra 6:14-16, 22. w23.11 15 ¶6-7




Saturday, January 18

Walk orderly in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had.​—Rom. 4:12.



Although many people have heard of Abraham, most know little about him. However, you know a lot about Abraham. You know, for example, that Abraham has been called “the father of all those having faith.” (Rom. 4:11) You may wonder, though, ‘Can I walk in the footsteps of Abraham and have the kind of faith he had?’ Yes, you can. One way we can develop faith like that of Abraham is by studying his example. At God’s command, Abraham moved to a distant land, lived in tents for decades, and attempted to sacrifice his beloved son Isaac. Those actions reflected strong faith. Abraham’s faith and works resulted in his having God’s approval and friendship. (Jas. 2:22, 23) Jehovah wants us​—wants you—​to enjoy those same blessings. For that reason, he inspired the Bible writers Paul and James to refer to Abraham’s example. w23.12 2 ¶1-2




Sunday, January 19

Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak.​—Jas. 1:19.



Sisters, develop good communication skills. Christians need to communicate effectively. In this regard, the disciple James provides practical counsel for us, saying the words above. When you listen carefully as others speak, you show empathy, or “fellow feeling,” for them. (1 Pet. 3:8) If you are not sure that you understand what a person is saying or how he feels, ask appropriate questions. Then take a moment to think before you speak. (Prov. 15:28, ftn.) Ask yourself: ‘Is what I am about to say true and upbuilding? Is it tactful and kind?’ Learn from mature sisters who are good communicators. (Prov. 31:26) Pay attention to the way they speak. The better you learn this skill, the better your relationships with others will be. w23.12 21 ¶12




Monday, January 20

Whoever isolates himself . . . rejects all practical wisdom.​—Prov. 18:1.



Today, Jehovah may use family, friends, or the elders to support us. However, when we are hurt, we may be inclined to withdraw. We just want to be left alone. That is a normal reaction. What can we do to receive Jehovah’s support? Fight the urge to isolate yourself. When we isolate ourselves, our focus often narrows, and we begin to think only about ourselves and the problems we are going through. This type of thinking can affect the decisions we make. Of course, we all need moments to be alone, especially when confronted with tragic situations. However, if we were to isolate ourselves for an extended period, we could push away the very means that Jehovah is using to support us. So welcome the help of your family, friends, and elders. View them for what they are​—Jehovah’s means of supporting you.​—Prov. 17:17; Isa. 32:1, 2. w24.01 24 ¶12-13




Tuesday, January 21

No razor should pass over his head.​—Num. 6:5.



Nazirites vowed not to cut their hair. That was a way to show their complete submission to Jehovah. Sadly, there were times in Israel’s history when Nazirites were not appreciated or supported. At times, it must have taken real courage for a Nazirite to stick to his vow and stand out as different. (Amos 2:12) Because we choose to submit to Jehovah’s will, we too stand out as different from the people around us. We need courage to identify ourselves as Jehovah’s Witnesses at work or at school. And as this world’s attitudes and conduct go from bad to worse, we will likely find it more difficult to live according to Bible principles and share the good news with others. (2 Tim. 1:8; 3:13) Always remember, though, that we “make [Jehovah’s] heart rejoice” when we courageously stand out as different from those who do not serve him.​—Prov. 27:11; Mal. 3:18. w24.02 16 ¶7; 17 ¶9




Wednesday, January 22

Welcome one another.​—Rom. 15:7.



Consider the diversity of the congregation in Rome. Among them were not only Jews, who were raised to obey the Mosaic Law, but also Gentiles, whose background was totally different. Some Christians were likely slaves while others were freemen​—perhaps some were even slave owners. How could those Christians overcome such differences and strengthen their love? The apostle Paul urged them to “welcome one another.” What did he mean? The word translated “welcome” means to receive someone kindly or hospitably, such as into one’s home or circle of friends. For example, Paul told Philemon how to welcome the runaway slave Onesimus: “Receive him kindly.” (Philem. 17) And Priscilla and Aquila welcomed Apollos, who knew less about Christianity than they did, by taking “him into their company.” (Acts 18:26) Rather than allow their diversity to divide them, those Christians overcame their differences and welcomed one another. w23.07 6 ¶13




Thursday, January 23

I will pay my vows to Jehovah.​—Ps. 116:14.



The main reason you dedicate yourself to Jehovah is that you love him. Your love is not based on emotion alone. Rather, it is rooted in “accurate knowledge” and “spiritual comprehension”​—the things that you learned about Jehovah that caused your love for him to grow. (Col. 1:9) Your study of the Scriptures has convinced you (1) that Jehovah is real, (2) that the Bible is his inspired Word, and (3) that he uses his organization to accomplish his will. Those who dedicate themselves to Jehovah should know the basic teachings found in God’s Word and be living in harmony with its standards. They share their faith with others to the extent that their circumstances allow. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Their love for Jehovah has grown, and their heartfelt desire is to give him exclusive devotion. Is that not so of you? w24.03 4-5 ¶6-8




Friday, January 24

They will become one flesh.​—Gen. 2:24.



Abigail was married to Nabal, who the Bible says was harsh and behaved badly. (1 Sam. 25:3) It must have been difficult for Abigail to live with such a man. Could Abigail have found an easy way out of her marriage? She was given that opportunity when David, Israel’s future king, came to kill her husband for insulting him and his men. (1 Sam. 25:9-13) Abigail could have fled, allowing David to carry out his plan. Yet, she intervened and convinced David to let Nabal live. (1 Sam. 25:23-27) What could have motivated her? Abigail loved Jehovah and respected his standards for marriage. She knew that Jehovah viewed marriage as a sacred arrangement. She wanted to please God, and that would have motivated her to do whatever she could to save her household, including her husband. She acted quickly to prevent David from murdering Nabal. w24.03 16-17 ¶9-10




Saturday, January 25

I would strengthen you with the words of my mouth.​—Job 16:5.



Are there some in your congregation who are trying to simplify their life in order to have a greater share in theocratic activities? Do you know young ones who are bravely standing out as different from others in school, even though it is difficult for them to do so? What about those who may be struggling to remain faithful because of family opposition? Let us seize every opportunity to speak reassuringly to such dear fellow worshippers, expressing our appreciation for their self-sacrificing spirit and courage. (Philem. 4, 5, 7) Jehovah is confident that we sincerely desire to please him and that we are willing to make sacrifices to live up to our dedication vow. He dignifies us by letting us express our love for him in a personal way. (Prov. 23:15, 16) May we, then, be determined to continue serving Jehovah, willingly offering him our very best. w24.02 18 ¶14; 19 ¶16




Sunday, January 26

He went through the land doing good and healing.​—Acts 10:38.



Picture the scene in late 29 C.E. at the start of Jesus’ ministry. Jesus and his mother, Mary, are invited to a wedding feast in Cana. Mary is apparently helping to care for the guests. But during the wedding feast, a problem arises​—the wine runs out. Mary quickly turns to her son and says: “They have no wine.” (John 2:1-3) What does Jesus do? He miraculously turns water into “fine wine.” (John 2:9, 10) Jesus would go on to perform many other miracles during his ministry. He used his miraculous power to help tens of thousands of people. For example, just two of his miracles​—feeding 5,000 men and later 4,000 men—​may have involved a total of over 27,000 people if we include the women and children who were also present. (Matt. 14:15-21; 15:32-38) On both occasions, Jesus also healed many who were sick.​—Matt. 14:14; 15:30, 31. w23.04 2 ¶1-2




Monday, January 27

I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, the One saying to you, “Do not be afraid. I will help you.”​—Isa. 41:13.



After a traumatic event, there may be days when we feel weak physically and emotionally. Like Elijah, we could feel that it is too hard to get up. We just want to sleep. (1 Ki. 19:5-7) We may need help to keep active in Jehovah’s service. In those moments, Jehovah assures us of his help as expressed in the words of today’s text. King David experienced this help. When faced with trials and enemies, he said to Jehovah: “Your right hand supports me.” (Ps. 18:35) Jehovah often supports us by motivating others to help us. For example, once when David felt weak, his friend Jonathan visited him to provide emotional support and words of encouragement. (1 Sam. 23:16, 17) Similarly, Jehovah chose Elisha to provide practical help to Elijah.​—1 Ki. 19:16, 21; 2 Ki. 2:2. w24.01 23-24 ¶10-12




Tuesday, January 28

Jehovah himself gives wisdom; from his mouth come knowledge and discernment.​—Prov. 2:6.



Jehovah is a generous, abundant Provider. These qualities are reflected in “true wisdom,” personified in Proverbs chapter 9 as a woman. The account mentions that this figurative woman has fully prepared her meat, mixed her wine, and arranged her table in her house. (Prov. 9:2, ftn.) Further, according to verses 4 and 5: “She [personified wisdom] says to the one lacking good sense: ‘Come, eat my bread.’” Why should we come to true wisdom’s house and eat the meal she offers? Jehovah wants his children to be wise and safe. He does not want us to learn life’s lessons the hard way​—through bitter experience and with nagging regrets. That is why “he treasures up practical wisdom for the upright.” (Prov. 2:7) When we have a healthy fear of Jehovah, we will want to please him. We hear his wise counsel, and we are happy to apply it.​—Jas. 1:25. w23.06 23 ¶14-15




Wednesday, January 29

God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work.​—Heb. 6:10.



Even if we feel limited in what we can do in God’s service, we can rest assured that Jehovah appreciates our sincere efforts to please him. How do we know? In Zechariah’s day, Jehovah asked his prophet to make a crown out of the gold and the silver sent by the exiles in Babylon. (Zech. 6:11) This “grand crown” would serve as a “reminder” of their generous contributions. (Zech. 6:14, ftns.) We can be confident that Jehovah will never forget our earnest efforts to serve him during uncertain times. We will no doubt continue to face uncertainties in these last days, and conditions may even get worse in the future. (2 Tim. 3:1, 13) However, we do not need to be consumed by anxiety. Remember Jehovah’s words to his people in Haggai’s day: “I am with you . . . Do not be afraid.” (Hag. 2:4, 5) We too can be sure that Jehovah will be with us as long as we do our best to carry out his will. w23.11 19 ¶20-21




Thursday, January 30

I am a sinful man.​—Luke 5:8.



The apostle Peter’s shortcomings could easily have been omitted from the Bible record. However, they were included under inspiration as lessons for us. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Learning about this man who had weaknesses and feelings like ours can help us to see that Jehovah does not expect perfection from us. He wants us to persevere​—to keep trying—​despite our weaknesses. Why is it necessary for us to persevere? After we feel that we have overcome a certain weakness, we may suffer a setback. But we still keep working toward our goal. We all say or do things that we later regret; nonetheless, if we refuse to give up, Jehovah will help us to keep making progress. (1 Pet. 5:10) The compassion Jesus showed Peter despite his shortcomings can motivate us to continue serving Jehovah. w23.09 20-21 ¶2-3




Friday, January 31

Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.​—John 11:21.



Jesus could have healed Lazarus, as Martha stated in today’s text. But Jesus has in mind doing something even more remarkable. He promises: “Your brother will rise.” He also says: “I am the resurrection and the life.” (John 11:23, 25) Yes, he has God-given power over life and death. Earlier, he raised a young girl shortly after her death and he also raised a young man, apparently on the day the man died. (Luke 7:11-15; 8:49-55) But can he resurrect someone who has been dead for four days and whose body has begun to decay? Mary, Lazarus’ other sister, goes out to meet Jesus. She repeats what her sister said: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” (John 11:32) Seeing and hearing Mary and others with her weeping, Jesus is deeply saddened. Moved by tender compassion for his friends, he gives way to tears. He understands how painful it is when a loved one dies. Surely, he is eager to remove the cause of their tears! w23.04 10-11 ¶12-13




