
July
Tuesday, July 1

He went through the land doing good and healing.​—Acts 10:38.



All that Jesus said and did, including the miracles he performed, perfectly reflected his Father’s thinking and feelings. (John 14:9) What can we learn from Jesus’ miracles? Jesus and his Father deeply love us. While on earth, Jesus showed the depth of his love for people by using his miraculous power to ease their suffering. On one occasion, two blind men cried out to him for help. (Matt. 20:30-34) Notice that Jesus was “moved with pity” and then he healed them. As used here, the Greek verb translated “moved with pity” refers to an intense compassion felt deep inside the body. Such deep compassion, which is an expression of love, also moved Jesus to feed the hungry and to cure a leper. (Matt. 15:32; Mark 1:41) We can be sure that Jehovah, the God of “tender compassion,” and his Son deeply love us and are pained by our suffering. (Luke 1:78; 1 Pet. 5:7) How they must long to remove all the woes that afflict humankind! w23.04 3 ¶4-5




Wednesday, July 2

O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives of his loyal ones; he rescues them from the hand of the wicked.​—Ps. 97:10.



We can take practical steps to minimize our exposure to the wrong thinking and ideas popular in Satan’s system. We can fill our mind with wholesome thoughts by reading and studying the Bible. Attending meetings and taking part in the ministry will also safeguard our thinking. Jehovah, in turn, promises that he will not let us be tempted beyond what we can bear. (1 Cor. 10:12, 13) Each of us needs to pray more than ever to remain faithful to Jehovah during these difficult last days. Jehovah wants us to ‘pour out our hearts before him’ in prayer. (Ps. 62:8) Praise Jehovah and thank him for all that he does. Ask him to help you to be courageous in the ministry. Beg him for help to deal with any problems and to resist any temptation that you may be facing. Do not let anything or anyone stop you from regularly praying to Jehovah. w23.05 7 ¶17-18




Thursday, July 3

Let us consider one another . . . , encouraging one another.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.



Why do we attend congregation meetings? Primarily, to praise Jehovah. (Ps. 26:12; 111:1) We also attend meetings so that we can encourage one another during these difficult times. (1 Thess. 5:11) When we raise our hand and give a comment, we contribute toward both of these objectives. But when commenting, we may face challenges. We may feel anxious about commenting, or we may keenly desire to participate but are not called on as often as we would like. How can we deal with these challenges? The apostle Paul said that we should focus on “encouraging one another.” When we realize that others in the audience can be encouraged by even a simple expression of our faith, we will feel better about volunteering to comment. And if we are not called on often, we can be happy that others in the congregation will have the opportunity to comment.​—1 Pet. 3:8. w23.04 20 ¶1-3




Friday, July 4

Go up to Jerusalem, . . . and rebuild the house of Jehovah.​—Ezra 1:3.



The word had gone out! The Jews, who had been captives in Babylon for some 70 years, were free to return to their homeland, Israel. (Ezra 1:2-4) Only Jehovah could have accomplished this. Babylon would not normally release its captives. (Isa. 14:4, 17) But Babylon had been overthrown, and the new ruler had told the Jews that they could leave. Every Jew, especially family heads, faced a decision: to leave Babylon or to stay behind. That decision might not have been an easy one to make. Old age prevented many from risking the hardships of the trip. And since most of the Jews had been born in Babylon, it was the only home they had ever known. To them, Israel was the land of their ancestors. Some Jews had apparently become very successful in Babylon, so they may have found it hard to leave their comfortable homes or their businesses and settle in an unfamiliar land. w23.05 14 ¶1-2




Saturday, July 5

Prove yourselves ready.​—Matt. 24:44.



God’s Word encourages us to keep cultivating endurance, compassion, and love. Luke 21:19 says: “By your endurance you will preserve your lives.” Colossians 3:12 states: “Clothe yourselves with . . . compassion.” And 1 Thessalonians 4:9, 10 says: “You yourselves are taught by God to love one another. . . . But we urge you, brothers, to go on doing so in fuller measure.” All these verses were addressed to disciples who had already shown endurance, compassion, and love. Yet, they had to continue developing these qualities. We must do the same. To help you, consider how the early Christians demonstrated these qualities. Then you will see how you can imitate those disciples and, as a result, prove yourself ready for the great tribulation. Then when the great tribulation begins, you will have learned how to endure and you will be determined to continue to endure. w23.07 3 ¶4, 8




Sunday, July 6

A highway will be there, . . . the Way of Holiness.​—Isa. 35:8.



Whether we are of the anointed or of the “other sheep,” we need to remain on “the Way of Holiness” as it takes us through the spiritual paradise and leads us to future Kingdom blessings. (John 10:16) Since 1919 C.E., millions of men, women, and children have left Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, and have begun traveling on that figurative road. When the Jews left Babylon, Jehovah saw to it that obstacles in their way were removed. (Isa. 57:14) What about the modern-day “Way of Holiness”? For many centuries leading up to 1919, Jehovah used God-fearing men to help clear the way out of Babylon the Great. (Compare Isaiah 40:3.) They did necessary preparatory work​—spiritual roadwork—​to make it possible later for righthearted people to leave Babylon the Great and enter the spiritual paradise, where pure worship of Jehovah had been restored. w23.05 15-16 ¶8-9




Monday, July 7

Serve Jehovah with rejoicing. Come into his presence with joyful shouting.​—Ps. 100:2.



Jehovah wants us to serve him happily and willingly. (2 Cor. 9:7) So should we keep working toward a spiritual goal if we do not feel like it? Consider the apostle Paul’s example. He said: “I strictly discipline my body and lead it as a slave.” (1 Cor. 9:25-27, ftn.) Paul forced himself to do what was right even when he may have felt inclined to do otherwise. Did Jehovah approve of Paul’s service? Definitely! And Jehovah rewarded him for his efforts. (2 Tim. 4:7, 8) Similarly, Jehovah is pleased to see us working toward our goal even when we do not feel motivated to do so. He is pleased because although we may not always be doing it out of love for that activity, he knows that we are doing it out of love for him. Just as Jehovah blessed Paul, He will bless us for our efforts. (Ps. 126:5) And as we experience Jehovah’s blessing, we may even start to feel motivated. w23.05 29 ¶9-10




Tuesday, July 8

Jehovah’s day is coming.​—1 Thess. 5:2.



The apostle Paul compared those who will not survive Jehovah’s day to people who are asleep. They are unaware of their surroundings or the passing of time. Hence, they cannot discern important developments or respond to them. Most people today are asleep in a spiritual sense. (Rom. 11:8) They are indifferent to evidence that we are living in “the last days” and that the great tribulation will come soon. (2 Pet. 3:3, 4) However, we recognize that the inspired counsel to stay awake becomes more urgent with each passing day. (1 Thess. 5:6) Therefore, we must keep calm and steady. Why? So that we do not get caught up in today’s political or social issues. The pressure to take sides in these matters will increase as Jehovah’s day draws closer. Still, we need not be anxious about how we will respond. God’s spirit can help us to have a calm and steady state of mind and to make wise decisions.​—Luke 12:11, 12. w23.06 10 ¶6-7




Wednesday, July 9

Sovereign Lord Jehovah, remember me, please, and strengthen me.​—Judg. 16:28.



What comes to your mind when you hear the name Samson? You likely think of a man of outstanding strength. That is true. But Samson made a bad decision that led to painful results. Still, Jehovah focused on Samson’s overall record of faithfulness, which He included in the Bible for our benefit. Jehovah used Samson to accomplish amazing things to help His chosen people, Israel. Centuries after Samson’s death, Jehovah inspired the apostle Paul to include Samson’s name in a list of outstanding men of faith. (Heb. 11:32-34) Samson’s example can encourage us. He relied on Jehovah, even during challenging circumstances. We can draw encouragement as well as learn other practical lessons from his example. w23.09 2 ¶1-2




Thursday, July 10

Let your petitions be made known to God.​—Phil. 4:6.



We can build up our endurance by frequently and earnestly sharing our concerns with Jehovah. (1 Thess. 5:17) Perhaps you are not facing a severe trial right now. Even so, do you seek Jehovah’s guidance whenever you feel upset, confused, or overwhelmed? If you regularly turn to our God for help with your day-to-day challenges now, you will not hesitate to do so when you face bigger challenges in the future. You will then be confident that he knows precisely when and how to act in your behalf. (Ps. 27:1, 3) We are more likely to endure the future great tribulation if we endure trials today. (Rom. 5:3) Why can we say that? Many brothers have found that each test of faith that they endured helped them withstand the next challenge. Endurance refined them, strengthening their faith that Jehovah is ready and willing to help. Faith, in turn, helped them endure the next trial.​—Jas. 1:2-4. w23.07 3 ¶7-8




Friday, July 11

I will . . . show you consideration.​—Gen. 19:21.



Jehovah’s humility and compassion move him to be reasonable. For example, Jehovah’s humility was evident when he was about to destroy the wicked people of Sodom. Through his angels, Jehovah instructed righteous Lot to flee to the mountainous region. Lot was afraid to go there. So he pleaded that he and his family be allowed to take refuge in Zoar, a small town that was slated for destruction. Jehovah could have insisted that Lot follow His instructions to the letter. Instead, he granted Lot’s request, even though it meant sparing Zoar. (Gen. 19:18-22) Centuries later, Jehovah showed compassion toward the inhabitants of Nineveh. He sent the prophet Jonah to announce the imminent destruction of the city and its wicked inhabitants. But when the Ninevites repented, Jehovah felt sorry for them and spared the city.​—Jonah 3:1, 10; 4:10, 11. w23.07 21 ¶5




Saturday, July 12

They killed [Jehoash] . . . , but they did not bury him in the burial places of the kings.​—2 Chron. 24:25.



What can we learn from the example of Jehoash? He was like a tree with shallow roots that depended on the support of a stake. When the stake​—Jehoiada—​was gone and the winds of apostasy blew, Jehoash toppled over. This powerfully illustrates that our fear of God must not depend solely on the good influence of fellow Christians, including family members. To remain spiritually strong, we must strengthen our own godly devotion and fear through regular study, meditation, and prayer. (Jer. 17:7, 8; Col 2:6, 7) Jehovah does not really ask much of us. What he requires is summed up at Ecclesiastes 12:13, which says: “Fear the true God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole obligation of man.” When we fear God, we will be able to face future tests and stand firm. Nothing will be able to damage our friendship with Jehovah. w23.06 19 ¶17-19




Sunday, July 13

Look! I am making all things new.​—Rev. 21:5.



God’s guarantee begins with the introduction: “The One seated on the throne said.” (Rev. 21:5a) These words introduce one of only three instances in the book of Revelation when Jehovah speaks in the visions. So this guarantee is provided, not by a powerful angel, not even by the resurrected Jesus, but by Jehovah himself! This fact highlights the trustworthiness of the words that follow. Why is that so? Because Jehovah “cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) That statement makes the words that we read at Revelation 21:5, 6 completely reliable. Consider the word “Look!” The Greek term translated “look!” is used repeatedly in the book of Revelation. What follows the exclamation? God’s statement: “I am making all things new.” True, Jehovah is speaking about future changes, but for him this promise is so certain to come true that he speaks of these changes as if they were already taking place.​—Isa. 46:10. w23.11 3-4 ¶7-8




Monday, July 14

He went outside and wept bitterly.​—Matt. 26:75.



The apostle Peter struggled with his weaknesses. Consider a few examples. When Jesus explained how he would suffer and die in fulfillment of Bible prophecy, Peter rebuked him. (Mark 8:31-33) Repeatedly, Peter and the other apostles argued about who was the greatest. (Mark 9:33, 34) On the last night before Jesus’ death, Peter impulsively cut off a man’s ear. (John 18:10) That same night, Peter gave in to fear and three times denied knowing his friend Jesus. (Mark 14:66-72) That led Peter to weep bitterly. Jesus did not give up on his disheartened apostle. After Jesus was resurrected, he gave Peter the opportunity to reaffirm his love for him. Jesus invited Peter to serve humbly as a shepherd of his sheep. (John 21:15-17) Peter responded positively. He was in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost and among the first to be anointed by holy spirit. w23.09 22 ¶6-7




Tuesday, July 15

Shepherd my little sheep.​—John 21:16.



“Shepherd the flock of God,” the apostle Peter urged his fellow elders. (1 Pet. 5:1-4) If you are an elder, we know that you love your brothers and sisters and want to shepherd them. However, you may at times feel that you are so busy or so tired that you cannot fulfill that assignment. What can you do? Pour out your concerns to Jehovah. Peter wrote: “If anyone ministers, let him do so as depending on the strength that God supplies.” (1 Pet. 4:11) Your brothers and sisters may be facing problems that cannot be fully solved in this system of things. But remember that “the chief shepherd,” Jesus Christ, can help them beyond what you can do. He can do so both today and in the new world. God asks elders simply to love their brothers, to shepherd their brothers, and to become “examples to the flock.” w23.09 29-30 ¶13-14




Wednesday, July 16

Jehovah knows that the reasonings of the wise men are futile.​—1 Cor. 3:20.



We must avoid resorting to using human reasoning. If we look at matters from a human standpoint, we may leave out Jehovah and his standards. (1 Cor. 3:19) “The wisdom of this world” often appeals to fleshly desires. A few Christians in Pergamum and Thyatira adopted the idolatrous and immoral views common in those cities. Jesus sent strong counsel to both congregations for their toleration of sexual immorality. (Rev. 2:14, 20) Today, we face pressure to adopt wrong viewpoints. Family members and acquaintances may appeal to our emotions and encourage us to compromise. For example, they may claim that giving in to our desires does not matter and that the Bible’s moral standards are outdated. At times, we might reason that the direction Jehovah gives us is not sufficient. We might even be tempted to “go beyond the things that are written.”​—1 Cor. 4:6. w23.07 16 ¶10-11




Thursday, July 17

A true friend shows love at all times and is a brother who is born for times of distress.​—Prov. 17:17.



Mary, the mother of Jesus, needed strength. She was not married; yet, she was to become pregnant. She had no experience raising children of her own, but she was to care for the boy who would become the Messiah. And since she had never had sexual relations, how would Mary explain all of this to her fiancé, Joseph? (Luke 1:26-33) How did Mary receive the strength? She sought help from others. For example, she asked Gabriel to provide further information concerning the assignment. (Luke 1:34) Shortly thereafter, she traveled all the way to “the mountainous country” of Judah to visit her relative Elizabeth. Elizabeth commended Mary and was inspired by Jehovah to share an encouraging prophecy about Mary’s unborn son. (Luke 1:39-45) Mary said that Jehovah had “acted mightily with his arm.” (Luke 1:46-51) Through Gabriel and Elizabeth, Jehovah strengthened Mary. w23.10 14-15 ¶10-12




Friday, July 18

He made us to be a kingdom, priests to his God and Father.​—Rev. 1:6.



A limited number of Christ’s disciples have been anointed with holy spirit, and they enjoy a special relationship with Jehovah. These 144,000 are to serve as priests in the heavens with Jesus. (Rev. 14:1) The Holy of the tabernacle represents their spirit-begotten condition while on earth as sons of God. (Rom. 8:15-17) The Most Holy of the tabernacle represents heaven, where Jehovah dwells. “The curtain” that separated the Holy from the Most Holy represents Jesus’ fleshly body that was a barrier to his entering heaven as the great High Priest of the spiritual temple. By giving up his human body as a sacrifice for mankind, Jesus opened up the way to heavenly life for all anointed Christians. They must also give up their fleshly body to receive their heavenly reward.​—Heb. 10:19, 20; 1 Cor. 15:50. w23.10 28 ¶13




Saturday, July 19

Time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gideon.​—Heb. 11:32.



Gideon responded mildly when the Ephraimites criticized him. (Judg. 8:1-3) He did not reply in anger. He showed lowliness of mind by listening to their concerns, and he tactfully defused the tense situation. Wise elders imitate Gideon by listening carefully and responding mildly if criticized. (Jas. 3:13) They thus contribute to the peace in the congregation. When Gideon was honored for the victory over Midian, he focused the attention on Jehovah. (Judg. 8:22, 23) How might appointed men imitate Gideon? They can credit Jehovah for what they accomplish. (1 Cor. 4:6, 7) For example, if an elder is commended for his teaching ability, he can direct attention to the source of the instruction, God’s Word, or to the training we receive from Jehovah’s organization. Elders might at times reflect on whether they are drawing undue attention to themselves. w23.06 4 ¶7-8




Sunday, July 20

My thoughts are not your thoughts.​—Isa. 55:8.



If we do not receive what we asked for in prayer, we might ask ourselves, ‘Am I praying for the right thing?’ Often, we think that we know what is best for us. But the things we ask for may not benefit us in the long run. If we are praying about a problem, there may be a better solution to the problem than the one we are asking for. And some things we ask for may not be in harmony with Jehovah’s will. (1 John 5:14) For instance, consider the example of parents who asked Jehovah to keep their child in the truth. That seems like an appropriate request. Yet, Jehovah will not force any of us to serve him. He wants all of us, including our children, to choose to worship him. (Deut. 10:12, 13; 30:19, 20) So the parents could instead ask Jehovah to help them reach their child’s heart so that he will be moved to love Jehovah and to become His friend.​—Prov. 22:6; Eph. 6:4. w23.11 21 ¶5; 23 ¶12




Monday, July 21

Keep comforting one another.​—1 Thess. 4:18.



Why is giving comfort to others an important expression of our love? According to a Bible reference work, the word that Paul used for “comfort” means “standing beside a person to encourage him when he is undergoing severe testing.” Thus, by giving comfort, we help a fellow believer who is in distress to get up and to continue walking on the road to life. Each time we offer a brother or a sister a shoulder to cry on, we express our love for our fellow believer. (2 Cor. 7:6, 7, 13) Feeling compassion and giving comfort are closely related. In what way? A compassionate person is moved to comfort others and to try to relieve their suffering. So first we feel compassion; then we give comfort. Note how Paul connects Jehovah’s compassion to the comfort He gives. Paul describes Jehovah as “the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort.”​—2 Cor. 1:3. w23.11 9-10 ¶8-10




Tuesday, July 22

Rejoice while in tribulations.​—Rom. 5:3.



All followers of Christ can expect tribulation. Consider the apostle Paul’s example. He said to those in Thessalonica: “When we were with you, we used to tell you in advance that we would suffer tribulation, and that is what has happened.” (1 Thess. 3:4) And to the Corinthians, he wrote: “We do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the tribulation we experienced . . . We were very uncertain even of our lives.” (2 Cor. 1:8; 11:23-27) Christians today, too, can expect tribulation of some sort. (2 Tim. 3:12) As you put faith in Jesus and follow him, friends and relatives may be hostile. Has your determination to be honest in all things created problems for you at work? (Heb. 13:18) Have you faced governmental opposition because you shared your hope with others? No matter what type of tribulation we may encounter, though, Paul says we should rejoice. w23.12 10-11 ¶9-10




Wednesday, July 23

You have brought great trouble on me.​—Gen. 34:30.



Jacob endured many problems. Two of Jacob’s sons, Simeon and Levi, brought disgrace on the family and reproach on Jehovah’s name. In addition, Jacob’s beloved wife, Rachel, died while giving birth to their second child. And because of a severe famine, Jacob was forced to move to the land of Egypt in his old age. (Gen. 35:16-19; 37:28; 45:9-11, 28) Through it all, Jacob never lost faith in Jehovah and in His promises. In turn, Jehovah showed Jacob that he had His favor. For example, Jehovah blessed Jacob materially. And just think of how grateful Jacob must have been to Jehovah when he was reunited with Joseph​—the son whom he had long thought to be dead! Jacob’s close friendship with Jehovah enabled him to face his trials successfully. (Gen. 30:43; 32:9, 10; 46:28-30) When we maintain a close friendship with Jehovah, we too can successfully deal with unexpected trials. w23.04 15 ¶6-7




Thursday, July 24

Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack nothing.​—Ps. 23:1.



Psalm 23 is a song that expresses confidence in Jehovah’s love and tender care. David, the writer of this psalm, describes the strong bond that existed between him and his Shepherd, Jehovah. David felt safe letting Jehovah direct him, and he was totally dependent on Him. David knew that Jehovah’s love would pursue him all the days of his life. What made him so confident? David felt well cared for because Jehovah’s provisions had been constant. David also enjoyed Jehovah’s friendship and favor. That is why he was sure that no matter what the future would bring, Jehovah would continue to care for all his needs. David’s trust in Jehovah’s tender love was more powerful than any of his worries and gave him deep happiness and satisfaction.​—Ps. 16:11. w24.01 29 ¶12-13




Friday, July 25

I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.​—Matt. 28:20.



Since World War II, Jehovah’s people in many lands have enjoyed a measure of peace and freedom while carrying out the preaching work. In fact, the work has flourished. Today the members of the Governing Body continue to look to Christ for guidance. They want the instructions they give to the brothers to reflect heaven’s view of matters. In turn, circuit overseers and elders provide direction to the congregations. Anointed elders are in Christ’s “right hand.” (Rev. 2:1) Of course, these elders are imperfect and make mistakes. Moses and Joshua erred at times, as did the apostles. (Num. 20:12; Josh. 9:14, 15; Rom. 3:23) Still, Christ is carefully guiding the faithful slave and the appointed elders, and he will continue to do so. We therefore have every reason to trust the guidance that he is providing through those appointed to take the lead. w24.02 23-24 ¶13-14




Saturday, July 26

Become imitators of God, as beloved children.​—Eph. 5:1.



Today we can please Jehovah by speaking about him with warmth, gratitude, and love. When we are in the ministry, we keep in mind that our main objective is to draw people to Jehovah, to help them to see our beloved Father as we do. (Jas. 4:8) We are delighted to show people how the Bible describes Jehovah, revealing his love, justice, wisdom, power, and other appealing qualities. We also praise Jehovah and please him by striving to imitate him. When we do so, we stand out in this wicked world. People may notice that we are different and may wonder why. (Matt. 5:14-16) As we interact with them in our day-to-day life, we may be able to explain why we act as we do. As a result, sincere ones feel drawn to our God. When we praise Jehovah in these ways, we bring delight to his heart.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4. w24.02 10 ¶7




Sunday, July 27

Be able both to encourage . . . and to reprove.​—Titus 1:9.



To become a mature Christian man, you will need to develop practical skills. These will help you to shoulder responsibilities in the congregation, to hold a secular job to support yourself or a family, and to have healthy relationships with others. For example, learn to read and write well. The Bible says that a happy and successful man spends time each day reading God’s Word and meditating on it. (Ps. 1:1-3) By reading the Bible daily, he will get to know Jehovah’s way of thinking, which will help him to think clearly and to reason well. (Prov. 1:3, 4) Our brothers and sisters look to capable men for Bible-based instruction and advice. If you can read and write well, you will be able to prepare informative, faith-strengthening talks and comments. You will also be able to take meaningful notes that will help you to build your own faith and to encourage others. w23.12 26-27 ¶9-11




Monday, July 28

The one who is in union with you is greater than the one who is in union with the world.​—1 John 4:4.



When you feel afraid, meditate on what Jehovah will do in the future when Satan is gone. A demonstration on the 2014 regional convention program depicted a father discussing with his family how 2 Timothy 3:1-5 might be worded if those verses foretold what it would be like in Paradise: “In the new world the happiest of times will be here. For men will be lovers of others, lovers of spiritual treasures, modest, humble, praisers of God, obedient to parents, thankful, loyal, having great affection for their families, open to agreement, always speaking well of others, self-controlled, mild, lovers of goodness, trustworthy, yielding, lowly in mind, lovers of God rather than lovers of pleasures, motivated by genuine godly devotion; and to these people stick closely.” Do you discuss with your family or fellow believers what life will be like in the new world? w24.01 6 ¶13-14




Tuesday, July 29

I have approved you.​—Luke 3:22.



How reassuring it is to know that Jehovah approves of his people as a group! The Bible says: “Jehovah takes pleasure in his people.” (Ps. 149:4) At times, however, some get so discouraged that they may wonder, ‘Does Jehovah approve of me personally?’ A number of Jehovah’s faithful worshippers in Bible times had moments when they struggled with such thoughts. (1 Sam. 1:6-10; Job 29:2, 4; Ps. 51:11) The Bible clearly shows that imperfect humans can gain Jehovah’s approval, or goodwill. How? We must exercise faith in Jesus Christ and get baptized. (John 3:16) We thus demonstrate publicly that we have repented of our sins and made a promise to God to do his will. (Acts 2:38; 3:19) Jehovah is delighted when we take these steps to cultivate a relationship with him. As long as we continue to do our best to live up to our dedication vow, Jehovah approves of us and considers us his close friends.​—Ps. 25:14. w24.03 26 ¶1-2




Wednesday, July 30

We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.​—Acts 4:20.



We can imitate the disciples by continuing to preach even when secular authorities demand that we stop. We can be confident that Jehovah will help us to accomplish our ministry. So pray for boldness and wisdom as well as for Jehovah’s help to deal with problems. Many of us are coping with physical or emotional challenges, the loss of a loved one, a difficult family situation, persecution, or some other problem. And such things as pandemics and wars have made many of these challenges even harder to deal with. Pour out your heart to Jehovah. Tell him about your situation just as you would tell a close friend. Be assured that Jehovah “will act in your behalf.” (Ps. 37:3, 5) Persevering in prayer will help us to “endure under tribulation.” (Rom. 12:12) Jehovah knows what his worshippers are going through​—“he hears their cry for help.”​—Ps. 145:18, 19. w23.05 5-6 ¶12-15




Thursday, July 31

Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord.​—Eph. 5:10.



When we have important decisions to make, we need to perceive “what the will of Jehovah is” and then act in harmony with it. (Eph. 5:17) By identifying Bible principles that apply to our situation, we are actually seeking God’s thinking on the matter. Then as we apply his principles, we will more likely make good decisions. “The wicked one,” our enemy Satan, would like to keep us so busy with this world’s pursuits that we have no time for our service to God. (1 John 5:19) It would be all too easy for a Christian to put material possessions, secular education, or his career ahead of opportunities to serve Jehovah. Were that to happen, it would indicate that he is being affected by the world’s thinking. Of course, these things are not wrong in themselves, but they should never take first place in our life. w24.03 24 ¶16-17




