
March
Saturday, March 1

The hope does not lead to disappointment.​—Rom. 5:5.



The new world is not yet here. Note, however, some of the things that are here​—the stars, the trees, the animals, and your fellow humans. No one would doubt that all these things are real, even though there was a time when they did not exist. They are now here only because Jehovah created them. (Gen. 1:1, 26, 27) Our God has also purposed to establish a new world. He will fulfill that purpose. In the new world, people will enjoy endless life in perfect health. At God’s appointed time, the new world will become as real as the universe around us today. (Isa. 65:17; Rev. 21:3, 4) In the meantime, use every opportunity you have to strengthen your faith. Build appreciation for the ransom. Contemplate Jehovah’s power. Fill your life with spiritual activities. By doing so, you can be among “those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”​—Heb. 6:11, 12. w23.04 31 ¶18-19




Sunday, March 2

Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?​—John 11:40.



Jesus raises his eyes and prays publicly. He wants to give Jehovah all the credit for what happens next. Then Jesus calls out: “Lazarus, come out!” (John 11:43) And Lazarus walks out of the tomb! Jesus has just done what some thought would have been impossible. This account strengthens our faith in the resurrection hope. How so? Recall Jesus’ promise to Martha: “Your brother will rise.” (John 11:23) Like his Father, Jesus has the desire and the power to fulfill that promise. His tears revealed that he has a heartfelt yearning to undo death and the sorrow that it causes. And the moment Lazarus walked out of the tomb, Jesus proved that he has the power to raise the dead. Also, think about Jesus’ reminder to Martha that is mentioned in today’s text. We have sound reasons for believing that God’s promise of a resurrection will come true. w23.04 11-12 ¶15-16




Monday, March 3

Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, to all who call on him in truth.​—Ps. 145:18.



We may need to change what we pray for as we discern Jehovah’s will more clearly. We must remember that Jehovah has a purpose, and he will fulfill it according to his established timetable. That purpose includes completely and permanently eliminating all problems that cause so much suffering today​—problems such as natural disasters, sickness, and death. Jehovah will accomplish his purpose by means of his Kingdom. (Dan. 2:44; Rev. 21:3, 4) However, until that time, Jehovah is permitting Satan to rule the world. (John 12:31; Rev. 12:9) If Jehovah were to solve mankind’s problems now, it could appear as if Satan’s rulership were having a measure of success. So while we must wait for Jehovah to fulfill certain promises, this does not mean that he leaves us without help. Jehovah will come to our aid. w23.05 8 ¶4; 9-10 ¶7-8




Tuesday, March 4

Know how you should answer each person.​—Col. 4:6.



How can we help others to benefit from the Memorial? A first step, of course, is to invite them. In addition to contacting those we meet in our regular ministry, we can make a list of people to invite. These could include our relatives, workmates, schoolmates, and others. Even if we do not have enough printed copies of the invitation, we can share a link to the electronic version. Who knows how many will respond! (Eccl. 11:6) Keep in mind that those we invite may have questions​—especially if they have never attended one of our meetings. We do well to anticipate their questions and prepare to answer them. Even after they attend the Memorial, newly interested ones may have further questions. We want to do whatever we can​—before, during, and after the Memorial—​to help those “rightly disposed” to benefit from this observance.​—Acts 13:48. w24.01 12 ¶13, 15; 13 ¶16




Wednesday, March 5

You are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears.​—Jas. 4:14.



The Bible describes eight resurrections of people raised to life on earth. Why not make a careful examination of each account? As you do, look for lessons you can learn. Think about how each example demonstrates God’s desire and power to restore the dead to life. Above all, reflect on the most important resurrection​—that of Jesus. Remember that his resurrection was confirmed by hundreds of eyewitnesses and gives us a solid basis for our faith. (1 Cor. 15:3-6, 20-22) How thankful we are for Jehovah’s promise of the resurrection! We can be sure that this promise will come true, for Jehovah has the desire and the power to fulfill it. Let us be determined to keep strengthening our faith in this precious hope. By doing so, we will draw ever closer to the God who, in effect, promises each of us, ‘Your loved ones will rise!’​—John 11:23. w23.04 8 ¶2; 12 ¶17; 13 ¶20




Thursday, March 6

Walk in modesty with your God!​—Mic. 6:8.



Modesty and humility are closely linked traits. We show that we are modest by having a proper view of ourselves and of our limitations. We show that we are humble by displaying lowliness of mind. (Phil. 2:3) Generally, a modest person is also a humble person. Gideon was a modest and humble man. When Jehovah’s angel told Gideon that he had been chosen to deliver Israel from the powerful Midianites, that humble man replied: “My clan is the least in Manasseh, and I am the most insignificant in my father’s house.” (Judg. 6:15) He felt unqualified for the assignment, but Jehovah knew better. With Jehovah’s help, Gideon completed his assignment successfully. Elders do their best to display modesty and humility in all things. (Acts 20:18, 19) They do not exaggerate their abilities or accomplishments; nor do they beat themselves up for their flaws or failings. w23.06 3 ¶4-5




Friday, March 7

He will crush your head.​—Gen. 3:15.



The crushing of Satan’s head is still over 1,000 years away. (Rev. 20:7-10) Before that happens, the Bible foretells these earthshaking events. First, the nations will proclaim “peace and security!” (1 Thess. 5:2, 3) “Instantly,” the great tribulation will begin when the nations attack all false religion. (Rev. 17:16) After that, Jesus will pronounce judgment on humankind, separating the sheep from the goats. (Matt. 25:31-33, 46) Satan, though, will not be idle. In his hatred, he will incite a coalition of nations that the Bible calls Gog of the land of Magog to attack Jehovah’s pure worshippers. (Ezek. 38:2, 10, 11) At some point, the anointed remnant will be gathered to heaven to join Christ and his heavenly forces to fight the war of Armageddon, the finale of the great tribulation. (Matt. 24:31; Rev. 16:14, 16) Then Christ’s Thousand Year Reign over the earth will begin.​—Rev. 20:6. w23.10 20-21 ¶9-10




Saturday, March 8

Your servant has feared Jehovah from his youth.​—1 Ki. 18:12.



Today many of Jehovah’s servants live in lands where our work is banned. They show the secular authorities due respect, but like Obadiah, these precious brothers and sisters give to Jehovah what belongs to Him​—exclusive devotion. (Matt. 22:21) They demonstrate their fear of God by obeying him rather than men. (Acts 5:29) They do this by continuing to proclaim the good news and by discreetly meeting together. (Matt. 10:16, 28) They are concerned that their brothers and sisters get much-needed spiritual food. Consider the example of Henri, who lives in an African land where our work was banned for a time. During the ban, Henri volunteered to distribute spiritual food to his fellow Witnesses. He wrote: “I am shy by nature. . . . Jehovah . . . gave me the courage I needed.” Can you see yourself being as courageous as Henri was? You can be if you develop a healthy fear of God. w23.06 16 ¶9, 11




Sunday, March 9

Through one man sin entered into the world.​—Rom. 5:12.



When Adam and Eve rebelled, it may have seemed that Satan had thwarted God’s purpose to fill the earth with perfect, obedient people. Satan might have thought that Jehovah had very few options left. One option was to put Adam and Eve to death and create another perfect couple to fulfill His purpose for mankind. But if God had done that, the Devil would have accused Him of being a liar. Why? Because, as recorded at Genesis 1:28, Jehovah had told Adam and Eve that their offspring would fill the earth. Or perhaps Satan thought that Jehovah would allow Adam and Eve to produce imperfect offspring who would never be able to reach perfection. (Eccl. 7:20; Rom. 3:23) In that case, the Devil would no doubt have accused Jehovah of being a failure. Why? Because this option would not accomplish God’s purpose, that is, to fill the Paradise earth with perfect, obedient descendants of Adam and Eve. w23.11 6 ¶15-16




Monday, March 10

Do not go beyond the things that are written.​—1 Cor. 4:6.



Jehovah gives us clear direction through his Word and through his organization. We have no reason to add to the instruction he provides. (Prov. 3:5-7) Therefore, we do not go beyond what is written in the Bible or make rules for fellow believers about personal matters. Satan employs “empty deception” and “the elementary things of the world” to mislead and divide people. (Col. 2:8) In the first century, these included philosophies based on human reasonings, unscriptural Jewish teachings, and the teaching that Christians must observe the Mosaic Law. These were deceptions because they took people’s attention away from the true Source of wisdom, Jehovah. Today, Satan uses the media and social networks to spread conspiracy theories and false news reports promoted by political leaders. w23.07 16 ¶11-12




Tuesday, March 11

How great your works are, O Jehovah! How very deep your thoughts are!​—Ps. 92:5.



Jehovah resolved the rebellion of Satan and the first humans in a way that must have dumbfounded Satan. Instead of proving to be a liar, Jehovah proved to be truthful by allowing Adam and Eve to have children. And instead of proving to be a failure, Jehovah proved to be victorious. He kept his purpose moving forward by providing an “offspring” who would save obedient descendants of Adam and Eve. (Gen. 3:15; 22:18) Satan must have been stunned by Jehovah’s ransom arrangement! Why? Because it is an arrangement based on unselfish love. (Matt. 20:28; John 3:16) That quality is not present in Satan’s selfish character. So, what will take place because of the ransom arrangement? By the end of the Millennium, perfect, obedient descendants of Adam and Eve will inhabit a paradise earth​—just as Jehovah originally purposed. w23.11 6 ¶17




Wednesday, March 12

God will judge.​—Heb. 13:4.



We uphold Jehovah’s law regarding the sanctity of life and blood. Why? Because Jehovah says that blood represents life, a precious gift from him. (Lev. 17:14) When Jehovah first allowed humans to eat the flesh of animals, he directed them not to eat the blood. (Gen. 9:4) He repeated this command when he gave the Mosaic Law to Israel. (Lev. 17:10) And he directed the first-century governing body to decree that all Christians “keep abstaining . . . from blood.” (Acts 15:28, 29) We steadfastly obey this command when we make medical decisions. We also strictly adhere to Jehovah’s high moral standards. Using vivid figurative language, the apostle Paul advises us to “deaden” our body members​—that is, to take strong measures in order to eliminate wrong fleshly desires. We avoid looking at or doing anything that could lead to sexual immorality.​—Col. 3:5; Job 31:1. w23.07 15 ¶5-6




Thursday, March 13

He finally opened his heart to her.​—Judg. 16:17.



Was Samson so trusting​—so blinded by his love for Delilah—​that he failed to discern what she was up to? Whatever the case, Delilah repeatedly pressured Samson to reveal the source of his strength, and he ultimately gave in to her demands. Sadly, Samson allowed himself to get into a situation that led to the loss of his strength and the loss of Jehovah’s approval for a time. (Judg. 16:16-20) Samson experienced painful consequences because of trusting Delilah rather than Jehovah. The Philistines captured and blinded Samson. He was imprisoned in Gaza, and he became a lowly grinder of grain. Then he was humiliated when the Philistines gathered for a celebration. They offered a great sacrifice to their false god Dagon, as if he had given Samson into their hands. They brought Samson from prison to the party to provide “some amusement”​—to make fun of him.​—Judg. 16:21-25. w23.09 5-6 ¶13-14




Friday, March 14

Take into consideration what is fine from the viewpoint of all men.​—Rom. 12:17.



Perhaps a coworker or a schoolmate questions our Christian stand on certain moral issues. We will do our best to defend our convictions while respecting our listener’s view. (1 Pet. 3:15) It is often helpful to view the question as a way to learn what he cares about rather than as an attack or a challenge. Regardless of the reason why someone has raised an issue, we do well to respond in a gentle, kind way. Our answer may then move him to reconsider his viewpoint. If a workmate asks, for example, why we do not celebrate birthdays, consider: Could he be wondering whether we are allowed to have a good time? We may be able to ease our workmate’s concerns by expressing how much we appreciate his interest in fellow workers. That might open the way to a relaxed conversation about what the Bible indicates regarding the subject of birthdays. w23.09 17 ¶10-11




Saturday, March 15

Be on your guard so that you may not be led astray with them by the error of the lawless people and fall from your own steadfastness.​—2 Pet. 3:17.



What a privilege we have to use the time that remains to give a witness to people of all nations. The apostle Peter urges us to “keep close in mind” Jehovah’s day. (2 Pet. 3:11, 12) How? We do well to meditate​—every day, if possible—​on the blessings of the new world. Visualize yourself taking a breath of really clean air, eating healthful food, welcoming back loved ones as they are resurrected, and teaching people who lived centuries ago about the fulfillment of Bible prophecies. Such meditation will help to keep you in expectation and protect you against becoming indifferent to the times we live in. By “having this advance knowledge” of our future, we will “not be led astray” by false teachers. w23.09 27 ¶5-6




Sunday, March 16

Be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous.​—Eph. 6:1.



Young people are surrounded by peers who tend to be “disobedient to parents.” (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) Why do many of them disobey? Some feel that their parents are hypocritical. The children are expected to do what the parents themselves fail to do. Others view their parents’ advice as outdated, impractical, or overly strict. If you are a young person, do you ever feel that way? Many find it difficult to apply Jehovah’s command found in today’s text. What can help you to do so? You can learn obedience from the best example​—Jesus. (1 Pet. 2:21-24) He was a perfect human with imperfect parents. But Jesus honored his parents even when they made mistakes and misunderstood him at times.​—Ex. 20:12. w23.10 7 ¶4-5




Monday, March 17

The former commandment is set aside because it is weak and ineffective.​—Heb. 7:18.



The apostle Paul explained that the sacrifices the Law required could not fully remove sin. For that reason, the Law had been “set aside.” So Paul went on to teach some deeper truths. He reminded his fellow Christians of “a better hope” based on Jesus’ sacrifice that could truly help them draw “near to God.” (Heb. 7:19) Paul explained to his Hebrew brothers why their Christian worship was far superior to the worship they offered in the past. The features of the Jewish religion were only “a shadow of the things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.” (Col. 2:17) The shadow that an object casts is only a general shape of the real thing that casts the shadow. So, too, the ancient Jewish pattern of worship was just a shadow of the reality that was to come. We need to understand the arrangement Jehovah has put in place for us to have our sins forgiven so that we can offer acceptable worship. w23.10 25 ¶4-5




Tuesday, March 18

In the time of the end the king of the south will engage with him in a pushing, and against him the king of the north will storm.​—Dan. 11:40.



Daniel chapter 11 speaks of two kings, or political powers, who struggle with each other for world domination. By comparing this prophecy with others in the Bible, we can identify “the king of the north” as Russia and its allies and “the king of the south” as the Anglo-American World Power. God’s people who live under the rule of “the king of the north” are enduring direct persecution by this king. Some Witnesses have been beaten and thrown into prison for their faith. Rather than intimidate our brothers, the actions of “the king of the north” build their faith. Why? Because our brothers know that the persecution of God’s people fulfills prophetic statements made by Daniel. (Dan. 11:41) Our knowing that can help us to keep our hope strong and our integrity intact. w23.08 11 ¶15-16




Wednesday, March 19

Whoever touches you touches the pupil of my eye.​—Zech. 2:8.



Because he loves us, Jehovah is sensitive to our feelings and is eager to protect us. He feels hurt when we are hurt. As a result, we can rightly pray: “Guard me like the pupil of your eye.” (Ps. 17:8) The eye is a sensitive and precious part of the body. So when Jehovah compares us to the pupil of his eye, it is as if he were saying, ‘Anyone who harms you, my people, harms what is precious to me.’ Jehovah wants us to be convinced that he loves us personally. But he knows that because of past experiences, we may wonder whether he could love us. Or we may be facing situations right now that test our confidence in Jehovah’s love. What will strengthen our confidence? Learning how Jehovah expresses his love toward Jesus, the anointed, and all of us. w24.01 27 ¶6-7




Thursday, March 20

The hand of our God was over us, and he rescued us from the hand of the enemy.​—Ezra 8:31.



Ezra had seen how Jehovah supported His people in times of test. Years earlier, in 484 B.C.E., Ezra was likely living in Babylon when King Ahasuerus issued a decree to exterminate the Jews throughout the Persian Empire. (Esther 3:7, 13-15) Ezra’s life was in danger! In response to this threat, the Jews “in every province” fasted and mourned, no doubt turning to Jehovah in prayer for guidance. (Esther 4:3) Imagine how Ezra and his fellow Jews felt when the tables were turned on those who had plotted to destroy the Jews! (Esther 9:1, 2) What Ezra experienced during those challenging times may have prepared him for future tests and very likely strengthened his confidence in Jehovah’s ability to protect His people. w23.11 17 ¶12-13




Friday, March 21

God counts righteousness apart from works.​—Rom. 4:6.



The apostle Paul was primarily referring to “works of law,” the law of Moses, given at Mount Sinai. (Rom. 3:21, 28) It seems that in Paul’s day some Jewish Christians were having a hard time accepting that the Mosaic Law and the works required by that Law had been done away with. Consequently, Paul pointed to Abraham’s example to prove that a righteous standing with God does not result from “works of law.” It comes from faith. That is encouraging because knowing this gives us confidence that a good standing with God is within our reach. It means that we can develop faith in God and in Christ, which can actually lead to divine approval. On the other hand, the “works” discussed in James chapter 2 are not the “works of law” mentioned by Paul. James is referring to the works, or activities, that Christians do in their daily life. (Jas. 2:24) Such works indicate whether a Christian has genuine faith in God or not. w23.12 3 ¶8; 4-5 ¶10-11




Saturday, March 22

A husband is head of his wife.​—Eph. 5:23.



Sisters who are considering marriage should choose their mate very carefully. Remember, you will come under the headship of the man you marry. (Rom. 7:2; Eph. 5:33) So ask yourself: ‘Is he a mature Christian? Is he putting spiritual interests first in his life? Does he make wise decisions? Can he admit his mistakes? Does he respect women? Does he have the skills needed to support me spiritually, materially, and emotionally?’ Of course, if you want to find a good prospective husband, you will need to be a good prospective wife. A good wife is “a helper” for her husband and “a complement” of him. (Gen. 2:18) And because she loves Jehovah, she works to enhance her husband’s reputation. (Prov. 31:11, 12; 1 Tim. 3:11) You can prepare for this role by deepening your love for Jehovah and by being a helper to others at home and in the congregation. w23.12 22-23 ¶18-19




Sunday, March 23

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God.​—Jas. 1:5.



Jehovah promises to give us the wisdom we need to make good decisions. We especially need godly wisdom when making decisions that will affect the rest of our life. He also gives us the power to endure. Just as he did for the apostle Paul, Jehovah will give us the power we need to endure our trials. (Phil. 4:13) One means that he uses is our spiritual family. The night before Jesus sacrificed his life, he prayed earnestly. He begged Jehovah to spare him the reproach of being considered a blasphemer. Instead of doing that, Jehovah helped Jesus by sending one of his angelic brothers to strengthen him. (Luke 22:42, 43) Jehovah may also help us by means of an encouraging call or visit from one of our brothers or sisters. All of us can look for opportunities to offer “a good word” to fellow believers.​—Prov. 12:25. w23.05 10-11 ¶9-11




Monday, March 24

Keep encouraging one another and building one another up.​—1 Thess. 5:11.



Inactive ones who attend the Memorial may have been afraid that they would not be well-received. So avoid putting them on the spot by asking embarrassing questions or by making comments that could be hurtful. These brothers and sisters are our fellow believers. We are happy to worship with them once again! (Ps. 119:176; Acts 20:35) Is it any wonder that Jesus arranged for us to observe the Memorial of his death each year? When we do, we benefit ourselves and others in many ways. (Isa. 48:17, 18) We grow in our love for Jehovah and Jesus. We show how much we appreciate what they have done for us. We strengthen our bonds with our fellow believers. And we may help others learn how they too can enjoy the blessings that the ransom makes possible. Let us do all we can, then, to be ready for this year’s Memorial​—the most important day of the year! w24.01 14 ¶18-19




Tuesday, March 25

I, Jehovah, am . . . the One guiding you.​—Isa. 48:17.



How does Jehovah guide us? Primarily, by means of his written Word, the Bible. However, he also uses human representatives. For example, he uses “the faithful and discreet slave” to provide spiritual food that helps us make wise decisions. (Matt. 24:45) Jehovah also uses other capable men to guide us. For example, circuit overseers and congregation elders provide encouragement and instruction that can help us get through difficult times. How grateful we are for reliable guidance during these critical last days! It helps us maintain Jehovah’s approval and keeps us on the road to life. Even so, we might occasionally find it a challenge to follow Jehovah’s guidance, especially when it is conveyed by imperfect men. At such times, we especially need confidence that Jehovah is the one leading his people and that following his guidance results in blessings. w24.02 20 ¶2-3




Wednesday, March 26

Love, not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.​—1 John 3:18.



We can grow in our love for God by diligently studying his Word. As you read the Bible, try to discern what each passage reveals about Jehovah. Ask yourself: ‘How does this account show that Jehovah loves me? What reasons does it give me to love Jehovah?’ Another way we can grow in our love for Jehovah is by regularly opening our heart to him in prayer. (Ps. 25:4, 5) Jehovah, in turn, will answer our prayers. (1 John 3:21, 22) We should also grow in our love for others. Some years after his conversion, the apostle Paul met a fine young man named Timothy. Timothy loved Jehovah, and he loved people. Paul told the Philippians: “I have no one else of a disposition like [Timothy’s] who will genuinely care for your concerns.” (Phil. 2:20) Paul was obviously impressed by Timothy’s love for the brothers and sisters. No doubt the congregations that Timothy served looked forward to his visits.​—1 Cor. 4:17. w23.07 9 ¶7-10




Thursday, March 27

I will never abandon you.​—Heb. 13:5.



Before Israel entered the Promised Land, Moses died. Without that faithful man, were God’s people left in the lurch? No. As long as they were faithful, Jehovah provided for them. Before Moses died, Jehovah told him to commission Joshua to lead the people. Moses had been training Joshua for decades. (Ex. 33:11; Deut. 34:9) In addition, there were many other capable men taking the lead​—chiefs of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and even tens. (Deut. 1:15) God’s people were well cared for. We find a similar example in Elijah. He had been taking the lead in pure worship among the Israelites for decades. But the time came when Jehovah transferred him to a different assignment, down south in Judah. (2 Ki. 2:1; 2 Chron. 21:12) Were faithful people in the ten-tribe kingdom of Israel abandoned? No. Elijah had been training Elisha for years. Jehovah’s purpose kept advancing, and he cared for his faithful worshippers. w24.02 5 ¶12




Friday, March 28

Go on walking as children of light.​—Eph. 5:8.



The Ephesian Christians had embraced the light of Scriptural truth. (Ps. 119:105) These Ephesians had abandoned their false religious practices and immoral conduct. They had “become imitators of God” and were doing their best to worship Jehovah and to please him. (Eph. 5:1) In a similar way, before we learned the truth, we were in religious and moral darkness. Some of us celebrated false religious holidays; others of us pursued an immoral lifestyle. But once we learned about Jehovah’s standards of right and wrong, we made changes. We began to bring our life into harmony with his righteous requirements. And as a result, we have enjoyed many benefits. (Isa. 48:17) Now, though, we face ongoing challenges. We need to stay away from the darkness that we left behind and “go on walking as children of light.” w24.03 21 ¶6-7




Saturday, March 29

To the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.​—Phil. 3:16.



You may feel that you are not ready for dedication and baptism. Perhaps you still need to make changes in your life to conform to Jehovah’s standards, or perhaps you need more time to strengthen your faith. (Col. 2:6, 7) Not all students progress at the same pace, and not all young ones are ready for dedication and baptism at the same age. Try to evaluate your spiritual progress according to what you are able to do and not in comparison with someone else. (Gal. 6:4, 5) Even if you realize that you are not yet ready to dedicate yourself to Jehovah, keep that step before you as a goal. Pray for Jehovah’s blessing on your efforts to make whatever changes are necessary. (Phil. 2:13) You can be certain that he will hear your prayer and respond.​—1 John 5:14. w24.03 5 ¶9-10




Sunday, March 30

Husbands, . . . continue dwelling with [your wives] according to knowledge.​—1 Pet. 3:7.



On one occasion, Sarah was distressed, and she vented her feelings to Abraham, even blaming him. Abraham knew that Sarah was a submissive and supportive wife. He listened to her and tried to resolve the issue. (Gen. 16:5, 6) What can we learn? Husbands, you have the authority to make decisions for your family. (1 Cor. 11:3) Yet, the loving thing to do would be to listen attentively and consider your wife’s opinion before deciding, especially if the decision will affect her. (1 Cor. 13:4, 5) On another occasion, Abraham decided to extend hospitality to unexpected visitors. He asked Sarah to drop what she was doing and prepare a large quantity of bread. (Gen. 18:6) Sarah acted quickly and supported Abraham’s decision. Wives, you can imitate Sarah by supporting your husband’s decisions. When you do, you strengthen your marriage.​—1 Pet. 3:5, 6. w23.05 24-25 ¶16-17




Monday, March 31

The wisdom from above is . . . ready to obey.​—Jas. 3:17.



After Gideon was appointed as judge, his obedience and courage were tested. He was given the dangerous assignment to destroy his father’s Baal altar. (Judg. 6:25, 26) Later, after gathering an army, Gideon was twice directed to reduce its size. (Judg. 7:2-7) Finally, he was told to attack the enemy camp in the dead of night. (Judg. 7:9-11) Elders should be “ready to obey.” An obedient elder readily submits to what the Scriptures say and to direction from God’s organization. He thus sets a good example for others. Still, his obedience may be tested. He may, for instance, find it hard to keep up with the direction he receives. In some cases, he may wonder whether certain direction is really practical or wise. Or he may be asked to take on an assignment that could put his freedom at risk. How can elders imitate Gideon’s obedience in such situations? Listen carefully to direction and apply it. w23.06 4-5 ¶9-11




