
May
Thursday, May 1

A great famine was about to come.​—Acts 11:28.



First-century Christians were not spared when a great famine came “on the entire inhabited earth.” No doubt family heads worried about how they would provide for their household. And what about young people who had been planning to expand their ministry? Might they have felt that they should delay those plans? Regardless of their circumstances, the Christians adapted. They continued to preach in any way that they could, and they gladly shared their material belongings with fellow believers in Judea. (Acts 11:29, 30) Those who received relief supplies saw Jehovah’s support firsthand. (Matt. 6:31-33) They must have felt closer to their fellow believers who had come to their assistance. And those who made donations or who otherwise shared in the relief work experienced the happiness that comes from giving.​—Acts 20:35. w23.04 16 ¶12-13




Friday, May 2

We know that we are to have the things we ask for, since we have asked them of him.​—1 John 5:15.



At times, Jehovah answers the prayers of his people by moving unbelievers to act in their behalf. For example, he moved King Artaxerxes to grant Nehemiah’s request to return to Jerusalem so that he could help with rebuilding the city. (Neh. 2:3-6) Today, too, Jehovah can move even those who do not worship him to come to our rescue when we are in need. Our prayers are not usually answered in spectacular ways. But the answers we do receive are just what we need to remain loyal to our heavenly Father. So be on the lookout for Jehovah’s answers to your prayers. From time to time, pause and reflect on how Jehovah is answering your prayers. (Ps. 66:19, 20) We must show faith, not just by praying to Jehovah, but also by accepting his answer to our prayers in whatever form it comes.​—Heb. 11:6. w23.05 11 ¶13; 12 ¶15-16




Saturday, May 3

To do your will, O my God, is my delight.​—Ps. 40:8.



When we dedicated ourselves to Jehovah, we vowed to worship him and to do his will. We must keep that vow. Living up to our dedication is not a burden. After all, Jehovah created us to do his will. (Rev. 4:11) He put within us a spiritual need and created us in his image. As a result, we are able to draw close to him and to find delight in doing his will. What is more, when we do God’s will and follow his Son, we “find refreshment” for ourselves. (Matt. 11:28-30) So strengthen your love for Jehovah by meditating on all the good he has done for you and the blessings he has in store for you. The more your love for God grows, the easier it will be for you to obey him. (1 John 5:3) Jesus succeeded in doing God’s will because he prayed to Jehovah for help and kept focused on his reward. (Heb. 5:7; 12:2) Like Jesus, pray to Jehovah for strength and keep the hope of everlasting life clearly in mind. w23.08 27-28 ¶4-5




Sunday, May 4

Do you despise the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience, because you do not know that God in his kindness is trying to lead you to repentance?​—Rom. 2:4.



We all appreciate people who are patient. Why is that the case? We respect those who can wait for something without getting frustrated. We appreciate that others are patient with us when we make mistakes. And we are grateful that our Bible teacher was patient with us as we struggled to learn, accept, or apply a Bible teaching. Above all, how thankful we are that Jehovah God is patient with us! Although we value patience in others, we ourselves may not always find it easy to be patient. For example, we may struggle to stay calm when stuck in traffic, especially if we are running late. We may lose our temper when others irritate us. And, at times, we could find it hard to keep waiting for Jehovah’s promised new world. However, in all these cases, we need to be more patient. w23.08 20 ¶1-2




Monday, May 5

He sent all the other men of Israel back home, and he kept only the 300 men.​—Judg. 7:8.



At Jehovah’s request, Gideon reduced his army by more than 99 percent. He may have thought: ‘Is this change really necessary? Will this work?’ Nevertheless, Gideon obeyed. Elders today imitate Gideon by implementing recommended changes in theocratic direction. (Heb. 13:17) Gideon obeyed Jehovah despite his fears and the risk involved. (Judg. 9:17) After receiving assurance from Jehovah, Gideon was absolutely convinced that God would support him as he protected God’s people. Elders living in areas where the work is under ban imitate Gideon. They courageously take the lead at the meetings and in the ministry despite the threat of arrest, interrogation, loss of employment, or violence. During the great tribulation, elders will need courage to obey instructions they will receive​—regardless of the dangers involved. w23.06 5-6 ¶12-13




Tuesday, May 6

Those honoring me I will honor.​—1 Sam. 2:30.



Jehovah had High Priest Jehoiada’s fine deeds recorded for our instruction. (Rom. 15:4) And when Jehoiada died, he was given the exceptional honor of being buried “in the City of David along with the kings, because he had done good in Israel with respect to the true God and His house.” (2 Chron. 24:15, 16) The account about Jehoiada can help all of us to develop fear of God. Christian overseers can imitate Jehoiada by remaining alert and by loyally protecting God’s flock. (Acts 20:28) Older ones can learn from Jehoiada that when they fear Jehovah and remain loyal, He can use them to accomplish His purpose. Young ones can take note of how Jehovah treated Jehoiada and imitate Him by treating loyal older ones with dignity and respect, especially those with a long record of faithful service. (Prov. 16:31) Let us loyally support “those who are taking the lead” by obeying them.​—Heb. 13:17. w23.06 17 ¶14-15




Wednesday, May 7

The lips of the righteous one nourish many.​—Prov. 10:21.



At meetings, use discretion when deciding how often you will volunteer to comment. If we raise our hand too often, we might make the conductor feel pressured to call on us repeatedly even though others have not yet had an opportunity. This could discourage others from raising their hand. (Eccl. 3:7) When many publishers raise their hand during a study, we may not get to comment as often as we would like. At times, the conductor may not be able to call on us at all. That can be disappointing, but we should try not to take it personally when we are not called on. (Eccl. 7:9) If you are unable to comment as often as you would like, why not listen carefully as others participate and then after the meeting commend them for their comment? Your brothers and sisters may find your commendation just as encouraging as the comments you would have given. w23.04 23-24 ¶14-16




Thursday, May 8

My heart is steadfast, O God.​—Ps. 57:7.



Study God’s Word and meditate on it. Just as a tree can stand strong if it has deep roots, we can remain firm if our faith is deeply rooted in God’s Word. As a tree grows, its roots grow deeper and spread farther. When we study and meditate, we strengthen our faith and deepen our conviction that God’s ways are best. (Col. 2:6, 7) Reflect on how Jehovah’s instruction, guidance, and protection helped his servants in times past. For example, Ezekiel paid close attention as an angel took detailed measurements of the visionary temple. This vision strengthened Ezekiel, and it provides us with practical lessons about how we can uphold Jehovah’s standards for pure worship. (Ezek. 40:1-4; 43:10-12) We also benefit when we take time to study about and meditate on the deeper things of God’s Word. We can have a steadfast heart, trusting fully in Jehovah.​—Ps. 112:7. w23.07 18 ¶15-16




Friday, May 9

Safeguard . . . thinking ability.​—Prov. 3:21.



The Bible is filled with good examples for young men to imitate. Those men from the past loved God and handled various responsibilities in caring for his people. You can also find good examples among the mature Christian men in your own family and in your congregation. (Heb. 13:7) And you have the perfect example of Jesus Christ. (1 Pet. 2:21) As you carefully study these examples, consider their outstanding qualities. (Heb. 12:1, 2) Then decide how you will imitate these men. A man with thinking ability considers his options carefully before acting. So work hard to gain and maintain that ability. Begin by learning Bible principles and thinking about why these are beneficial. Then use those principles to help you make decisions that will please Jehovah. (Ps. 119:9) That is a major step toward becoming a mature Christian man.​—Prov. 2:11, 12; Heb. 5:14. w23.12 24-25 ¶4-5




Saturday, May 10

[Be] ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect.​—1 Pet. 3:15.



Parents can effectively teach their children how to respond mildly when their beliefs are challenged. (Jas. 3:13) Some parents have practice sessions during family worship. They consider topics that might come up at school, discuss and demonstrate how to give an answer, and teach their children how to speak in a mild, appealing way. Practice sessions can help Christians to present convincing arguments and to convince themselves that they have sound reasons for their beliefs. The “Young People Ask” series on jw.org includes worksheets for teenagers. Those are designed to help young ones to reinforce their beliefs and to prepare answers in their own words. By studying this series as a family, we all can learn how to defend our faith in a mild, appealing way. w23.09 17 ¶10; 18 ¶15-16




Sunday, May 11

Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due time we will reap if we do not tire out.​—Gal. 6:9.



Have you ever set a spiritual goal but struggled to achieve it? If so, you are not alone. For example, Philip wanted to improve the quality and frequency of his prayers, but he struggled to find time to pray. Erika’s goal was to be punctual for meetings for field service; yet, she still arrived late for nearly every meeting. If you currently have a goal that you have not yet achieved, rest assured that you are not a failure. Even reaching a simple goal often requires time and hard work. The fact that you still want to reach your goal shows that you treasure your relationship with Jehovah and want to give him your best. Jehovah values your efforts. Of course, he does not expect more from you than what you can give. (Ps. 103:14; Mic. 6:8) So your goal should be reasonable, according to what your circumstances allow. w23.05 26 ¶1-2




Monday, May 12

If God is for us, who will be against us?​—Rom. 8:31.



Courageous people may experience fear, but they do not allow it to stop them from doing what is right. Daniel was a very courageous young man. He studied the writings of God’s prophets, including the prophecies of Jeremiah. From that study, Daniel later discerned that the long captivity of the Jews in Babylon was soon to end. (Dan. 9:2) Seeing Bible prophecy come true no doubt strengthened Daniel’s trust in Jehovah, and those who have strong trust in God can be remarkably courageous. (Compare Romans 8:32, 37-39.) Most important, Daniel prayed to his heavenly Father often. (Dan. 6:10) He confessed his sins to Jehovah and shared his feelings with Him. And Daniel asked for help. (Dan. 9:4, 5, 19) He was a human like us, so he was not born with courage. Instead, he developed that quality through study and prayer and by trusting in Jehovah. w23.08 3 ¶4; 4 ¶7




Tuesday, May 13

Let your light shine before men, so that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.​—Matt. 5:16.



When we obey the superior authorities, we benefit ourselves and others. How so? For one thing, we avoid the punishment that comes to those who disobey the law. (Rom. 13:1, 4) Our personal obedience can affect how the authorities view Jehovah’s Witnesses as a whole. For instance, some decades ago in Nigeria, soldiers entered a Kingdom Hall during a congregation meeting, looking for rioters who were protesting the payment of taxes. But the officer in charge told the soldiers to leave, saying: “Jehovah’s Witnesses are not tax agitators.” Every time you obey the law, you could enhance the reputation of Jehovah’s people​—a reputation that may one day help protect your fellow believers. w23.10 9 ¶13




Wednesday, May 14

You need endurance, so that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the fulfillment of the promise.​—Heb. 10:36.



Some of Jehovah’s servants have been waiting for the end of this system of things for a long time. From a human standpoint, the fulfillment of God’s promise might seem to be delaying. Jehovah addressed that concern when he assured the prophet Habakkuk: “The vision is yet for its appointed time, and it is rushing toward its end, and it will not lie. Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it! For it will without fail come true. It will not be late!” (Hab. 2:3) Did God provide that assurance for the benefit of Habakkuk only? Or do His words have meaning for us today? Under inspiration, the apostle Paul applied those words to Christians, who are in expectation of the new world. (Heb. 10:37) Yes, we can be sure that even if our promised deliverance seems to delay, “it will without fail come true. It will not be late!” w23.04 30 ¶16




Thursday, May 15

All the Israelites began to murmur against Moses.​—Num. 14:2.



The Israelites rejected the clear proof that Jehovah was using Moses as His representative. (Num. 14:10, 11) Repeatedly, they refused to recognize Moses’ role. As a result, that generation of Israelites was denied entry into the Promised Land. (Num. 14:30) However, some Israelites did follow Jehovah’s guidance. For example, Jehovah noted: “Caleb . . . kept following after me wholeheartedly.” (Num. 14:24) God rewarded Caleb, even granting him his preferred choice of land in Canaan. (Josh. 14:12-14) The next generation of Israelites also set a good example in following Jehovah’s guidance. When Joshua succeeded Moses as the appointed leader of the Israelites, they “deeply respected him all the days of his life.” (Josh. 4:14) As a result, Jehovah blessed them by bringing them into the land that he had promised.​—Josh. 21:43, 44. w24.02 21 ¶6-7




Friday, May 16

Whoever loves God must also love his brother.​—1 John 4:21.



Just as a doctor is able to get some information about the health of our heart when checking our pulse, we can get some information about the strength of our love for God by checking our love for others. If we notice that our love for fellow believers has weakened somewhat, this may indicate that our love for God is also growing weak. But when we regularly show love for fellow believers, this signals that our love for God is strong. We should be concerned if our love for our brothers and sisters is growing weak. Why? Because it would mean that we are in spiritual danger. The apostle John makes that clear when he reminds us: “The one who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.” (1 John 4:20) What is the lesson for us? Jehovah is pleased with us only if we “love one another.”​—1 John 4:7-9, 11. w23.11 8 ¶3; 9 ¶5-6




Saturday, May 17

Your father and your mother will rejoice.​—Prov. 23:25.



When he was young, King Jehoash made a wise decision. Being without a father, he followed the direction of faithful High Priest Jehoiada. That priest instructed Jehoash as if he were his own son. In response, Jehoash wisely decided to take the lead in pure worship and serve Jehovah. Jehoash even arranged for Jehovah’s temple to be repaired. (2 Chron. 24:1, 2, 4, 13, 14) If you are being taught to love Jehovah and to live by his standards, you are being given a valuable gift. (Prov. 2:1, 10-12) Your parents can provide training in many ways. As you apply the Scriptural advice you receive, you will make your parents happy. More important, you will make God happy and will build a lasting friendship with him. (Prov. 22:6; 23:15, 24) Does that not give you good reason to imitate the example of Jehoash when he was young? w23.09 8-9 ¶3-5




Sunday, May 18

I will listen to you.​—Jer. 29:12.



Jehovah promises to listen to our prayers. Our God loves his faithful worshippers, so he will never ignore their prayers. (Ps. 10:17; 37:28) However, this does not mean that he will grant us all our requests. We may have to wait until the new world before we receive some of the things we ask for. Jehovah considers how our requests relate to his overall purpose. (Isa. 55:8, 9) Part of that purpose includes filling the earth with men and women who are joyfully united under his rulership. But Satan claims that humans would be better off ruling themselves. (Gen. 3:1-5) To prove that the Devil’s claim is a lie, Jehovah has allowed humans to govern themselves. Yet, human rule has caused many of the problems we face today. (Eccl. 8:9) We understand that Jehovah will not remove all these problems at this time. w23.11 21 ¶4-5




Monday, May 19

I have appointed you a father of many nations.​—Rom. 4:17.



Jehovah promised that through Abraham many nations would be blessed. However, when Abraham was 100 years old and Sarah was 90, the promised son had not yet appeared. From a human standpoint, it seemed impossible for Abraham and Sarah to have a son. That was a real test for Abraham. “Yet based on hope, he had faith that he would become the father of many nations.” (Rom. 4:18, 19) And sure enough, that hope was realized. He did become father to Isaac, the long-hoped-for son. (Rom. 4:20-22) We can have God’s approval and be counted righteous as God’s friends, as Abraham was. In fact, Paul touched on that, writing: “The words ‘it was counted to him’ were not written for [Abraham’s] sake only, but also for our sake, to whom it will be counted, because we believe in Him who raised Jesus.” (Rom. 4:23, 24) Like Abraham, we need to have both faith and works as well as hope. w23.12 7 ¶16-17




Tuesday, May 20

You have seen my affliction; you are aware of my deep distress.​—Ps. 31:7.



When you face a trial that makes you afraid, remember that Jehovah takes note of the trial and of how that trial makes you feel. For example, Jehovah noticed not only the mistreatment of the Israelites in Egypt but also “the pains they [suffered].” (Ex. 3:7) You may wonder, though, how Jehovah is supporting you while you face a frightening trial. So ask him to help you to see his support. (2 Ki. 6:15-17) Then consider: Has a talk or a comment at a congregation meeting strengthened you? Has a publication, a video, or an original song encouraged you? Has someone shared a reassuring thought or scripture with you? We might easily take for granted our loving brotherhood and the spiritual food we receive. Yet, they are extraordinary gifts from Jehovah. (Isa. 65:13; Mark 10:29, 30) They prove that he cares about you. (Isa. 49:14-16) And they prove that he is worthy of your trust. w24.01 4-5 ¶9-10




Wednesday, May 21

Grant to your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness.​—Acts 4:29.



Just before returning to heaven, Jesus reminded his disciples of their assignment to give a witness about him “in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8; Luke 24:46-48) A short time later, the Jewish leaders seized the apostles Peter and John and brought them before the Sanhedrin, demanding that these faithful men stop preaching, even threatening them. (Acts 4:18, 21) Peter and John said: “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves. But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.” (Acts 4:19, 20) When Peter and John were released, the disciples raised their voices to Jehovah in a prayer that focused on his will. Jehovah answered that sincere prayer.​—Acts 4:31. w23.05 5 ¶11-12




Thursday, May 22

This is my Son, the beloved.​—Matt. 17:5.



For untold ages, Jehovah and his beloved Son forged a close bond of deep love and affection. Their relationship is the oldest in the universe. Jehovah clearly expressed his love for Jesus, as we read in today’s text. Jehovah could have simply said, ‘This is the one whom I have approved.’ However, he wanted us to know how much he loves Jesus, so he called him “my Son, the beloved.” Jehovah was proud of who Jesus was and of what he was about to do. (Eph. 1:7) And Jesus had no doubts about his Father’s feelings for him. Jehovah’s love was so real to Jesus that he could feel it deep inside. He repeatedly expressed with confidence that the Father loved him.​—John 3:35; 10:17; 17:24. w24.01 28 ¶8




Friday, May 23

A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth.​—Prov. 22:1.



Imagine this: Someone you care about says something terrible about you. You know that it is a lie; yet, some believe it. Even worse, they begin repeating the lie, and many others believe it too. How would you feel? Most likely, the slander would make you feel bad, would it not? This scenario can help us understand how Jehovah felt when his reputation was tarnished. One of his spirit sons lied about him to the first woman, Eve. She believed the lie. That lie led our first parents to rebel against Jehovah. As a result, sin and death entered the human family. (Gen. 3:1-6; Rom. 5:12) All the problems we see in the world​—the deaths, the wars, the misery—​have come about because of the lies that Satan has spread. Does Jehovah feel pain because of such slander and its results? Without a doubt. Yet, Jehovah is not bitter, or resentful. In fact, he remains “the happy God.”​—1 Tim. 1:11. w24.02 8 ¶1-2




Saturday, May 24

How could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?​—Gen. 39:9.



How can you show a similar resolve to that of Joseph? You can decide now what you will do if a temptation arises. Learn to say no immediately to things that Jehovah hates, even refusing to dwell on them. (Ps. 97:10; 119:165) That way you will not waver when tempted. In your case, you may know that you have found the truth and that you want to serve Jehovah with all your heart but something still holds you back from dedication and baptism. You can take to heart the example of King David. You can beg Jehovah: “Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious thoughts. See whether there is in me any harmful way, and lead me in the way of eternity.” (Ps. 139:23, 24) Jehovah blesses those who are “earnestly seeking him.” Your working toward the goal of dedication and baptism shows him you are doing just that.​—Heb. 11:6. w24.03 6 ¶13-15




Sunday, May 25

He does not need to offer up sacrifices daily.​—Heb. 7:27.



The high priest was authorized to represent the people before God. Israel’s first high priest, Aaron, was appointed by Jehovah when the tabernacle was inaugurated. However, as the apostle Paul explained, “many had to become priests in succession because death prevented them from continuing as such.” (Heb. 7:23-26) And as imperfect men, those high priests had to offer sacrifices for their own sins. Herein lies a sharp contrast between Israel’s high priests and the great High Priest, Jesus Christ. As our High Priest, Jesus Christ is “a minister . . . of the true tent, which Jehovah set up, and not man.” (Heb. 8:1, 2) Paul explained that “because [Jesus] continues alive forever, his priesthood has no successors.” Paul added that Jesus is “undefiled, separated from the sinners” and that unlike the high priests of Israel, “he does not need to offer up sacrifices daily” for his own sins. w23.10 26 ¶8-9




Monday, May 26

The former heaven and the former earth had passed away.​—Rev. 21:1.



“The former heaven” refers to political governments influenced by Satan and his demons. (Matt. 4:8, 9; 1 John 5:19) As used in the Bible, “earth” can refer to the earth’s inhabitants. (Gen. 11:1; Ps. 96:1) Thus, “the former earth” refers to today’s wicked human society. Jehovah will not merely remodel, or fix up, the existing “heaven” and “earth”; rather, he will make a clean sweep by replacing them. He will replace the present heaven and the present earth with “a new heaven and a new earth”​—that is, a new government and a new human society. Jehovah will make the earth and humans like new by bringing them to a state of perfection. As Isaiah foretold, the entire earth will be made into a gardenlike park​—a global Eden. We will also be made new, or experience restoration, on a personal level. The lame, the blind, and the deaf will be healed, and even the dead will be restored to life.​—Isa. 25:8; 35:1-7. w23.11 4 ¶9-10




Tuesday, May 27

Prove yourselves ready.​—Matt. 24:44.



The “great tribulation” will strike suddenly. (Matt. 24:21) Unlike many other disasters, however, the great tribulation will not catch everyone off guard. About 2,000 years ago, Jesus warned his followers to get ready for that day. If we are prepared, it will be easier for us to go through that difficult time and to help others to do the same. (Luke 21:36) We will need endurance to obey Jehovah, trusting that he will protect us. What will we do if our brothers lose some or all of their material things? (Hab. 3:17, 18) We will need compassion to move us to provide them with relief. How will we react if, as a result of the attack by a coalition of nations, we have to live in close quarters with our brothers and sisters for a while? (Ezek. 38:10-12) We will need strong love for them to help us get through that difficult time. w23.07 2 ¶2-3




Wednesday, May 28

Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, making the best use of your time.​—Eph. 5:15, 16.



Married couples can learn from the example of Aquila and Priscilla, a couple appreciated by many early Christians. (Rom. 16:3, 4) They worked, preached, and helped others together. (Acts 18:2, 3, 24-26) In fact, whenever the Bible mentions Aquila and Priscilla, it always mentions them together. How can couples imitate them? Think about the many things that you and your spouse need to do. Could you handle some of these tasks as a couple instead of individually? For example, Aquila and Priscilla preached together. Do you regularly make plans to do the same? Aquila and Priscilla also worked together. You and your spouse may not have the same job, but could you do household chores together? (Eccl. 4:9) When you help each other perform a task, you feel more like a team and you have the opportunity to talk. w23.05 22-23 ¶10-12




Thursday, May 29

When I am afraid, I put my trust in you.​—Ps. 56:3.



Everyone feels afraid at times. For instance, when King Saul was trying to hunt David down, David decided to flee to the Philistine city of Gath. The king of Gath, Achish, soon learned that David was the mighty warrior who was celebrated in song as having struck down “tens of thousands” of Philistines. David “became very much afraid.” (1 Sam. 21:10-12) He worried about what Achish would do to him. How did David conquer his fears? In Psalm 56, David expresses his feelings while he was in Gath. That psalm lays bare David’s fears, but it also reveals how he conquered those fears. When he felt afraid, David trusted in Jehovah. (Ps. 56:1-3, 11) His trust was not misplaced. With Jehovah’s blessing, David devised an unusual but effective strategy: He pretended to be crazy! Achish now viewed David more as an irritant than a threat, so David was able to escape.​—1 Sam. 21:13–22:1. w24.01 2 ¶1-3




Friday, May 30

Those with him who are called and chosen and faithful will do so.​—Rev. 17:14.



Who are the ones mentioned in today’s text? The resurrected anointed ones! So when the last of the anointed on earth are taken to heaven near the end of the great tribulation, one of their first assignments will be to fight. After being raised to heaven, they will serve along with Christ and his holy angels, waging the final war against God’s enemies. Think of it! On earth, some anointed Christians are elderly, even frail. But once resurrected to life in heaven, they will be mighty and immortal spirit creatures, assigned to fight alongside their Warrior-King, Jesus Christ. After the war of Armageddon has been fought, they will share in guiding mankind to perfection. Without a doubt, they will then do their beloved brothers and sisters on earth a lot more good in heaven than they ever could as mere imperfect humans! w24.02 6-7 ¶15-16




Saturday, May 31

Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all.​—Gal. 5:16.



Some who are ready for dedication and baptism still hold back. They may wonder, ‘What if afterward I commit a serious sin and get disfellowshipped?’ If you have that fear, be assured that Jehovah will give you everything you need “to walk worthily of [him] in order to please him fully.” (Col. 1:10) He will also give you the strength to do what is right. He has already proved that he can do that by how he has dealt with many others. (1 Cor. 10:13) That is one reason why relatively few people are expelled from the Christian congregation. Jehovah equips his people to remain faithful. Every imperfect human is tempted to do wrong things. (Jas. 1:14) However, whether you act on temptation is a choice​—your choice. The fact is that ultimately you are the one who is in control of how you will live. Though some people may make claims to the contrary, you can learn to control your impulses. w24.03 5 ¶11-12




