
November
Saturday, November 1

Out of the mouth of children and infants, you have brought forth praise.​—Matt. 21:16.



If you are a parent, help your young ones to prepare comments appropriate to their age. At times, serious matters, such as marital problems or moral issues, are considered during a study, but there will probably be a paragraph or two that a child can comment on. Also, help your children understand why they will not likely be called on every time they raise their hand. Explaining this can prevent them from being disappointed when others are chosen instead of them. (1 Tim. 6:18) All of us can prepare upbuilding comments that honor Jehovah and encourage our fellow Christians. (Prov. 25:11) While we may occasionally offer a brief personal experience, we should refrain from talking too much about ourselves. (Prov. 27:2; 2 Cor. 10:18) Instead, we endeavor to keep the focus on Jehovah, his Word, and his people as a whole.​—Rev. 4:11. w23.04 24-25 ¶17-18




Sunday, November 2

Let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.​—1 Thess. 5:6.



Love is essential to stay awake and keep our senses. (Matt. 22:37-39) Love for God helps us to endure in preaching despite any trouble this might bring on us. (2 Tim. 1:7, 8) Because our love extends to those who do not share our faith, we keep preaching, even witnessing by telephone and by letter. We do not give up hope that one day our neighbors will change and begin to do what is right. (Ezek. 18:27, 28) Our love of neighbor includes fellow Christians. We show such love by “encouraging one another and building one another up.” (1 Thess. 5:11) Like soldiers serving side by side in combat, we encourage one another. We would never knowingly hurt our brothers and sisters or repay injury for injury. (1 Thess. 5:13, 15) We also show our love by respecting the brothers who are presiding over the congregation.​—1 Thess. 5:12. w23.06 10 ¶6; 11 ¶10-11




Monday, November 3

When [Jehovah] says something, will he not do it?​—Num. 23:19.



One way we can strengthen our faith is by meditating on the ransom. The ransom is a guarantee that God’s promises will come true. When we carefully reflect on why the ransom was provided and what it involved, we strengthen our faith that God’s promise of endless life in a better world is sure to be fulfilled. Why can we say that? Well, what did the ransom involve? Jehovah sent his beloved firstborn Son, his closest companion, from heaven to be born as a perfect human. While on earth, Jesus endured all kinds of hardships. Then he suffered and died a painful death. What a high price Jehovah paid! Our loving God would never have allowed his Son to suffer and die just to provide a better but very brief life for us. (John 3:16; 1 Pet. 1:18, 19) Having paid so high a price, Jehovah will see to it that unending life in the new world becomes a reality. w23.04 27 ¶8-9




Tuesday, November 4

Where are your stings, O Death?​—Hos. 13:14.



Does Jehovah have the desire to resurrect the dead? Without question, he does. He inspired a number of Bible writers to record his promise of a future resurrection. (Isa. 26:19; Rev. 20:11-13) And when Jehovah makes a promise, he always fulfills it. (Josh. 23:14) Jehovah is, in fact, eager to restore the dead to life. Consider the words of the patriarch Job. He was sure that even if he died, Jehovah would yearn to see him live again. (Job 14:14, 15, ftn.) Jehovah has the same longing for all his worshippers who have died. He is eager to bring them back to life, healthy and happy. What about the billions who have died without having a chance to learn the truth about Jehovah? Our loving God wants to resurrect them too. (Acts 24:15) He wants them to have the opportunity to become his friends and live forever on earth.​—John 3:16. w23.04 9 ¶5-6




Wednesday, November 5

By God we will gain power.​—Ps. 108:13.



How can you strengthen your hope? If, for example, you have the hope to live forever on earth, read about the Bible’s description of the Paradise and meditate on it. (Isa. 25:8; 32:16-18) Reflect on what life will be like in the new world. Imagine yourself there. If we keep the hope of the new world firmly in mind, our problems will be “momentary and light.” (2 Cor. 4:17) Through the hope Jehovah has given you, he will make you strong. He has already provided what you need to receive strength from him. So when you need help to fulfill an assignment, to endure a trial, or to maintain your joy, approach Jehovah in earnest prayer and seek his guidance through personal study. Accept encouragement from your Christian brothers and sisters. Keep your hope clear and bright. Then you will be “strengthened with all power according to [God’s] glorious might so that you may endure fully with patience and joy.”​—Col. 1:11. w23.10 17 ¶19-20




Thursday, November 6

Give thanks for everything.​—1 Thess. 5:18.



We have many reasons to thank Jehovah in prayer. We can thank him for any good thing that we have; after all, every good gift comes from him. (Jas. 1:17) For example, we can express our appreciation for the beauty of the earth and the marvels of creation. We can also express gratitude for our life, our family, our friends, and our hope. And we want to thank Jehovah for allowing us to enjoy his precious friendship. We may need to make a special effort to think about the reasons that we personally have to be grateful to Jehovah. We live in an unthankful world. People are often focused on what they want rather than on what they can do to show appreciation for what they have. If that attitude were to rub off on us, our prayers could become a list of requests. To prevent that from happening, we need to continue to cultivate and express appreciation for all that Jehovah does for us.​—Luke 6:45. w23.05 4 ¶8-9




Friday, November 7

Keep asking in faith, not doubting at all.​—Jas. 1:6.



As our loving Father, Jehovah does not like to see us in pain. (Isa. 63:9) Still, he does not prevent all our trials, which can be likened to rivers or flames. (Isa. 43:2) However, he does promise to help us “pass through” them. And he will not allow our trials to cause us permanent harm. Jehovah also gives us his powerful holy spirit to help us endure. (Luke 11:13; Phil. 4:13) As a result, we can be confident that we will always have exactly what we need in order to endure and to remain faithful to him. Jehovah expects us to trust in him. (Heb. 11:6) At times, our trials may seem insurmountable. We might even begin to doubt whether Jehovah will help us. But the Bible assures us that by God’s power we can “scale a wall.” (Ps. 18:29) So instead of giving in to our doubts, we should pray in full faith, trusting that Jehovah will answer our prayers.​—Jas. 1:6, 7. w23.11 22 ¶8-9




Saturday, November 8

[Love’s] flames are a blazing fire, the flame of Jah. Surging waters cannot extinguish love, nor can rivers wash it away.​—Song of Sol. 8:6, 7.



What a beautiful description of true love! These words contain a reassuring truth for married couples: You can have unfailing love for each other. Whether a married couple will have unfailing love as long as they live depends on them. To illustrate, a campfire has the potential to burn indefinitely​—but only if it is fed. If left unattended, the fire will eventually go out. Likewise, the love between a husband and wife can remain strong indefinitely​—but only if they nurture their relationship. At times, a couple could feel that their love is cooling off, especially when they are weighed down by financial hardship, health concerns, or the pressures of raising children. So to keep “the flame of Jah” alive, both husband and wife should work to have a strong relationship with Jehovah. w23.05 20-21 ¶1-3




Sunday, November 9

Do not be afraid.​—Dan. 10:19.



To develop courage, what do we need to do? Our parents may urge us to be courageous, but they cannot pass this quality on to us as if it were a family heirloom. Gaining courage is like learning a new skill. One way you can master the skill is by closely watching the instructor’s actions and then copying his example. In a similar way, we learn to be courageous by closely looking at how others show this quality and then copying their example. Like Daniel, we need to know God’s Word well. We must form a close bond with Jehovah by talking to him freely and often. And we need to trust in Jehovah, being convinced that we have his backing. Then when our faith is tested, we will be courageous. Courageous people often gain the respect of others. They may also attract honesthearted people to Jehovah. Certainly, we have good reasons to develop courage. w23.08 2 ¶2; 4 ¶8-9




Monday, November 10

Make sure of all things.​—1 Thess. 5:21.



The Greek word rendered “make sure of” was used in connection with testing precious metals. Thus, we need to test what we hear or what we read to determine whether it is genuine. This will be even more important for us as the great tribulation approaches. Instead of naively accepting what others say, we use our thinking ability to compare what we read or what we hear with what the Bible and Jehovah’s organization say. In doing so, we will not be fooled by any demonic propaganda or trickery. (Prov. 14:15; 1 Tim. 4:1) As a group, God’s servants will survive the great tribulation. Individually, though, we do not know what tomorrow will bring. (Jas. 4:14) Still, whether we live through the great tribulation or die before then, we will be rewarded with everlasting life if we remain faithful. May we all focus on our wonderful hope and keep ready for Jehovah’s day! w23.06 13 ¶15-16




Tuesday, November 11

He has revealed his confidential matter to his servants.​—Amos 3:7.



We do not know how some Bible prophecies will be fulfilled. (Dan. 12:8, 9) But just because we do not fully comprehend how a prophecy will be fulfilled does not mean that it will not come true. Without a doubt, we can trust that Jehovah will reveal to us what we need to know at exactly the right time, just as he did in the past. A proclamation of “peace and security” will be made. (1 Thess. 5:3) Then the world’s political powers will turn on false religion and wipe it out. (Rev. 17:16, 17) They will then attack God’s people. (Ezek. 38:18, 19) These events will lead directly to the final war of Armageddon. (Rev. 16:14, 16) We can be certain that these events will shortly take place. Until then, let us continue to show our appreciation to our loving heavenly Father by paying attention to Bible prophecy and by helping others to do the same. w23.08 13 ¶19-20




Wednesday, November 12

Let us continue loving one another, because love is from God.​—1 John 4:7.



When the apostle Paul was discussing faith, hope, and love, he concluded by saying that “the greatest of these [qualities] is love.” (1 Cor. 13:13) Why could Paul say this? In the future, we will no longer need to have faith in God’s promises about his new world or hope that those promises will be fulfilled because they will already be realized. But we will always need to have love for Jehovah and for people. In fact, our love for them will keep growing forever. Also, love identifies us as true Christians. Jesus told his apostles: “By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.” (John 13:35) Further, having love for one another keeps us united. Paul called love “a perfect bond of union.” (Col. 3:14) The apostle John wrote to fellow believers: “Whoever loves God must also love his brother.” (1 John 4:21) When we show love for one another, we show our love for God. w23.11 8 ¶1, 3




Thursday, November 13

Throw off every weight.​—Heb. 12:1.



The Bible compares our life as Christians to a race. The runners who successfully cross the finish line are rewarded with everlasting life. (2 Tim. 4:7, 8) We need to make every effort to keep on running, especially because the finish line is closer than ever. The apostle Paul identified what will help us to win the race. He directed us to “throw off every weight and . . . run with endurance the race that is set before us.” Did Paul mean that there was no load a Christian should carry? No, that was not his point. Rather, he meant that we need to get rid of every unnecessary weight. This type of weight could hinder us and cause us to tire out. To endure, we must quickly identify and discard any unnecessary weight that could slow us down. At the same time, however, we do not want to cast aside loads that we should carry. Otherwise, we could disqualify ourselves from the race.​—2 Tim. 2:5. w23.08 26 ¶1-2




Friday, November 14

Do not let your adornment be external.​—1 Pet. 3:3.



Reasonableness helps us to respect the views of others. For example, some of our sisters like to wear makeup, whereas others prefer not to. Some Christians enjoy drinking alcohol in moderation, but others decide to abstain from it. All Christians desire good health but choose different methods of health care. If we felt so strongly about our own choices that we tried to promote them in the congregation, we could stumble others and cause divisions. (1 Cor. 8:9; 10:23, 24) For instance, instead of strictly regulating the way we dress, Jehovah has given us principles to follow. We are to dress in a way that is appropriate for ministers of God, showing reasonableness, modesty, and “soundness of mind.” (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Therefore, we do not draw undue attention to ourselves by how we dress. Bible principles will also help elders to avoid setting arbitrary rules about clothing and hairstyles. w23.07 23-24 ¶13-14




Saturday, November 15

Listen intently to me, and eat what is good, and you will find great delight in what is truly rich.​—Isa. 55:2.



Jehovah has laid the basis for us to enjoy a blessed outcome. Those responding to the invitation from the loud and “stupid woman” focus on enjoying “sweet,” secret pleasures. Their outcome is in “the depths of the Grave.” (Prov. 9:13, 17, 18) How different it is for those who accept the invitation from “true wisdom”! (Prov. 9:1) We are learning to love what Jehovah loves and to hate what he hates. (Ps. 97:10) And we find satisfaction in inviting others to benefit from “true wisdom.” It is as if we were to “call out from the heights above the city: ‘Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.’” The benefits for us and for those who respond are not just for the here and now. They are enduring, allowing us to “live” forever as we “walk forward in the way of understanding.”​—Prov. 9:3, 4, 6. w23.06 24 ¶17-18




Sunday, November 16

The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, and the one controlling his temper than one conquering a city.​—Prov. 16:32.



How do you feel when a workmate or a schoolmate asks you about your beliefs? Do you feel nervous? Most of us do. But such a question may offer insight into the other person’s thinking or beliefs, giving us an opportunity to share the good news. At times, though, a person may raise a question in a challenging manner. That should not surprise us. After all, some have been misinformed about our beliefs. (Acts 28:22) Furthermore, we are living in “the last days,” a time when many are “not open to any agreement” and are even “fierce.” (2 Tim. 3:1, 3) You may wonder, ‘How can I be gentle and gracious when someone challenges my Bible-based beliefs?’ What will help you? In a word​—mildness. A mild person does not get easily upset but is able to control himself when faced with frustrations and uncertainties. w23.09 14 ¶1-2




Monday, November 17

You will appoint them as princes in all the earth.​—Ps. 45:16.



At times, we receive counsel that safeguards us from such things as materialism and activities that can put us in danger of breaking God’s laws. Here, too, we are blessed by following the guidance Jehovah provides. (Isa. 48:17, 18; 1 Tim. 6:9, 10) No doubt Jehovah will continue to use human representatives to provide guidance during the great tribulation and on into the Thousand Year Reign. Will we keep following that direction? Much may depend on how we respond to the guidance that Jehovah is providing now. Therefore, let us always follow Jehovah’s guidance, including that which is provided by the men who are appointed to watch over us. (Isa. 32:1, 2; Heb. 13:17) And as we do, we have every reason to trust in our Guide, Jehovah, who leads us away from spiritual danger and toward our destination​—everlasting life in the new world. w24.02 25 ¶17-18




Tuesday, November 18

By undeserved kindness you have been saved.​—Eph. 2:5.



The apostle Paul enjoyed a satisfying life in Jehovah’s service, but he had many challenges to overcome. Paul often traveled long distances, and travel was not easy in those days. On his journeys, Paul was sometimes “in dangers from rivers” and “in dangers from robbers.” He was also occasionally subjected to physical mistreatment from opposers. (2 Cor. 11:23-27) And Paul’s Christian brothers did not always show appreciation for his sincere efforts to help them. (2 Cor. 10:10; Phil. 4:15) What helped Paul to keep going in Jehovah’s service? Paul learned much about Jehovah’s personality from the Scriptures and from his own experiences. Paul became convinced that Jehovah God loved him. (Rom. 8:38, 39; Eph. 2:4, 5) And he came to love Jehovah very much. Paul showed his love for Jehovah “by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.”​—Heb. 6:10. w23.07 9 ¶5-6




Wednesday, November 19

Be in subjection to the superior authorities.​—Rom. 13:1.



Many people acknowledge that we need the secular governments and that we should obey at least some of the laws set by these “superior authorities.” But those same people may hesitate to obey a law that seems unfair or appears to require too much. The Bible acknowledges that human governments cause suffering, are under Satan’s control, and will soon be destroyed. (Ps. 110:5, 6; Eccl. 8:9; Luke 4:5, 6) It also tells us that “whoever opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God.” Our relative subjection to the superior authorities is part of Jehovah’s temporary arrangement to maintain order. Therefore, we must “render to all their dues,” including taxes, respect, and obedience. (Rom. 13:1-7) We may view a law as being inconvenient, unfair, or costly to obey. But we obey Jehovah, and he tells us to obey these authorities as long as they do not ask us to break his commands.​—Acts 5:29. w23.10 8 ¶9-10




Thursday, November 20

Jehovah’s spirit empowered him.​—Judg. 15:14.



When Samson was born, the Philistines were ruling over the nation of Israel and oppressing it. (Judg. 13:1) Their harsh rulership brought great suffering to the Israelites. Jehovah chose Samson to “take the lead in saving Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.” (Judg. 13:5) To fulfill this challenging assignment, Samson would have to rely on Jehovah. On one occasion, a Philistine military force had come to capture Samson at Lehi, evidently in Judah. The men of Judah were afraid, so they decided to hand Samson over to the enemy. Samson’s own people bound him securely with two new ropes and brought him to the Philistines. (Judg. 15:9-13) However, “Jehovah’s spirit empowered” Samson and he freed himself from the ropes. He then “found a fresh jawbone of a male donkey,” picked it up, and used it to strike down 1,000 Philistine men!​—Judg. 15:14-16. w23.09 2 ¶3-4




Friday, November 21

This is according to the eternal purpose that he formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord.​—Eph. 3:11.



Jehovah has progressively revealed his “eternal purpose” in the Bible. One way or another, he always succeeds because he “has made everything work for his purpose.” (Prov. 16:4) And the results of what Jehovah does will endure forever. What is Jehovah’s purpose, and what adjustments has he made in order to accomplish it? God told the first humans what his purpose was for them. They were to “be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection . . . every living creature” on earth. (Gen. 1:28) When Adam and Eve rebelled, causing sin to enter the human family, Jehovah’s purpose was not thwarted. He adjusted the way it would be achieved. Immediately, he determined to set up a Kingdom in heaven that would accomplish his original purpose for mankind and the earth.​—Matt. 25:34. w23.10 20 ¶6-7




Saturday, November 22

If Jehovah had not been my helper, I would soon have perished.​—Ps. 94:17.



Jehovah can help us to persevere. It may be a struggle to carry on, especially if we are coping with a persistent weakness. At times, our weaknesses may seem more challenging than those that the apostle Peter faced. But Jehovah can give us the strength not to give up. (Ps. 94:18, 19) For example, one brother engaged in a homosexual lifestyle for a number of years before learning the truth. He decisively left those immoral practices behind. Still, he at times struggled with wrong desires. What helped him to persevere? He explains: “Jehovah strengthens us.” He adds: “With Jehovah’s spirit . . . , I have learned that it is possible to [continue] in the way of the truth . . . Jehovah has been able to use me, and despite my imperfections he continually strengthens me.” w23.09 23 ¶12




Sunday, November 23

The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah is riches and glory and life.​—Prov. 22:4.



Young brothers, you will not automatically become a mature Christian man. You need to choose good examples to imitate, develop thinking ability, be reliable, acquire practical life skills, and prepare for future roles. You may at times feel overwhelmed when you contemplate the work ahead. But you can succeed. Remember that Jehovah is eager to help you. (Isa. 41:10, 13) Of course, your brothers and sisters in the congregation will help you too. When you reach your full potential as a mature Christian man, your life will be rich and satisfying. We love you, young brothers! May Jehovah richly bless you as you work now to become mature Christian men. w23.12 29 ¶19-20




Monday, November 24

Overlook an offense.​—Prov. 19:11.



Imagine that you are at a gathering with a group of brothers and sisters. You are having a pleasant time and you take a group picture. In fact, you take two more pictures in case the first picture does not turn out well. Now you have three pictures. But in one of them, you notice that a brother is frowning. So you delete it because you have two other pictures in which everyone in the group, including that brother, is smiling. We usually have good memories of times spent with our brothers and sisters. But suppose that on one of those occasions, a brother or a sister says or does something that is unkind. What should we do with that memory? Why not try to delete it just as you would delete one of those pictures? (Eph. 4:32) We can afford to because we have many good memories of pleasant association with that individual. Those are the kinds of memories we want to keep and treasure. w23.11 12-13 ¶16-17




Tuesday, November 25

Women should adorn themselves in appropriate dress, . . . in the way that is proper for women professing devotion to God.​—1 Tim. 2:9, 10.



The Greek words used here suggest that a Christian woman’s dress would be respectable and would show consideration for the feelings or opinions of others. How we admire our mature Christian sisters for dressing modestly! Discernment is another quality that all mature Christian sisters demonstrate. What is discernment? It is good judgment​—the ability to tell right from wrong and then to choose the wise course. Consider the example of Abigail. Her husband made a bad decision that was going to have a serious impact on his entire household. Abigail took immediate action. Her good judgment saved lives. (1 Sam. 25:14-23, 32-35) Discernment also helps us to know when to speak and when to keep silent. And it helps us to maintain balance when showing personal interest in others.​—1 Thess. 4:11. w23.12 20 ¶8-9




Wednesday, November 26

Let us rejoice, based on hope of the glory of God.​—Rom. 5:2.



The apostle Paul wrote those words to the congregation in Rome. The brothers and sisters there had learned about Jehovah and Jesus, had exercised faith, and had become Christians. God thus “declared [them] righteous as a result of faith,” and he anointed them with holy spirit. (Rom. 5:1) Yes, they gained a valid, wonderful hope. Paul later wrote to anointed Christians in Ephesus about the hope to which they were called. That hope included receiving “an inheritance for the holy ones.” (Eph. 1:18) And Paul also indicated to the Colossians where their hope would be realized. He called it “the hope that is being reserved for you in the heavens.” (Col. 1:4, 5) The hope of anointed Christians, then, is that they be resurrected to everlasting life in heaven, where they will reign with Christ.​—1 Thess. 4:13-17; Rev. 20:6. w23.12 9 ¶4-5




Thursday, November 27

The peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.​—Phil. 4:7.



The original word for “guard” was a military expression and was used to refer to soldiers who guarded a city and kept it safe from attack. The inhabitants of a guarded city slept in peace, knowing that troops were posted at the gates. Similarly, when the peace of God guards our hearts and minds, we feel calm, knowing that we are safe. (Ps. 4:8) As in the case of Hannah, even if our situation does not change immediately, we can still feel a measure of peace. (1 Sam. 1:16-18) And when we feel calm, we often find it easier to think clearly and make wise decisions. What can we do? When you are troubled, summon the guard, so to speak. How? Pray until you feel the peace of God. (Luke 11:9; 1 Thess. 5:17) If you are facing a crisis, persevere in prayer, and you will experience Jehovah’s peace as it guards your heart and mind.​—Rom. 12:12. w24.01 21 ¶5-6




Friday, November 28

Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.​—Matt. 6:9.



To sanctify his Father’s name, Jesus endured every torment, insult, and slander heaped on him. He knew that he had obeyed his Father in all things; he had nothing to be ashamed of. (Heb. 12:2) He also knew that Satan was directly attacking him in those dark hours. (Luke 22:2-4; 23:33, 34) Satan surely hoped to break Jesus’ integrity; yet, Satan failed miserably! Jesus proved conclusively that Satan is a vicious liar and that Jehovah does have loyal servants, who keep their integrity even under the most severe tests! Do you want to please your reigning King? Keep praising Jehovah’s name, helping others to know our God as he truly is. When you do, you are following in Jesus’ steps. (1 Pet. 2:21) Like Jesus, you are making Jehovah rejoice and are proving His adversary, Satan, to be a debased liar! w24.02 11-12 ¶11-13




Saturday, November 29

With what will I repay Jehovah for all the good he has done for me?​—Ps. 116:12.



During the past five years, more than a million people have been baptized as Jehovah’s Witnesses. When you dedicate yourself to Jehovah, you choose to become a disciple of Jesus Christ and make the doing of God’s will the most important thing in your life. What will Christian dedication require of you? Jesus said: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself.” (Matt. 16:24) The Greek phrase translated “let him disown himself” can also be rendered “he must say no to himself.” As a dedicated servant of Jehovah, you will need to say no to anything that conflicts with his will. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) That includes saying no to “the works of the flesh,” such as sexual immorality. (Gal. 5:19-21; 1 Cor. 6:18) Will such restrictions make your life difficult? Not if you love Jehovah and are convinced that his laws are for your own good.​—Ps. 119:97; Isa. 48:17, 18. w24.03 2 ¶1; 3 ¶4




Sunday, November 30

I have approved you.​—Luke 3:22.



Jehovah gives his holy spirit to those whom he approves of. (Matt. 12:18) We can ask ourselves, ‘Have I been able to display some aspect of the fruitage of God’s spirit in my life?’ Do you notice that you are more patient with others than you were before you came to know Jehovah? Actually, the more you learn to display the fruitage of God’s spirit, the more evident it will be to you that you have Jehovah’s approval! Jehovah applies the value of the ransom to those whom he approves of. (1 Tim. 2:5, 6) But what if our heart resists the idea that Jehovah approves of us, even though we have faith in the ransom and are baptized? Remember, we cannot always trust our own feelings but we can trust Jehovah. He considers those who have faith in the ransom to be righteous in his eyes and promises to bless them.​—Ps. 5:12; Rom. 3:26. w24.03 30 ¶15; 31 ¶17




