
October
Wednesday, October 1

The wisdom from above is . . . ready to obey.​—Jas. 3:17.



Do you ever struggle to be obedient? King David did, so he prayed to God: “Stir within me a willingness to obey you.” (Ps. 51:12) David loved Jehovah. Still, David at times struggled to be obedient, and so do we. Why? First, we have inherited a tendency to be disobedient. Second, Satan constantly tries to incite us to rebel, as he did. (2 Cor. 11:3) Third, we are surrounded by this world’s rebellious attitude, “the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.” (Eph. 2:2) We must work hard not only to fight our tendency to sin but also to resist the pressure that the Devil and this world put on us to disobey. We must put forth effort to obey Jehovah and those whom he has appointed to a position of authority. w23.10 6 ¶1




Thursday, October 2

You have saved the fine wine until now.​—John 2:10.



What can we learn from Jesus’ miracle of turning water into wine? We learn a lesson in humility. Jesus did not boast about the miracle; in fact, he never boasted about his accomplishments. On the contrary, he humbly and repeatedly gave all glory and credit to his Father. (John 5:19, 30; 8:28) If we imitate Jesus by keeping a humble view of ourselves, we will not boast about our achievements. Let us boast, not about ourselves, but about the wonderful God we are privileged to serve. (Jer. 9:23, 24) Let us give him due credit. After all, what good could we possibly accomplish without Jehovah’s help? (1 Cor. 1:26-31) When we are humble, we do not have to take credit for the good things we do for others. We are content with knowing that Jehovah sees and values what we do. (Compare Matthew 6:2-4; Heb. 13:16) Surely, we please Jehovah when we imitate Jesus in showing humility.​—1 Pet. 5:6. w23.04 4 ¶9; 5 ¶11-12




Friday, October 3

Look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.​—Phil. 2:4.



Under inspiration, the apostle Paul encouraged Christians to look out for the interests of others. How can we apply that counsel during meetings? By remembering that others, like us, want to participate. Think about it this way. When you are having a conversation with your friends, would you talk so much that they have little opportunity to speak? Of course not! You want them to share in the conversation. Similarly, at meetings, we want to allow as many as possible to comment. In fact, one of the best ways to encourage our brothers and sisters is by giving them a chance to express their faith. (1 Cor. 10:24) So keep our comments brief, thus allowing time for more to participate. Even when you give a short comment, avoid talking about too many points. If you cover everything in the paragraph, there will be little left for others to say. w23.04 22-23 ¶11-13




Saturday, October 4

I do all things for the sake of the good news, in order to share it with others.​—1 Cor. 9:23.



We must remember how important it is to continue helping others, especially through our Christian ministry. In our ministry, we need to be flexible. We meet people who have different beliefs and attitudes and who come from a variety of backgrounds. The apostle Paul was adaptable, and we can learn from his example. Jesus appointed Paul as “an apostle to the nations.” (Rom. 11:13) In that role, Paul preached to Jews, Greeks, intellectuals, humble peasants, dignitaries, and kings. In order to reach the hearts of such a diverse audience, Paul became “all things to people of all sorts.” (1 Cor. 9:19-22) He paid attention to the culture, background, and beliefs of his audience and adapted his approach accordingly. We too can be more effective in our ministry if we are resourceful and adjust our approach to fit the needs of our listeners. w23.07 23 ¶11-12




Sunday, October 5

A slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all.​—2 Tim. 2:24.



Mildness is a strength, not a weakness. It takes inner strength to keep calm when facing a trying situation. Mildness is one aspect of “the fruitage of the spirit.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) A form of the Greek word rendered “mildness” was at times used to describe a wild horse that had been tamed. Picture a wild horse that becomes gentle. That is, gentle, yet strong. As humans, how can we develop mildness and at the same time be strong? Not by sheer willpower. A key is praying for God’s spirit, asking him to help us cultivate this beautiful quality. Experience shows that this can be done. Many Witnesses have responded mildly when confronted by opposers, leaving a favorable impression on observers.​—2 Tim. 2:24, 25. w23.09 15 ¶3




Monday, October 6

I prayed, and Jehovah granted my petition that I asked of him.​—1 Sam. 1:27.



In an awe-inspiring vision, the apostle John saw 24 elders in the heavens worshipping Jehovah. They praised God, acknowledging that he is worthy to receive “the glory and the honor and the power.” (Rev. 4:10, 11) Faithful angels also have a multitude of reasons to praise and honor Jehovah. They are in heaven with him and have come to know him well. They see his qualities revealed in what he does. As they observe Jehovah in action, they are moved to praise him. (Job 38:4-7) We too want to include praise to Jehovah in our prayers, expressing what we love and appreciate about him. As you read and study the Bible, try to identify the qualities manifested by Jehovah that especially appeal to you. (Job 37:23; Rom. 11:33) Then tell Jehovah how you feel about those qualities. We can also praise Jehovah for acting in our behalf and in behalf of our entire spiritual family.​—1 Sam. 2:1, 2. w23.05 3-4 ¶6-7




Tuesday, October 7

Walk worthily of Jehovah.​—Col. 1:10.



In 1919, Babylon the Great lost its hold over God’s people. That year, a “faithful and discreet slave” came on the scene, just in time to welcome honesthearted ones to the newly opened “Way of Holiness.” (Matt. 24:45-47; Isa. 35:8) Thanks in part to the faithful “road workers” of the past, those setting foot on that highway could increase their knowledge of Jehovah’s purposes. (Prov. 4:18) They could also bring their life into harmony with Jehovah’s requirements. Jehovah has not expected his people to make the necessary changes all at once. Rather, he has refined his people over time. How happy we will all be when we are able to please our God in everything we do! Every road needs regular maintenance. Since 1919, roadwork on “the Way of Holiness” has continued, with a view to making it possible for more people to leave Babylon the Great. w23.05 17 ¶15; 19 ¶16




Wednesday, October 8

I will never leave you.​—Heb. 13:5.



The Governing Body has personally been training helpers to the various committees of the Governing Body. These helpers are right now faithfully carrying a heavy load of responsibility. They are well-prepared to continue the work of caring for Christ’s sheep. When the last of the anointed are taken to heaven near the end of the great tribulation, pure worship will keep right on going here on earth. Thanks to the leadership of Jesus Christ, God’s worshippers will not miss a beat. True, at that time, we will be under attack by Gog of Magog, a hostile coalition of nations. (Ezek. 38:18-20) But that brief attack will fail; it will not stop God’s people from worshipping Jehovah. He will surely rescue them! In a vision, the apostle John saw the “great crowd” of Christ’s other sheep. John was told that this “great crowd” comes “out of the great tribulation.” (Rev. 7:9, 14) Yes, they will be kept safe! w24.02 5-6 ¶13-14




Thursday, October 9

Do not put out the fire of the spirit.​—1 Thess. 5:19.



What can we do to receive holy spirit? We can pray for it, study God’s inspired Word, and associate with his spirit-directed organization. Doing so will help us to cultivate “the fruitage of the spirit.” (Gal. 5:22, 23) God grants his spirit only to those who maintain clean thinking and clean conduct. He would not continue to give us his spirit if we were to harbor unclean thoughts and act on them. (1 Thess. 4:7, 8) To keep receiving holy spirit, we must also “not treat prophecies with contempt.” (1 Thess. 5:20) “Prophecies” here refer to messages produced by God’s spirit, including those concerning Jehovah’s day and the urgency of our times. We do not push that day off in our mind, thinking that Armageddon will not happen in our lifetime. Instead, we keep it close in mind by maintaining right conduct and keeping busy with “deeds of godly devotion.”​—2 Pet. 3:11, 12. w23.06 12 ¶13-14




Friday, October 10

The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom.​—Prov. 9:10.



What should we as Christians do if a pornographic image shows up on our electronic device? We should immediately reject the image. We can be helped to take such action if we recall that our most treasured possession is our relationship with Jehovah. Actually, images that are not generally considered pornographic might be sexually arousing. Why avoid them? Because we do not want to take even a small step toward committing adultery in our heart. (Matt. 5:28, 29) An elder in Thailand named David says: “I ask myself: ‘Even though the images may not be pornographic, will Jehovah be pleased if I keep looking at them?’ This kind of reasoning helps me to act wisely.” We are helped to act wisely by cultivating a healthy fear of displeasing Jehovah. Godly fear is “the beginning,” or foundation, “of wisdom.” w23.06 23 ¶12-13




Saturday, October 11

Go, my people, enter your inner rooms.​—Isa. 26:20.



The “inner rooms” may refer to our congregations. During the great tribulation, we will find the protection that Jehovah promises as we remain united with fellow believers. Therefore, we must work hard now not just to tolerate our brothers and sisters but also to love them. Our survival may depend on it! “The great day of Jehovah” will bring distress on humankind. (Zeph. 1:14, 15) Jehovah’s people will face hardships too. But if we prepare now, we will be able to stay calm and help others. We will endure any challenges that come our way. When our fellow believers suffer, we will do our best to give them relief by showing compassion and providing for their needs. And we will stick close to our brothers and sisters, whom we have already grown to love. Jehovah will then reward us with eternal life in a world where all disasters and tribulations will be forgotten.​—Isa. 65:17. w23.07 7 ¶16-17




Sunday, October 12

[Jehovah] will make you firm, he will make you strong, he will firmly ground you.​—1 Pet. 5:10.



God’s Word often describes faithful men as powerful. But even the strongest among them did not always feel strong. For example, on some occasions King David felt that he was “as strong as a mountain,” but on other occasions he “became terrified.” (Ps. 30:7) Although Samson was exceptionally powerful when he was moved by God’s spirit, he recognized that without the power that comes from God, he would “grow weak and become like all other men.” (Judg. 14:5, 6; 16:17) These faithful men were strong only because Jehovah gave them power. The apostle Paul acknowledged that he too needed power from Jehovah. (2 Cor. 12:9, 10) He contended with health problems. (Gal. 4:13, 14) At times, he also struggled to do the right thing. (Rom. 7:18, 19) And sometimes he felt anxious and uncertain. (2 Cor. 1:8, 9) Yet, when Paul was weak, he became powerful. How? Jehovah gave Paul the power he lacked. He made Paul strong. w23.10 12 ¶1-2




Monday, October 13

Jehovah sees into the heart.​—1 Sam. 16:7.



If we at times struggle with feelings of worthlessness, we can remember that in his own way, Jehovah drew us to him. (John 6:44) He sees the good in us that we may not see in ourselves, and he knows our heart. (2 Chron. 6:30) So we can trust him when he says that we are precious. (1 John 3:19, 20) Before learning the truth, some of us did things that may still fill us with guilt. (1 Pet. 4:3) Even faithful Christians battle against sinful inclinations. Does your heart condemn you? If so, take comfort in knowing that faithful servants of Jehovah have struggled with similar feelings. For example, the apostle Paul felt miserable when reflecting on his imperfections. (Rom. 7:24) Of course, Paul had repented of his sins and got baptized. Still, he referred to himself as “the least of the apostles” and the “foremost” sinner.​—1 Cor. 15:9; 1 Tim. 1:15. w24.03 27 ¶5-6




Tuesday, October 14

They abandoned the house of Jehovah.​—2 Chron. 24:18.



One lesson we can learn from King Jehoash’s bad decision is that we need to choose friends who will be a good influence on us​—friends who love Jehovah and who want to make him happy. We do not need to limit our association to those in our own age group. Remember, Jehoash was much younger than his friend Jehoiada. Regarding your choice of friends, ask yourself: ‘Do they help me to strengthen my faith in Jehovah? Are they encouraging me to live by God’s standards? Do they talk about Jehovah and his valuable truths? Do they show respect for God’s standards? Do they just tell me what I might want to hear, or do they have the courage to correct me if I stray?’ (Prov. 27:5, 6, 17) Frankly, if your friends do not love Jehovah, you do not need them. But if you have friends who love Jehovah, hang on to them​—they will be good for you!​—Prov. 13:20. w23.09 9-10 ¶6-7




Wednesday, October 15

I am the Alpha and the Omega.​—Rev. 1:8.



The letter alpha begins the Greek alphabet, and the letter omega concludes it. By using the description “the Alpha and the Omega,” Jehovah indicates that when he starts something, he brings it to its successful conclusion. After Jehovah created Adam and Eve, He said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it.” (Gen. 1:28) At that moment, Jehovah, in effect, said “Alpha.” He clearly stated his purpose: The time would come when perfect, obedient descendants of Adam and Eve would fill the earth and transform it into a paradise. At that future time, Jehovah will, in a sense, say “Omega.” After completing the creation of “the heavens and the earth and everything in them,” Jehovah gave a guarantee. He guaranteed that he would without fail carry out his purpose for mankind and for the earth. It would be fully accomplished at the end of that seventh day.​—Gen. 2:1-3. w23.11 5 ¶13-14




Thursday, October 16

Clear up the way of Jehovah! Make a straight highway through the desert for our God.​—Isa. 40:3.



The difficult literal journey from Babylon to Israel could take about four months, but Jehovah promised that any obstacles that seemed to prevent their return would be cleared away. In the minds of faithful Jews, the benefits of returning to Israel far outweighed any sacrifices they would make. The greatest blessing involved their worship. There was no temple of Jehovah in Babylon. There was no altar where the Israelites could offer up the sacrifices required by the Mosaic Law, and there was no organized priesthood to offer those sacrifices. In addition, Jehovah’s people were greatly outnumbered by pagan men and women, who had no regard for Jehovah or his standards. So God-fearing Jews​—thousands of them—​were looking forward to returning to their homeland where they could restore pure worship. w23.05 14-15 ¶3-4




Friday, October 17

Go on walking as children of light.​—Eph. 5:8.



We need the help of God’s holy spirit so that we can keep conducting ourselves “as children of light.” Why? Because it is a definite challenge to remain clean in this immoral world. (1 Thess. 4:3-5, 7, 8) Holy spirit can help us to combat the thinking of the world, including its philosophies and viewpoints that conflict with God’s thinking. Holy spirit can also help us to produce “every sort of goodness and righteousness.” (Eph. 5:9) One way we can receive holy spirit is by praying for it. Jesus said that Jehovah will “give holy spirit to those asking him.” (Luke 11:13) And when we praise Jehovah together at Christian meetings, we also receive holy spirit. (Eph. 5:19, 20) The wholesome influence of God’s holy spirit will help us to live in a way that pleases God. w24.03 23-24 ¶13-15




Saturday, October 18

Keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.​—Luke 11:9.



Do you need more patience? If so, pray for it. Patience is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit. (Gal. 5:22, 23) So we can pray for holy spirit and ask Jehovah to help us cultivate its fruitage. If we face a situation that tests our patience, we “keep on asking” for holy spirit to help us be patient. (Luke 11:13) We can also ask Jehovah to help us see matters from his point of view. Then after praying, we need to do our best to be patient each day. The more we pray for patience and strive to be patient, the more this quality will take root in our heart and become part of our personality. It also helps to meditate on Bible examples. The Bible contains many examples of people who were patient. By meditating on those accounts, we can learn ways to demonstrate patience. w23.08 22 ¶10-11




Sunday, October 19

Let down your nets for a catch.​—Luke 5:4.



Jesus assured the apostle Peter of Jehovah’s support. The resurrected Jesus provided Peter and his fellow apostles with another miraculous catch of fish. (John 21:4-6) This miracle no doubt reassured Peter that Jehovah could easily supply the material things he needed. Perhaps the apostle then recalled Jesus’ words that Jehovah would provide for those who keep “seeking first the Kingdom.” (Matt. 6:33) In line with that, Peter made the ministry, not the fishing business, his priority. He gave a bold witness on the day of Pentecost 33 C.E., helping thousands to accept the good news. (Acts 2:14, 37-41) He thereafter helped the Samaritans and the Gentiles to accept Christ. (Acts 8:14-17; 10:44-48) Jehovah certainly used Peter in a mighty way to bring people of all sorts into the congregation. w23.09 20 ¶1; 23 ¶11




Monday, October 20

If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered.​—Dan. 2:5.



About two years after the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon had a disturbing dream about an immense image. He threatened to kill all his wise men, including Daniel, if they could not tell him what he had dreamed and also give the interpretation. (Dan. 2:3-5) Daniel had to act quickly; otherwise, lives would be lost. He “went in and asked the king to grant him time to tell the interpretation to the king.” (Dan. 2:16) That took courage and faith. There is no record that Daniel had ever interpreted dreams before. He asked his companions “to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this secret.” (Dan. 2:18) Jehovah answered those prayers. With God’s help, Daniel interpreted Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. Daniel’s life and the lives of his companions were spared. w23.08 3 ¶4




Tuesday, October 21

The one who has endured to the end will be saved.​—Matt. 24:13.



Consider the benefits of being patient. When we are patient, we are happier and calmer. Thus, patience can improve our mental and physical health. When we are patient with others, we enjoy better relationships with them. Our congregation becomes more united. If someone provokes us, our being slow to anger can prevent the situation from getting worse. (Ps. 37:8, ftn.; Prov. 14:29) But most of all, we imitate our heavenly Father and draw even closer to him. What an appealing and beneficial quality patience is! While we may not always find it easy to be patient, with Jehovah’s help, we can continue to cultivate this quality. And as we patiently wait for the new world, we can be confident that “the eye of Jehovah watches over those fearing him, those waiting for his loyal love.” (Ps. 33:18) May we all be determined to continue clothing ourselves with patience. w23.08 22 ¶7; 25 ¶16-17




Wednesday, October 22

Faith by itself, without works, is dead.​—Jas. 2:17.



James pointed out that a man might claim to have faith, but where are his corresponding works? (Jas. 2:1-5, 9) James also mentioned someone who saw ‘a brother or a sister lacking clothing or food’ but did not provide practical help. Even if that one claimed to have faith, it was not backed up by actions; therefore, it was useless. (Jas. 2:14-16) James referred to Rahab as a positive example of faith in action. (Jas. 2:25, 26) She had heard about Jehovah and recognized that he was supporting the Israelites. (Josh. 2:9-11) She showed her faith by her actions​—she protected two Israelite spies when their lives were in danger. As a result, this imperfect, non-Israelite woman was declared righteous, just as Abraham had been. The example she set emphasizes the importance of having faith backed up by works. w23.12 5-6 ¶12-13




Thursday, October 23

May you be rooted and established on the foundation.​—Eph. 3:17.



As Christians, we are not content with having only a superficial understanding of the Bible. With the help of God’s holy spirit, we are eager to learn “even the deep things of God.” (1 Cor. 2:9, 10) Why not start a personal study project that will draw you closer to Jehovah? For example, you could explore how he demonstrated his love for his ancient servants and how that proves that he loves you too. You might examine Jehovah’s arrangement for worship in Israel and how that compares with the Christian arrangement today. Or perhaps you could make an in-depth study of the prophecies that Jesus fulfilled during his life and ministry on earth. You can find a lot of joy in studying such subjects with the help of the Watch Tower Publications Index or the Research Guide for Jehovah’s Witnesses. Doing deep Bible study can strengthen your faith and help you “find the knowledge of God.”​—Prov. 2:4, 5. w23.10 18-19 ¶3-5




Friday, October 24

Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.​—1 Pet. 4:8.



The word the apostle Peter used for “intense” literally means “stretched out.” The second part of the verse describes the effect that intense love can have. It covers the sins of our brothers. We could picture it this way: We grasp our love with both hands, as if it were an extendable piece of fabric, and stretch it out more and more until it covers, not one, not two, but “a multitude of sins.” To cover is a descriptive way of saying to forgive. Just as a piece of fabric can cover a stain, love can cover the weaknesses and imperfections of others. Our love for others should be strong enough that we can forgive the imperfections of our fellow believers​—even if that requires considerable effort at times. (Col. 3:13) When we succeed in forgiving others, we show that our love is strong and that we want to please Jehovah. w23.11 11-12 ¶13-15




Saturday, October 25

Shaphan began to read from it before the king.​—2 Chron. 34:18.



As an adult, King Josiah began to have the temple renovated. During that work, “the book of Jehovah’s Law given through Moses” was found. On hearing it read, the king was moved to take action by complying with what it said. (2 Chron. 34:14, 19-21) Would you like to read the Bible regularly? If you are trying, how is it going? Do you keep track of verses that may help you personally? When Josiah was about 39 years old, he made a mistake that cost him his life. He trusted in himself instead of asking Jehovah for guidance. (2 Chron. 35:20-25) There is a lesson here. No matter how old we are or how long we have been studying the Bible, we must keep searching for Jehovah. That involves regularly praying for his guidance, studying his Word, and benefiting from the advice of mature Christians. We will then be less likely to make big mistakes and more likely to be happy.​—Jas. 1:25. w23.09 12 ¶15-16




Sunday, October 26

God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.​—Jas. 4:6.



The Bible mentions many remarkable women who loved Jehovah and served him. They were “moderate in habits” and “faithful in all things.” (1 Tim. 3:11) In addition, sisters can find in their own congregation examples of mature Christian women who are worthy of imitation. Young sisters, why not identify a few mature Christian women you know whose example you can imitate? Note their appealing qualities; then consider how you can manifest them. An important aspect of Christian maturity is humility. If a woman is humble, she will enjoy a good relationship with Jehovah and with others. For example, a woman who loves Jehovah humbly chooses to support the principle of headship that her heavenly Father established. (1 Cor. 11:3) That principle has specific applications in the congregation and in the family arrangement. w23.12 18-19 ¶3-5




Monday, October 27

Husbands should love their wives as their own bodies.​—Eph. 5:28.



Jehovah expects a husband to love his wife and to care for her physical, emotional, and spiritual needs. Developing thinking ability, having respect for women, and being reliable, will help you as a marriage mate. After you have married, you may become a father. What can you learn from Jehovah about being a good father? (Eph. 6:4) Jehovah openly told his Son, Jesus, that he loved him and approved of him. (Matt. 3:17) If you become a father, make sure that you regularly assure your children that you love them. Generously commend them for the good things that they do. Fathers who imitate Jehovah’s example help their children to develop into mature Christian men and women. You can prepare now for this role by lovingly caring for others in your family and in the congregation and by learning to express your love and appreciation for them.​—John 15:9. w23.12 28-29 ¶17-18




Tuesday, October 28

[Jehovah] is the stability of your times.​—Isa. 33:6.



As faithful servants of Jehovah, we face difficulties and infirmities that are common to all mankind. We may also have to endure opposition or persecution from those who hate God’s people. Though Jehovah does not shield us from such hardships, he does promise to help us. (Isa. 41:10) With his assistance, we can maintain our joy, make good decisions, and stay loyal to him even through the most difficult situations. Jehovah promises to give us what the Bible calls “the peace of God.” (Phil. 4:6, 7) This peace refers to the calmness and tranquility of mind and heart that result from our precious relationship with him. This peace “surpasses all understanding”; it is more wonderful than we can imagine. Have you ever felt surprisingly calm after praying fervently to Jehovah? That feeling is “the peace of God.” w24.01 20 ¶2; 21 ¶4




Wednesday, October 29

Let me praise Jehovah; let everything within me praise his holy name.​—Ps. 103:1.



Love for God moves faithful people to praise his name wholeheartedly. King David understood that to praise Jehovah’s name is to praise Jehovah himself. Jehovah’s name involves his reputation, so it brings to mind all his beautiful qualities and his marvelous deeds. David wanted to treat his Father’s name as holy and to praise it. He wanted to do so with “everything within” him​—that is, wholeheartedly. Similarly, the Levites took the lead in praising Jehovah. They humbly admitted that their words could never fully express the praise that Jehovah’s sacred name deserves. (Neh. 9:5) Without a doubt, such humble, heartfelt praise brought joy to Jehovah’s heart. w24.02 9 ¶6




Thursday, October 30

To the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.​—Phil. 3:16.



Jehovah will not consider you a failure for not achieving a goal that was out of your reach. (2 Cor. 8:12) View the setback as a learning experience. Keep in mind what you have already achieved. The Bible says that “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work.” (Heb. 6:10) So neither should you forget. Reflect on what you have already accomplished​—be it developing a friendship with Jehovah, speaking to others about him, or getting baptized. Just as you have progressed and reached spiritual goals in the past, you can continue to progress toward your current goal. With Jehovah’s help, you can reach your goal. As you continue working toward your spiritual goal, do not forget to enjoy seeing how Jehovah helps and blesses you along the way. (2 Cor. 4:7) If you do not give up, you will receive even greater blessings.​—Gal. 6:9. w23.05 31 ¶16-18




Friday, October 31

The Father himself has affection for you, because you have had affection for me and have believed that I came as God’s representative.​—John 16:27.



Jehovah loves to express warm approval of those for whom he has affection. The Scriptures report two occasions when He told Jesus that he was His beloved, approved Son. (Matt. 3:17; 17:5) Would you like to hear Jehovah reassure you of his approval? Jehovah does not speak to us audibly, but he speaks to us through the pages of his Word. We can “hear” Jehovah’s voice of approval when we read Jesus’ words in the Gospels. Jesus perfectly reflected his Father’s personality. So when we read that Jesus expressed his approval of his imperfect but faithful followers, we can picture Jehovah saying those words to us. (John 15:9, 15) If trials occur, they do not mean that we have lost God’s approval. Rather, they provide us with opportunities to prove the depth of our love for God and our trust in him.​—Jas. 1:12. w24.03 28 ¶10-11




