
September
Monday, September 1

A daybreak will visit us from on high.​—Luke 1:78.



God has given Jesus the power to solve all mankind’s problems. By means of his miracles, Jesus demonstrated his power to conquer obstacles that we could never overcome on our own. For example, he has the power to free us from the root cause of mankind’s problems​—inherited sin and its effects, sickness and death. (Matt. 9:1-6; Rom. 5:12, 18, 19) His miraculous works proved that he can cure “every sort of” sickness and even resurrect the dead. (Matt. 4:23; John 11:43, 44) Also, he has the power to control violent windstorms and defeat wicked spirits. (Mark 4:37-39; Luke 8:2) How reassuring it is to know that Jehovah has placed such power in the hands of his Son! We can be fully confident that the future blessings under God’s Kingdom will come true. The miracles Jesus performed as a man on earth teach us what he will do on a much greater scale as the heavenly King of God’s Kingdom. w23.04 3 ¶5-7




Tuesday, September 2

The spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.​—1 Cor. 2:10.



If you are in a large congregation and feel that your hand is frequently overlooked, you might be tempted to give up. But do not stop trying to comment. Prepare several comments for each meeting. Then if you are not chosen to comment early in the study, you will still have opportunities to comment as the meeting progresses. When preparing for the Watchtower Study, think about how each paragraph ties in to the theme of the article. If you do, you will likely have something to offer throughout the lesson. Additionally, you might prepare to comment on paragraphs that discuss deeper truths that are more difficult to explain. Why? Because there may be fewer volunteers during that part of the lesson. What if you find that after several meetings you still have not had an opportunity to comment? Tell the conductor before the meeting which question you would like to answer. w23.04 21-22 ¶9-10




Wednesday, September 3

Joseph . . . did as the angel of Jehovah had directed him, and he took his wife home.​—Matt. 1:24.



Joseph readily applied Jehovah’s direction, and that made him a better husband. On at least three occasions, he received instructions from God regarding his family. Each time, he obeyed promptly, even when it meant making big changes. (Matt. 1:20; 2:13-15, 19-21) By following God’s direction, Joseph protected Mary, supported her, and provided for her. Imagine how Joseph’s actions must have deepened Mary’s love and respect for him! Husbands, you can imitate Joseph by seeking Bible-based advice on caring for your family. When you apply this advice, even if it means making changes, you show love for your wife and you strengthen your marriage. A sister in Vanuatu who has been married for over 20 years says: “When my husband seeks and applies Jehovah’s direction, I respect him more. I feel secure, and I have confidence in his decisions.” w23.05 21 ¶5




Thursday, September 4

A highway will be there, yes, a way called the Way of Holiness.​—Isa. 35:8.



The Jews returning from Babylon were to become “a holy people” to their God. (Deut. 7:6) That did not mean, though, that they did not need to make changes in order to please Jehovah. Most of the Jews born in Babylon had apparently become accustomed to some of the thinking and standards of the Babylonians. Decades after the first Jews returned to Israel, Governor Nehemiah was astonished to find out that children born in Israel had not even learned the language of the Jews. (Deut. 6:6, 7; Neh. 13:23, 24) How could those young ones learn to love and worship Jehovah if they could not understand Hebrew​—the main language in which God’s Word was written? (Ezra 10:3, 44) So those Jews had significant changes to make, but it would be much easier for them to make those changes in Israel, where pure worship was gradually being restored.​—Neh. 8:8, 9. w23.05 15 ¶6-7




Friday, September 5

Jehovah supports all who are falling and raises up all who are bowed down.​—Ps. 145:14.



Unfortunately, no matter how motivated or disciplined we are, we may still have setbacks. For example, “unexpected events” may rob us of the time we need to work on our goal. (Eccl. 9:11) We may face a difficulty that leaves us feeling discouraged and with little strength. (Prov. 24:10) Our imperfect flesh may cause us to act in a way that does not help us with our goal. (Rom. 7:23) Or we may just feel tired. (Matt. 26:43) What can help us to overcome a setback or a bad day? Remember that a setback does not mean you have failed. The Bible says that we may repeatedly experience problems or difficulties. However, it also makes clear that we can get up again. Yes, by moving forward despite a setback, you prove to Jehovah that you want to please him. How happy Jehovah must be when he sees you continuing to strive for your goal! w23.05 30 ¶14-15




Saturday, September 6

[Become] examples to the flock.​—1 Pet. 5:3.



Pioneering helps a young man to learn how to work effectively with a variety of people. It also helps him to make a reasonable budget and live by it. (Phil. 4:11-13) A good stepping stone to full-time service is auxiliary pioneering, which helps one be ready to take up regular pioneering. Pioneering may open the door to other forms of full-time service, including serving as a construction servant or a Bethelite. Christian men should have the goal of qualifying to serve their brothers and sisters as congregation elders. The Bible says that men who are reaching out for this role are “desirous of a fine work.” (1 Tim. 3:1) First, a brother must qualify to serve as a ministerial servant. Ministerial servants assist the elders in many practical ways. Both elders and ministerial servants humbly serve their brothers and sisters and share zealously in the ministry. w23.12 28 ¶14-16




Sunday, September 7

While he was still a boy, he started to search for the God of David his forefather.​—2 Chron. 34:3.



King Josiah was a teenager when he started to search for Jehovah. He wanted to learn about Jehovah and do His will. However, life was not easy for this young king. He had to take a stand for pure worship when false worship was prevalent. And indeed he did! Before Josiah was 20 years old, he began to remove false worship from the nation. (2 Chron. 34:1, 2) Even if you are very young, you can decide to imitate Josiah by searching for Jehovah and learning to appreciate His qualities. That fine course will move you to dedicate yourself to him. What will that dedication mean in your daily life? Luke, who got baptized at age 14, says, “From now on, I will put serving Jehovah first in my life and will try to make him happy.” (Mark 12:30) What a blessing it will be for you if you desire to do the same! w23.09 11 ¶12-13




Monday, September 8

Show respect for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord.​—1 Thess. 5:12.



When the apostle Paul wrote this letter, the Thessalonian congregation was less than a year old. Its appointed men were likely inexperienced and may have made mistakes. Still, they deserved respect. As the great tribulation approaches, we may need to depend on local elders for direction even more than we do now. We may lose contact with world headquarters and the branch office; hence, it is important to learn to love and respect our elders now. No matter what happens, let us keep our senses, not focusing on their imperfections, but focusing on the fact that Jehovah through Christ is guiding these faithful men. Just as a helmet protected a soldier’s head, our hope of salvation protects our thinking. We recognize that what this world offers is worthless. (Phil. 3:8) Our hope helps us to remain calm and steady. w23.06 11-12 ¶11-12




Tuesday, September 9

A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant.​—Prov. 9:13.



Those hearing the “stupid woman” face a choice: Will they accept her invitation or reject it? There are valid reasons why we should avoid sexually immoral conduct. The “stupid woman” is described as saying: “Stolen waters are sweet.” (Prov. 9:17) What are “stolen waters”? The Bible likens sexual intimacies that a married couple may enjoy to refreshing water. (Prov. 5:15-18) Husband and wife can find pleasure in appropriate sexual acts within their legal marriage. How different, though, with “stolen waters.” That may refer to illicit, immoral sex. Such often occurs in secret, just as a thief often steals in secret. The “stolen waters” may seem particularly sweet if those involved feel that they are getting away with their sinful course. What a sad deception! Jehovah sees all. Nothing could be more bitter than losing his favor, so there is nothing “sweet” about that tragic loss.​—1 Cor. 6:9, 10. w23.06 22 ¶7-9




Wednesday, September 10

Even if I do it against my will, I still have a stewardship entrusted to me.​—1 Cor. 9:17.



What if, for a time, you feel that your prayers have become mechanical or that your ministry is in a rut? Do not conclude that you have lost Jehovah’s spirit. You are an imperfect human, and your feelings can fluctuate. If your zeal starts to diminish, reflect on the example of the apostle Paul. Although he tried to imitate Jesus, he knew that at times he might not feel as motivated as at other times. Paul was determined to accomplish his ministry despite how he might feel at the moment. Similarly, do not let your imperfect feelings make your decisions for you. Resolve that you will do the right thing despite how you feel. Your actions should in time affect your feelings for the better.​—1 Cor. 9:16. w24.03 11-12 ¶12-13




Thursday, September 11

Demonstrate the proof of your love to them.​—2 Cor. 8:24.



We can show love to our brothers and sisters by welcoming them into our circle of friends. (2 Cor. 6:11-13) Many of us belong to congregations made up of brothers and sisters who are from different backgrounds and who have a variety of personalities. We can strengthen our love for all of them by focusing on their good qualities. When we learn to see others as Jehovah sees them, we prove that we love them. Love will be vital during the great tribulation. When that tribulation begins, where will we find protection? Consider what Jehovah instructed his people to do when ancient Babylon was attacked: “Go, my people, enter your inner rooms, and shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for a brief moment until the wrath has passed by.” (Isa. 26:20) It seems that those words also apply to us who will face the great tribulation. w23.07 6-7 ¶14-16




Friday, September 12

The scene of this world is changing.​—1 Cor. 7:31.



Have a reputation for being reasonable. Ask yourself: ‘Do people perceive me as being reasonable, yielding, and tolerant? Or do they view me as a rigid, harsh, or headstrong person? Do I listen to others and yield to their wishes when appropriate?’ The degree to which we are reasonable reflects the extent to which we are imitating Jehovah and Jesus. Reasonableness involves being flexible when our circumstances change. Such changes can create unexpected hardships for us. We may face a health emergency. Or sudden changes in the economy or in the political climate where we live may completely disrupt our life. (Eccl. 9:11) Even a change in a theocratic assignment can test us. We can successfully adapt to new circumstances if we take the following four steps: (1) accept reality, (2) look to the future, (3) focus on the positive, and (4) do things for others. w23.07 21-22 ¶7-8




Saturday, September 13

You are someone very precious.​—Dan. 9:23.



The prophet Daniel was a young man when the Babylonians made him a prisoner of war and dragged him far away from his homeland. But Daniel obviously impressed his captors. They saw “what appear[ed] to the eyes”​—that Daniel was “without any defect, of good appearance” and that he came from an influential family. (1 Sam. 16:7) For those reasons, the Babylonians trained him to become an elite member of their society. (Dan. 1:3, 4, 6) Jehovah loved Daniel because of the type of person that this young man chose to be. In fact, Daniel may have been only in his late teens or early 20’s when Jehovah mentioned him favorably together with Noah and Job, men who had spent many decades building a good reputation with God. (Gen. 5:32; 6:9, 10; Job 42:16, 17; Ezek. 14:14) And Jehovah continued to love Daniel throughout his long and remarkable life.​—Dan. 10:11, 19. w23.08 2 ¶1-2




Sunday, September 14

Comprehend fully what is the breadth and length and height and depth.​—Eph. 3:18.



When deciding whether to buy a house, you would want to examine all the aspects of your future home in person. We can do something similar when we read and study the Bible. If you just read it quickly, you may learn only basic facts​—“the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God.” (Heb. 5:12) Instead, as with the house, go “inside” to examine the rich details. An excellent way to study the Bible is to see how the various parts of its message connect together. Endeavor to understand not only what truths you believe but also why you believe them. To understand God’s Word fully, we must learn deep Bible truths. The apostle Paul urged his Christian brothers and sisters to study God’s Word diligently so that they could “comprehend fully what is the breadth and length and height and depth” of the truth. Then they would become further “rooted and established” in their faith. (Eph. 3:14-19) We need to do the same. w23.10 18 ¶1-3




Monday, September 15

Brothers, take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets who spoke in the name of Jehovah.​—Jas. 5:10.



The Bible contains many examples of people who were patient. Why not make it a study project to examine such examples? For instance, although David was anointed at an early age to be the future king of Israel, he had to wait many years before he received the kingship. Simeon and Anna worshipped Jehovah faithfully while they waited for the promised Messiah. (Luke 2:25, 36-38) As you study such accounts, look for the answers to the following questions: What may have helped this person to show patience? How did he benefit by being patient? How can I imitate him? You might also benefit by learning about those who did not show patience. (1 Sam. 13:8-14) You might ask: ‘What may have contributed to their lack of patience? What consequences did they face?’ w23.08 25 ¶15




Tuesday, September 16

We have believed and have come to know that you are the Holy One of God.​—John 6:69.



The apostle Peter was loyal; he did not let anything cause him to give up permanently. He demonstrated his loyalty on one occasion when Jesus said something that his disciples did not understand. (John 6:68) Without waiting for an explanation, many stopped following Jesus. But not Peter. He recognized that only Jesus had “sayings of everlasting life.” Jesus knew that Peter and the other apostles would abandon him. Nevertheless, Jesus expressed confidence that Peter would recover and remain faithful. (Luke 22:31, 32) Jesus understood that “the spirit . . . is eager, but the flesh is weak.” (Mark 14:38) Accordingly, even after Peter denied knowing him, Jesus did not give up on his apostle. The resurrected Jesus appeared to Peter​—evidently when Peter was alone. (Mark 16:7; Luke 24:34; 1 Cor. 15:5) How that must have encouraged the downcast apostle! w23.09 22 ¶9-10




Wednesday, September 17

Happy are those whose lawless deeds have been pardoned and whose sins have been covered.​—Rom. 4:7.



God pardons or covers over the sins of those who put faith in him. He forgives them completely and no longer takes their sins into account. (Ps. 32:1, 2) He views such individuals as guiltless and righteous on the basis of their faith. Although they were declared righteous, Abraham, David, and other faithful worshippers of God were still imperfect sinners. But because of their faith, God viewed them as blameless, especially when compared with those who had no standing with him. (Eph. 2:12) As the apostle Paul makes clear in his letter, faith is central to having a personal relationship with God. That was true in the case of both Abraham and David, and it is true of us as well. w23.12 3 ¶6-7




Thursday, September 18

Always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his name.​—Heb. 13:15.



Today all Christians have the privilege of offering sacrifices to Jehovah by using their time, energy, and resources to further the interests of God’s Kingdom. We can show that we cherish our privilege to worship Jehovah by offering him our very best sacrifices. The apostle Paul outlines various aspects of our worship that we should never neglect. (Heb. 10:22-25) These include approaching Jehovah in prayer, making public declaration of our hope, meeting together as a congregation, and encouraging one another “all the more so as [we] see [Jehovah’s] day drawing near.” Toward the end of the Revelation account, Jehovah’s angel states the following twice for emphasis: “Worship God!” (Rev. 19:10; 22:9) May we never forget this deep spiritual truth regarding Jehovah’s great spiritual temple and the cherished privilege we have to worship our great God! w23.10 29 ¶17-18




Friday, September 19

Continue loving one another.​—1 John 4:7.



We all want to “continue loving one another.” However, it is important for us to remember that Jesus warned that “the love of the greater number [would] grow cold.” (Matt. 24:12) Jesus was not saying that this would occur on a large scale among his disciples. Nonetheless, we should remain alert so that we are not influenced by the lack of love in the world around us. With that thought in mind, let us consider this important question: Is there a way to test whether our love for our brothers is strong? One way to determine the strength of our love is to examine how we handle certain situations in life. (2 Cor. 8:8) One such situation is mentioned by the apostle Peter: “Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Pet. 4:8) So the weaknesses and imperfections of others can put our love to the test. w23.11 10-11 ¶12-13




Saturday, September 20

Love one another.​—John 13:34.



We cannot obey Jesus’ command about love if we show love to some in the congregation but not to others. Granted, we may feel closer to some than to others, as did Jesus. (John 13:23; 20:2) But the apostle Peter reminds us that we should strive to have “brotherly affection”​—a warm familylike attachment—​for all our brothers and sisters. (1 Pet. 2:17) Peter urged us to “love one another intensely from the heart.” (1 Pet. 1:22) In this context, to love “intensely” involves stretching the limits of our natural inclination to love. For example, what if a brother offends or hurts us in some way? Our instinct may be to retaliate rather than to show love. Yet, Peter learned from Jesus that retaliation does not please God. (John 18:10, 11) Peter wrote: “Do not pay back injury for injury or insult for insult. Instead, repay with a blessing.” (1 Pet. 3:9) Allow intense love to move you to be kind and considerate. w23.09 28-29 ¶9-11




Sunday, September 21

Women should likewise be . . . moderate in habits, faithful in all things.​—1 Tim. 3:11.



We are amazed at how quickly a child grows into an adult. This growth seems to take place automatically. However, growing to Christian maturity is by no means automatic. (1 Cor. 13:11; Heb. 6:1) To reach that goal, we need a deep personal relationship with Jehovah. We also need his holy spirit as we cultivate godly qualities, develop practical skills, and prepare for future responsibilities. (Prov. 1:5) Jehovah made humans to be male or female. (Gen. 1:27) Obviously, men and women are physically different, but they are different in other ways as well. For example, Jehovah made men and women to fulfill specific roles, so they need qualities and skills that will help them to carry out their respective assignments.​—Gen. 2:18. w23.12 18 ¶1-2




Monday, September 22

Make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son.​—Matt. 28:19.



Did Jesus want others to use his Father’s personal name? Certainly. Some pious religious leaders of the day may have held that God’s name was too sacred to pronounce, but Jesus never allowed such unscriptural traditions to prevent him from honoring his Father’s name. Consider the time when he cured a demonized man in the region of the Gerasenes. The people became fearful and begged Jesus to leave, so he did not stay in that region. (Mark 5:16, 17) Still, Jesus wanted Jehovah’s name to be known there. So he commissioned the man he had cured to tell people, not what Jesus had done, but what Jehovah had done. (Mark 5:19) He wants the same today​—that we make his Father’s name known throughout the whole world! (Matt. 24:14; 28:20) When we do our part, we please our King, Jesus. w24.02 10 ¶10




Tuesday, September 23

You have persevered for the sake of my name.​—Rev. 2:3.



We are truly blessed to be part of Jehovah’s organization during these turbulent last days. As world conditions deteriorate, Jehovah provides us with a united, spiritual family of brothers and sisters. (Ps. 133:1) He helps us to have strong family bonds. (Eph. 5:33–6:1) And he gives us the insight and wisdom we need to have true inner peace. We must, however, work hard to keep serving Jehovah faithfully. Why? Because we may at times be offended by the imperfections of others. We may also find it difficult to put up with our own shortcomings, especially if we make the same mistakes time and again. We need to persevere in Jehovah’s service (1) when a fellow believer offends us, (2) when our spouse disappoints us, and (3) when we are disappointed with ourselves. w24.03 14 ¶1-2




Wednesday, September 24

To the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.​—Phil. 3:16.



From time to time, you will hear the experiences of brothers and sisters who have reached out to expand their sacred service. Perhaps they attended the School for Kingdom Evangelizers or moved to where there is a greater need. If you can set such a goal, by all means do so. Jehovah’s people are eager to expand their ministry. (Acts 16:9) What, though, if right now you are unable to do that? Do not think that you are inferior to those who can. The Christian race is one of endurance. (Matt. 10:22) Do not underestimate the value of serving Jehovah according to your abilities and circumstances. That is an important way that you can keep following Jesus after baptism.​—Ps. 26:1. w24.03 10 ¶11




Thursday, September 25

He kindly forgave us all our trespasses.​—Col. 2:13.



Our heavenly Father promises to forgive us if we are repentant. (Ps. 86:5) So if we are truly sorry for the sins we have committed, we can take Jehovah at his word​—he has forgiven us. Remember that Jehovah is not rigid, or inflexible. He never demands more of us than we can reasonably do. He appreciates whatever we do for him as long as we are doing our best. Also, reflect on Bible examples of those who served Jehovah whole-souled. Think of the apostle Paul. He exerted himself zealously for years, traveling thousands of miles and establishing many congregations. Yet, when circumstances limited his share in the preaching work, did he lose God’s approval? No. He continued to do what he could, and Jehovah blessed him. (Acts 28:30, 31) Similarly, what we can give to Jehovah may vary at times. But what matters to him is why we do it. w24.03 27 ¶7, 9




Friday, September 26

Early in the morning, [Jesus] left for an isolated place, and there he began praying.​—Mark 1:35.



By means of his own prayers to Jehovah, Jesus set an example for his disciples to follow. Throughout his ministry, Jesus prayed frequently. He had to set aside time to pray because he was often busy and surrounded by many people. (Mark 6:31, 45, 46) He got up early in the morning so that he could have time alone to pray. On at least one occasion, he prayed all night before making an important decision. (Luke 6:12, 13) And Jesus prayed repeatedly on the night before he died as he focused on completing the most challenging aspect of his earthly assignment. (Matt. 26:39, 42, 44) Jesus’ example teaches us that no matter how busy we are, we need to set aside time to pray. Like Jesus, we may need to reserve time for prayer​—getting up early in the morning or staying up a little later in the evening. When we do, we show Jehovah that we appreciate this special gift. w23.05 3 ¶4-5




Saturday, September 27

The love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given to us.​—Rom. 5:5.



Notice the expression “poured out” in the text above. One reference work describes it as “come upon us like a stream.” What a powerful image to highlight the abundance of Jehovah’s love for the anointed! The anointed know that they are “loved by God.” (Jude 1) The apostle John expressed their feelings when he wrote: “See what sort of love the Father has given us, that we should be called children of God!” (1 John 3:1) Is Jehovah’s love limited to the anointed? No, Jehovah has proved his love for all of us. What is the greatest confirmation of Jehovah’s love? The ransom​—the most extraordinary act of love in the universe!​—John 3:16; Rom. 5:8. w24.01 28 ¶9-10




Sunday, September 28

My enemies will retreat on the day that I call for help. Of this I am confident: God is on my side.​—Ps. 56:9.



The verse above reveals a way that David conquered his fears. Even though his life was in jeopardy, he meditated on what Jehovah would yet do for him. David knew that Jehovah would rescue him at the right time. After all, Jehovah had declared that David would be the next king of Israel. (1 Sam. 16:1, 13) To David, whatever Jehovah promised was as good as fulfilled. What has Jehovah promised to do for you? We do not expect him to shield us from all problems. Still, whatever trials you may face in this system of things, Jehovah will do away with them in the coming new world. (Isa. 25:7-9) Our Creator is surely strong enough to raise the dead, to heal us, and to remove all opposers.​—1 John 4:4. w24.01 6 ¶12-13




Monday, September 29

Happy is the one whose transgression is pardoned, whose sin is covered.​—Ps. 32:1.



Reflect on your dedication and baptism. You took those steps because you wanted to stand on Jehovah’s side. Think back to what helped you to become convinced that you had found the truth. You took in accurate knowledge of Jehovah and grew to respect and love him as your heavenly Father. You developed faith and were motivated to repent. Your heart moved you to abandon wrong practices and to live in harmony with God’s will. You felt relief when you sensed God’s forgiveness. (Ps. 32:2) You attended Christian meetings and began to share with others the wonderful things you had learned. As a dedicated and baptized Christian, you are now walking on the road to life, determined not to lose your way. (Matt. 7:13, 14) May you stand firm, steadfast in your devotion to Jehovah and immovable in your obedience to his commands. w23.07 17 ¶14; 19 ¶19




Tuesday, September 30

God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.​—1 Cor. 10:13.



By reflecting on your prayer of dedication to Jehovah, you will find the strength to resist any temptation. For example, would you start flirting with another person’s mate? Certainly not! You will have already said no to that. You will thus spare yourself the anguish of having to deal with improper feelings after they have taken root. You will “turn away” from “the path of the wicked.” (Prov. 4:14, 15) Recalling Jesus’ determination to please his Father, you will quickly and firmly reject anything that you know would displease the God to whom you are dedicated. (Matt. 4:10; John 8:29) The fact is that trials and temptations give you an opportunity to show that you are determined to keep following Jesus. As you do, you can be assured that Jehovah will help you. w24.03 9-10 ¶8-10




