From Our Readers
Cleanliness
Reading “Meeting the Challenge of Cleanliness” (September 22, 1988) made me reflect on how I myself was brought up. To tell you the truth, it was in an unhygienic and unsanitary condition, all because of ignorance and lack of knowledge. After reading this issue, I just wonder how I was able to stay alive in those unhealthy conditions. Also, thank you for the helpful checklist on pages 10 and 11. It helped me to stop putting things off. I right away cleaned up the cupboards, etc. I fought a war and gained the victory over the cockroaches.
S. M., St. Lucia, West Indies
Children Dying
As a doctor, I would like to express my reaction to “Millions of Children Are Dying​—What Could Save Them?” (September 22, 1988). I appreciate the measures mentioned in order to check this slaughter: better nutrition (primacy given to breast-feeding) and better hygiene. However, you cite vaccinations as one of the measures intended to save lives. You avoid “getting your feet wet” by stating that Awake! does not recommend one type of medical treatment over another. In my opinion, the fact that you publish this information amounts to taking sides. Is it not dangerous to put community interests ahead of individual interests? The number of morbid, even mortal, complications prove that man has been polluted by vaccinations.
D. G., M.D., France
I always find your articles interesting, and I appreciate your review. However, in your September 22 issue, you appear to be badly informed about the effectiveness and dangers of vaccinations.
J. V., France
Many things people do in seeking improved health are less than desirable. Some take medicines that have undesirable side effects, believing that the benefits outweigh the risks. Many view vaccines similarly. We consider vaccination to be a personal matter, though one must accept any legal consequence of his or her decision.​—ED.
Parents’ Homework
When we visited schools with the magazine “Parents​—You Have Homework Too!” (September 8, 1988), we were told that it must first be presented to the Superintendent of Schools. When I returned after having left a copy with his secretary, I suggested leaving a few issues in the teachers’ lounges. But he said: “Better yet, I have read the information, so why don’t you bring about a hundred copies to my office, and we will distribute them to all the teachers.”
K. A., United States
I am an assistant principal in an elementary school of 655 students. After I left a copy of Awake! with the principal, he decided to do a series of letters to the parents based on this fine issue. At first he was concerned that the publisher might not wish him to quote from Awake!, but I assured him that this would be no problem. However, you may wish to assure him of this also.
S. S., United States
We have no objection to information in “Awake!” being used for such purposes as long as “Awake!” is credited as its source.​—ED.

