Announcements
KEEPING THE FLOCK CLEAN
“Cleanse yourselves, ye that bear the vessels of Jehovah,” says His Word to those who are his dedicated servants. (Isa. 52:11, AS) The ways of Satan’s world are unclean, morally and spiritually, and every effort must be made to keep apart from such uncleanness if the salvation of God is to be realized. The Watchtower magazine provides strong spiritual food for persons who wish to conform to God’s righteous requirements and who are distressed by the present unhappy state of earth’s affairs. March will be a month to work with the Watchtower subscription for $1. Join in this good work, and let everyone be a subscriber. Three booklets are given free with each year’s subscription.
SATISFIED WITH YOUR RELIGION?
There are many persons today who are not satisfied with the role religion is playing in world affairs. Some religious leaders advocate more active participation in government; others are adamantly insisting that religion keep separate from world politics. The book What Has Religion Done for Mankind? provides you with a history of religion’s role in human affairs from the time of Adam. Send for your copy today. The cost is 50c.
MEMORIAL FOR 1953
One of the most important days in 1953 is March 30. On that day, after 6 p.m., Standard Time, Jehovah’s devoted people throughout the earth will assemble to observe the Lord’s evening meal. (1 Cor. 11:20-26, NW) Countless persons of good will, by their attendance in company with Jehovah’s anointed, will give evidence of their recognition of the importance of this occasion too. With gratitude and thankfulness the meeting will be opened with song and prayer. Then a capable dedicated and baptized brother, preferably of the anointed, will give a talk on the meaning and importance of the Memorial. The emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served at an appropriate time in the course of the meeting, and the anointed brothers will partake of them.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 12: Why the Struggle to Keep Integrity? Also, Integrity Leads to Life, ¶1-5.
Week of April 19: Integrity Leads to Life, ¶6-26.

