Bomb Blast Levels Kingdom Hall in Australia
“It could never happen in a country like Australia!” But it did. At 9:35 Sunday morning, July 21, 1985, David Winder began his Bible discourse in the Casula Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, in Sydney. Twenty-five minutes later, a bomb blast blew him through the roof, demolished the hall, killed one man, and sent to the hospital 46 of the 109 present. It couldn’t happen in Australia, but it did. This firsthand report from the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Australia reveals the horror and the tragedy of that morning, but it also underlines the thrilling determination and faith of the Witnesses there to press on in meeting together and in publishing the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom.
A POWERFUL bomb, estimated by police to be one kilogram (2.2 lb) of gelignite, had been hidden under the speaker’s platform, timed to go off during the Bible lecture. Its explosion sent the speaker through the roof and landed him on a pile of debris outside the hall​—bleeding, critically injured, with two broken legs.
Graham Wykes, sitting in the front row, was killed instantly. His wife and two daughters suffered severe injuries. One member of the Society’s branch staff, Sue Schulz, had her nose broken and lost most of her front teeth. One interested attender had to have shrapnel removed from her eyes. A three-month-old baby was hospitalized with a concussion.
By Sunday evening 14 of the 46 hospitalized were held over; the others were allowed to go home. Most of them were suffering from shock and damaged eardrums. Observers were amazed that more were not killed, since the hall was reduced to a shambles.
Worldwide Publicity
Regular radio and TV programs were interrupted throughout the country to announce this outrage, and soon the news was being flashed throughout the world. Typical of newspaper headlines was the Brisbane Telegraph: “MIRACLE! 110 survive in church explosion.” The national paper The Australian declared: “Innocence is no protection against terrorism.” The front page of the Brisbane Daily Sun heralded: “BOMB TERROR​—church outrage shocks nation.” The Sydney Morning Herald feature story headlined: “Family life sermon, then one lay dead, 49 injured.” The article continued: “The dazed congregation was remarkably calm. Some stayed inside to tend the injured, the others moved quietly out of the hall as best they could. Police, ambulance and fire brigade officers were on the scene within minutes.”
Police soon ruled out international terrorists as the perpetrators of this crime. Reportedly, no fewer than 60 individuals and organizations claimed responsibility for the recent terrorist bombing of the airport in Frankfurt, in the Federal Republic of Germany​—a usual terrorist procedure. Yet no one has claimed responsibility for the attack on the Kingdom Hall.
Perhaps the editorial in the July 22 issue of The Australian best sums up the conclusion drawn by many thinking persons when it said, in part: “Whoever planted the bombs and however grotesque his or their motives, Australians have been reminded how small our world has become. We are not immune from the horrors which are part of the daily lives of inhabitants of a growing part of our planet.”
Indeed, no part of the world is now immune from such conditions nor are any individuals immune. The apostle Paul clearly warned of this very situation at 2 Timothy 3:1-4: “Remember that there will be difficult times in the last days. People will be . . . merciless, slanderers, violent, and fierce; they will hate the good; they will be treacherous, reckless, and swollen with pride.” (Today’s English Version) And did not Jesus himself warn that during this time ‘because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number would cool off’?​—Matthew 24:12.
From the moment the news broke, the branch office of the Watch Tower Society in Sydney was besieged with phone calls expressing shock and sympathy. From both local and overseas sources the calls flooded in.
Many telegrams and letters of sympathy were received from all over the world​—some from politicians, religious leaders, and others in positions of prominence. Very much appreciated was a letter from The Honourable Mr. Justice Watson of the Commonwealth Family Court. Justice Watson had himself been a victim of a bomb blast in his home. In his letter he said, in part: “In these dark and distressful days many of your people, particularly the Wykes family, will sense the gathering strength of family, friends and congregation. In this may they find not only strength but that peace which is beyond human understanding.”
A Sydney cabdriver expressed the feelings of many in a poignant letter to the editor of The Sydney Morning Herald. He wrote: “One of my jobs yesterday (July 21) was to pick up the ABC film crew from Hoxton Park airstrip and get them, as fast as possible, to Liverpool Hospital. What we saw there was sheer horror. I was asked to wait, which I did. During that 20 minutes life’s real horrors began to emerge. Pain and hurt are a part of life, but what I saw just is not necessary. . . . The inevitable ‘why, why, why’ happens in the guts. It hits even a humble cabbie​—so hard I threw up. . . . Just let us, who hate violence, pain and the bomb, not be involved in these senseless ideals and get on with this short life. . . . Please, no more.”
Incidentally, at no time did an issue arise over blood transfusions​—something Jehovah’s Witnesses are known to refuse on religious grounds. (Acts 15:20, 29) The Brisbane Daily Sun quoted a Liverpool hospital spokesman as saying that no one had refused transfusions of blood-volume expanders. It was explained that this “does the work of blood while giving the body a chance to replenish its own supply. It works perfectly, even for people with the rarest blood groups and doctors don’t have to waste time trying to match the rare groups. The synthetic blood also carries no disease​—it is certainly the answer to protests from religious groups who have accepted it quite readily.”
The scores of messages and expressions of sympathy for the victims of this tragedy from members of the public are deeply appreciated. Members of the police, ambulance crews, fire brigade, and hospital and medical staff have been untiring in their efforts to assist. One of the nursing staff at the Liverpool hospital was filled with emotion when dealing with the first casualties to come from the bomb site. She told one of the Witnesses in attendance: “I would be crying if I were not so rushed. I can’t tell you how sorry I feel for these unfortunate victims.” Total strangers have phoned and written to offer accommodations and assistance in any way they can.
Of particular value and comfort were the many telegrams with words of compassion and encouragement from Jehovah’s Witnesses from all over the world. The victims also take comfort from the words of the apostle Peter about satanic attacks made against Christians in his time. Those early Christians were advised to be ‘solid in the faith, knowing that the same things in the way of sufferings were being accomplished in the entire association of their brothers in the world.’​—1 Peter 5:9.
Tragedy Advances the Good News
Could there be any blessings from such trauma? Perhaps this could best be viewed in the light of the apostle Paul’s imprisonment in Rome. In writing to the Philippian Christians, he said: “Now I desire you to know, brothers, that my affairs have turned out for the advancement of the good news rather than otherwise, . . . and most of the brothers in the Lord, feeling confidence by reason of my prison bonds, are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.”​—Philippians 1:12-14.
The savage attack on innocent members of their Christian brotherhood in the Lurnea Congregation meeting that morning in the Casula Kingdom Hall caused a similar reaction. The congregations throughout the Sydney area experienced unusual attendance on the following meeting nights in their Kingdom Halls. As Paul further said to the Philippians, they are truly “standing firm in one spirit, with one soul striving side by side for the faith of the good news, and in no respect being frightened by [their] opponents.”​—Philippians 1:27, 28.
Yet another blessing was mentioned by Paul in his letter: “Some are preaching the Christ through envy and rivalry, but others also through goodwill. . . . The former do it out of contentiousness, not with a pure motive, for they are supposing to stir up tribulation for me in my prison bonds.” Paul said that his prison bonds had become “public knowledge” to everyone. The enormous publicity given to the “tribulation” brought upon Jehovah’s Witnesses in this instance has circled the globe.​—Philippians 1:13, 15, 17.
Some opposers took advantage of this publicity to vent their hatred of the Witnesses. Many false and deceptive statements were made, “supposing to stir up tribulation” for the Witnesses. Instead, it brought an even more sympathetic response from the public who were able to see through the false claims.
Did this experience slow up the Witnesses in their preaching? On the contrary, it has done exactly what Paul reported, namely, “most of the brothers in the Lord . . . are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.” (Philippians 1:14) It has been reassuring to hear so many sincere words of fellow feeling and interest from householders. The Witnesses are more eager than ever to be out in the public ministry and meet them.
While the events of July 21 were still fresh in mind, people were receptive to the solution and the reasons why such things happen. Those who do respond and probe deeper into God’s Word will get a real blessing. Over 21,000 individuals or family groups in Australia already enjoy a weekly private home Bible study conducted by a qualified minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the last four years in Australia, over 10,000 people have taken up the public ministry.
It is a seeming paradox that peaceful, law-abiding people were warned by their Master that they should expect anything but a peaceful response to their presence in a hostile world. He explained that “they will do all these things against you on account of my name, because they do not know him that sent me.” (John 15:21) Jesus was sent by his Father, Jehovah, as his representative. He met a violent death at the hands of worldly men who did not know Jehovah. So it should not surprise us to find violence employed against his followers today.​—John 15:20.
How Comforting to Know That Deliverance Is Near!
How comforting it is to know that things will not continue this way much longer. Sweeping and dramatic changes are about to take place, resembling the events of Noah’s day. This world of violence and hatred is in its death throes, and it will be replaced by a new one where “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13) The very things that cause such sorrow to millions can cause us to rejoice when we “read” the evidence correctly, as one would read a road sign on the highway to see where he is heading. Jesus said: “But as these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.”​—Luke 21:28.
[Box on page 12]
Jehovah’s Witnesses have a loving worldwide brotherhood. As an example, upon learning through the press or TV of the bombing and those injured, many Witnesses in the United States immediately sent money for the bomb victims. Within a few days some one hundred letters containing more than $7,000 were received​—gifts ranging from a young boy’s 27¢ to a man’s $1,000. Following are a few excerpts from the letters.
“I am a brother of little means, but I would like you to please accept this small contribution [$7] to help.”
“Please forward this money to the sister who lost her husband in the bombing tragedy.”
“Please use our donation to pay medical expenses of brothers and sisters injured. (Acts 11:29) We heard that one was killed. John 5:28, 29 comes to mind.”
“I would like to contribute $50 toward rebuilding the hall and $50 toward hospital bills.”
“An approved associate wishes to help. So I am forwarding you his bank draft for $1,000.”
“My son and daughter would like to write to some young brothers and sisters in that congregation to encourage them.”
“Could I have the address of the family of the brother that was killed, as I’d like to send a note to them. [$50 enclosed.]”
“To demonstrate our brotherly love, we [a congregation] have collected $161.55 to be used as they see fit.”
“It isn’t much [$3], but it is all I have, and maybe it will help a little.”
“To help the brothers and sisters there, whether to aid the widowed sister or to build a new Kingdom Hall.”
“I’m not working presently but here’s $1. If I get more, I’ll send more.”
It’s not the amount given, it’s the readiness to give that counts. Jesus, after noting the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests at the temple, “saw a certain needy widow drop two small coins of very little value there, and he said: ‘I tell you truthfully, This widow, although poor, dropped in more than they all did.’”​—Luke 21:2, 3.
‘God loves a cheerful giver. If the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has. The gift of each one’s hand should be in proportion to the blessing of Jehovah.’​—2 Corinthians 9:7; 8:12; Deuteronomy 16:17.
[Picture on page 10]
Side view of rear part of the Kingdom Hall
[Pictures on page 11]
The hole blown in concrete slab
Literature and magazine storeroom

