From Our Readers
Scientific Fraud?  Your recent article “Scientists Take Public for a Ride” (January 8, 1994) came to my attention. The scientists involved appear to have made a simple error that they later corrected. This is how science is supposed to work, but the title of your article suggests some kind of wrongdoing. The skull cap in question may have turned out to have been that of an ass, but that fact has no bearing on the authenticity of other finds such as the famous “Lucy” skeleton. We know these creatures existed.
M. P., United States
We were not implying that the scientists involved in this particular discovery were deliberately dishonest. Indeed, we quoted Dr. Moyà himself and noted his candor. The incident was used to illustrate the way scientific truth has often been sacrificed to personal, political, and nationalistic interests. True, legitimate fossil specimens have been found. But there is no proof whatsoever that these creatures were actually ancestors of mankind. “Lucy,” for example, had a brain one third the size of a human’s. Clearly it was nothing more than a now extinct species of ape.​—ED.
Addictions  Thank you so much for the series “Addictions​—What’s Behind Them?” (April 22, 1994) I read the articles from beginning to end twice. You see, I have an eating disorder. I feel somewhat better following treatment in a clinic, but I still have a struggle at times. The article strengthened my resolve.
T. S., Germany
I am a former drug addict and alcoholic. The advice that you give is really appropriate. I was also motivated by recognizing that an addiction is a spiritual barrier, since an addict cannot be totally clean in the eyes of our Creator.
M. G., France
Six and a half years ago, I lost a son to cocaine addiction. Having felt such pain and survived, I was ready to deal with my own food addiction. Growing up in an alcoholic family, I had learned to use food to comfort myself and to run away from pain. I tried diets, only to fail. Further tasting Jehovah’s love after 20 years as a Christian has been of great help, however. Thank you, thank you for the articles.
S. E., United States
Reformed Criminal  I want to thank you so very much for the article “My Escape to the Truth.” (February 8, 1994) I am 24 years old, and I’m on death row in Washington State Penitentiary. This article hit home and makes me want to do what is right in Jehovah’s eyes. Brian Garner really touched my heart.
J. B., United States
I am an inmate of a Missouri correctional facility and was inspired by Mr. Garner’s decision to turn himself in after learning the truth. This shows the effect your organization can have on people with an open mind and good heart. It is easy to see that true freedom comes only by exercising faith in God.
W. B., United States
A year ago I was embezzling money from the companies I worked for. I stole hundreds of thousands of yen, something no one would have dreamed a 20-​year-​old girl was doing! However, I was studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and my conscience began to condemn me. So I returned the money and confessed to those in charge. And while some harsh words were said, no further action was taken. I am deeply grateful for this article, for it has helped me to realize yet again how very great Jehovah’s mercy is.
S. M., Japan

