When More Is Needed
ALTHOUGH many of the suggestions in the preceding articles can be very helpful, sometimes more assistance is needed in specific circumstances. Case studies include, for example, reports of children who are not only impulsive but also very dangerous. These children, even though cared for by loving families, manifest their destructive behavior by smashing things, screaming at people, starting fires, shooting guns, stabbing with knives (if available), and harming animals, other people, or themselves, if it happens to cross their minds to do so. In essence, they epitomize chaos.
Whether or not to obtain medical assistance, in order to have the best care for their child, is a private personal decision to make. Each family must decide how to meet the distinctive individual needs of their child, having in mind the comforting assurance given to parents at Proverbs 22:6.
One of the most controversial treatments, currently, is the issue of medication. The most frequently prescribed drug, Ritalin, has had mixed results. Many families have been well pleased with the progress of their child while he is on Ritalin or other activity-​modifying drugs. However, current debate continues, not only about the usefulness of these drugs but about the overprescription of them. In fact, some doctors challenge their value entirely, stating, for example, that Ritalin used for extended periods can have many harmful side effects. It must be emphasized again, however, that many families and doctors cite few side effects with improved behavior and academic progress. Interestingly, many adults who have been diagnosed as having ADD and who are currently on medication are also happy with the results. Medication is, therefore, a private decision based on careful research and evaluation.
For those who have attempted medication with poor results, there are alternative methods of treatment. Many families have read about and recorded good results with vitamin and herbal treatments or a combination of both. As noted earlier, ADD/​ADHD may be caused in some instances by biochemical imbalances in the brain that these treatments are believed to help correct.
Additionally, there are other factors that some believe trigger many of the problems associated with ADD/​ADHD. Dr. Doris Rapp, in her book Is This Your Child?, states that “some children have physical illness and/​or emotional, behavioral, and learning problems that are partly or mainly related to allergies or environmental exposures.” Also, reactions to dyes, sugars, and additives may actually mimic these problems with violent tantrums, mood swings, and insomnia.
Many families have learned how to modify their children’s behavior, yet their academic performance can create additional problems. For some, special services such as tutors, counseling, support groups, and special teachers may help. Because these children tend to do better in a one-​on-​one arrangement, some families, at their doctor’s suggestion, have reported success with home schooling.
Not to be overlooked are many new educational projects, such as Dr. Mel Levine’s Schools Attuned, which celebrates individual uniqueness and diversity of children. Dr. Levine’s program advocates custom designing education to meet the needs of every child. Wherever this diversified approach to learning has been implemented in the United States, the results seem to have been good.
The Future
Raising children might be likened to purchasing a new home. Both require a lifetime investment; however, because of circumstances, prospective buyers may be forced to settle for less than the ideal. Similarly, imperfect parents raising imperfect children in Satan’s world are forced to settle for less than the ideal. The newly purchased home might have unusual or undesirable features, but with work and a little imagination, many awkward features can be practically eliminated. Even a difficult architectural feature may soon become the focal point of the home.
Likewise, if parents adapt to the individual needs of their unusual child, he or she can become a beautiful part of their lives. Each child must be appreciated for his own qualities. Therefore, focus on the positive. Rather than stifling children, encourage each one’s creativity, and appreciate that he or she is a worthy person deserving of dignity and love​—a precious gift from Jehovah God.​—Psalm 127:3-5.

