A Step on the Way Back
‘HE SPOKE to them with illustrations.’ The Bible thus introduces Jesus’ three memorable illustrations about mercy​—the one lost sheep, the lost drachma coin, and the prodigal son.​—Luke 15:3-32.
Two articles in The Watchtower of April 15, 1991, analyzed those illustrations and helped many readers to see how mercy can be extended today. A prime focus was on spiritual shepherds in taking the initiative to contact persons who were disfellowshipped but who might respond to kindly visits. What has been the result of these articles and the new procedure?
Soon after the magazine was published, a man in the state of Washington, U.S.A., wrote: “Proof of Jehovah’s abundant loving kindness arrived in my mail today. I sit here with tears in my eyes and joy in my heart over the provisions and readjustment provided by the Most High. Only a truly just God can provide help for those sheeplike ones that are lost. . . . Yes, I am disfellowshipped but on the road to reinstatement.” In October he was reinstated.
But what about the visits made by two congregation elders? A Christian wife wrote: “Words cannot express how I feel. My husband has been disfellowshipped for about 13 years. The elders visited him, as suggested in the article. Last night for the first time in many years, he went to one of the meetings. He is now trying to turn his life around and make a comeback.”
As traveling overseers visit congregation after congregation, they do see the results. One circuit overseer wrote recently:
“When the April 15, 1991, Watchtower was published, many wondered what the response would be to elders making contact. The answer has become quite apparent.
“In our circuit, the last four congregations that I have visited have witnessed the return to the Kingdom Halls of nine people. Although only one has been reinstated, the other eight are making fine progress. The elders and congregations are excited to see the fruits of their labor and the wisdom of applying theocratic directions.
“We rejoice in this fine, merciful arrangement. As the one reinstated sister commented, ‘I did not have the courage to return by myself, since I felt condemned before Jehovah. But when the elders called, it was the encouragement that I needed to come back.’ Her enthusiasm has greatly encouraged the congregation.”
Even if many who are visited do not respond, good is certainly being accomplished by this merciful initiative. Thus, beginning in September the elders in each congregation will review the names of those in the territory who are disfellowshipped and will arrange to visit all whom they feel might respond to mercy extended.

