Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
▫ What could well be foreshadowed by the added privileges of service that were given to the Nethinim and the sons of the servants of Solomon upon their return from exile in Babylon?
Today, as the remnant of spiritual Israel on earth go on decreasing, the other sheep go on increasing. Some of these sheeplike ones, like the Nethinim and the sons of the servants of Solomon, have now been assigned weighty responsibilities under the oversight of the remnant. (Isaiah 61:5)​—4/15, pages 16-17.
▫ What did the prophet Zephaniah mean when he said: “Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger”? (Zephaniah 2:2, 3)
For anyone to be protected during the coming “great tribulation,” it is not a case of once saved, always saved. (Matthew 24:13, 21) Concealment on that day will depend on a person’s continuing to do three things: He must seek Jehovah, seek righteousness, and seek meekness.​—5/1, pages 15-16.
▫ In what sense does Michael “stand up” in “the time of the end”? (Daniel 12:1, 4)
Since his installment as King in 1914, Michael has been “standing” in behalf of Jehovah’s people. But soon Michael is to “stand up” in a very special sense​—as Jehovah’s Agent to remove all wickedness from the earth and as the Deliverer of God’s people.​—5/1, page 17.
▫ On what does true happiness depend?
True happiness depends on our precious relationship with Jehovah, his approval, and his blessing. (Proverbs 10:22) Hence, true happiness cannot be achieved apart from obedience to Jehovah and joyful submission to his will. (Luke 11:28)​—5/15, pages 16, 19.
▫ When Jesus performed his healing miracles, was faith necessary on the part of the one healed?
A measure of faith was needed on the part of many in order to come to Jesus to be healed. (Matthew 8:13) However, no confession of faith was required for Jesus to perform his miracles, such as when he healed a lame man who did not know who Jesus was. (John 5:5-13) Jesus even restored the severed ear of the high priest’s servant, who was among a group of Jesus’ enemies. (Luke 22:50, 51) These miracles were performed with the power of God’s holy spirit, not because of the faith of the sick individual.​—6/1, page 3.
▫ What is represented by the “dragnet” spoken of in Jesus’ illustration at Matthew 13:47-50?
The “dragnet” represents an earthly instrument that professes to be God’s congregation and that gathers in “fish.” It has included both Christendom and the congregation of anointed Christians, the latter having continued to collect ‘fine fish,’ under the guidance of the angels, in line with Matthew 13:49.​—6/15, page 20.
▫ What are some of the principles that judges in Israel had to apply in carrying out their assignments?
Equal justice for rich and poor, strict impartiality, and no accepting of bribes. (Leviticus 19:15; Deuteronomy 16:19)​—7/1, page 13.
▫ What should elders try to achieve by means of judicial hearings?
One aim is to find out the facts of the case, doing this with love. Once these are known, the elders must do whatever is needed to protect the congregation and to maintain within it Jehovah’s high standards and the free flow of God’s spirit. The hearing is also to save, if at all possible, an endangered sinner. (Compare Luke 15:8-10.)​—7/1, pages 18-19.
▫ Why are fantasies relating to illicit sex so harmful?
In view of Jesus’ words at Matthew 5:27, 28, all of those who persistently indulge in fantasies of illicit sex are guilty of committing adultery in their hearts. And there is the real danger that such fantasies may lead to immorality.​—7/15, page 15.
▫ In what ways might Jehovah help us to view our trials properly and so endure them?
Scriptures may be brought to our attention by fellow believers or during a Bible study. Events maneuvered through God’s providences may help us to see what to do. Angels may share in directing us, or we may receive guidance through holy spirit. (Hebrews 1:14)​—7/15, page 21.
▫ Did the Council of Nicaea in 325 C.E. establish or affirm the Trinity doctrine?
No, the Council of Nicaea only equated the Son with the Father in being “of one substance.” The idea that the Father, Son, and holy spirit were each true God​—a three-in-one God—​was not developed by that council nor by earlier Church Fathers.​—8/1, page 20.
▫ Was Job the only human faithful to Jehovah during the period that he lived? (Job 1:8)
No, the book of Job itself indicates that Elihu was accepted by God. Also, during the time Job lived, there were many Israelites living in Egypt, and there is no reason to think that all of these were unfaithful and unacceptable to God.​—8/1, page 31.

