Preaching in Maputo​—Mozambique’s Intriguing Capital!
In 1991, Jehovah’s Witnesses were given legal recognition in Mozambique. Since then the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom has been making spectacular progress in this tropical country on the southeastern coast of Africa. Following is an account of how Jehovah’s Witnesses carry on their Bible educational work in Mozambique, especially around Maputo, the capital.
ITS weather influenced by the warm Indian Ocean, Mozambique enjoys a balmy climate. Exquisite palm-fringed beaches and coral reefs abound along the coast. A large bay with sheltered waters lies to the south of the country​—an ideal location for its capital, Maputo.
The beauty and tranquillity of this land, however, belie the violence of its history. For centuries it struggled under foreign domination, first the Arabs and then the Portuguese. These latter came with the full blessing of the Catholic Church to plunder the land for its treasures​—ivory, gold, and slaves. Finally, after centuries of colonial oppression, a bitter internal struggle broke out that led to independence in 1975. Unfortunately, the change did not make life more secure, as the country became embroiled in civil war, resulting in much suffering for the people, particularly for the innocent rural population.
Maputo, the Capital
In the last decade, thousands of Mozambicans have fled to the relative safety of the towns and cities. This is especially noticeable in Maputo, where a mixture of quaint Portuguese architecture and colorful Africa lends a vibrant atmosphere to the city. Taking a stroll down the wide, tree-lined avenues of Maputo today, the first thing you will notice is the throngs of people bustling about their daily business. But there is a difference. “In spite of the congestion and hardship of everyday life, the people are always ready with a smile,” observes Rodrigo, a missionary in Maputo. “You hardly ever find rude people!” Yes, the Mozambicans are known to be a spontaneous and friendly people.
Of course, as with most of Africa, the natural place to meet the people is at the local market. To get there you can take a ride on a Chapa 100, the local name for the many pickup trucks that are used for public transport. As usual, more people seem to be clinging to the outside of the truck than are inside. Perhaps it is better to walk.
Mozambicans are incurable entrepreneurs. A visitor to Maputo cannot help but notice how many employ themselves by setting up tiny stalls on pavements and street corners. Would you like to buy fresh fruits, vegetables, herbs, or spices? There is more than enough to go around. What about a live chicken, cashew nuts, or reeds with which to build your house? Nothing is too much trouble, and everything is done in a friendly spirit. Services such as having your shoes polished or your car washed are also available. Using a hot iron bar and a sheet of plastic, a young boy will even laminate your precious documents.
Actually, not all street trading is strictly legal. It is done anyway. The illegal hawkers are called dumba nenge, which means “rely on your feet.” This is doubtless because when the authorities come around to inspect, fleetness of foot is essential for the survival of their precarious business.
Judging by the smell, we must be nearing the fish market! In the late afternoon each day, along the beaches of the Costa do Sol, a flurry of activity surrounds the fishing boats as they bring in their catch of the day. In addition to fish of all shapes and sizes, there are crabs, lobsters, and, of course, the famous Mozambican prawns. However, you may be interested in another kind of fishing that is going on in and around Maputo.
“Fishers of Men”
Since gaining legal recognition in Mozambique, Jehovah’s Witnesses have received a fine response from the public. One man expressed his appreciation by saying: “In London I have seen many of you on the streets. In fact, wherever I have been, I have seen Jehovah’s Witnesses. Now it makes me feel good to see you here too.”
If the acceptance of Bibles and Bible-based literature in Portuguese and Tsonga, the local languages, is any indication, then this is indeed a spiritually inclined people. Paula, another missionary, reports that on an average Saturday morning, it is quite possible to place well over 50 magazines at the bazaar, or central market. The book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work is proving to be extremely popular. Many young people have been displaced or orphaned by the war, and they seem to appreciate the values and direction that this book provides.
In a typically uninhibited African fashion, large groups of interested persons will gather around the missionary to hear what is being said. Such pavement gatherings often develop into lively Scriptural discussions. One sister recalls an exciting experience.
“While doing street witnessing on one occasion, I got a fright when a military jeep screeched to a halt near me. A young soldier shouted at some of the bystanders: ‘Hey, you there, tell that lady to come here.’ When I went over to him, the soldier’s face broke into a broad smile as he said: ‘You are good people. We are happy to see you here. I believe you have a book about young people. I would like one too.’ I replied that I did not have any, but I assured him that as soon as they were in stock, I would deliver one to his home.”
Depot Deliveries
To meet the increasing demand for literature, the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in South Africa delivers literature supplies to a depot in Maputo every two weeks. Manuel, a missionary, looks after the depot and is responsible for organizing the distribution of literature.
One morning a middle-aged man sauntered in and asked what this place was used for. Manuel replied that this was a depot for Bible literature. The man walked out, but within a minute he was back.
“You said these were Bible books, didn’t you?” he asked.
“Yes, that’s right,” replied Manuel.
“What organization is this for?” the man asked.
“Jehovah’s Witnesses,” Manuel replied, adding, “We keep our local congregations supplied with this literature.”
“Ah, Jehovah’s Witnesses!” The man’s face lit up. “There is so much I like about you people. But at the same time, there is something I don’t like about you.”
“Well, what do you like about us?” asked Manuel tactfully.
“I love the interesting and educational books that you produce,” the man explained. “What I do not like is that I can never get enough of them. You cannot believe how hungry we are in Maputo for literature like yours.” Then he pulled out a written list of publications by the Watch Tower Society, including many back issues of Watchtower and Awake! magazines, that he had missed.
“I carry this list around with me,” he told Manuel. “Whenever I meet Jehovah’s Witnesses, I try to get whatever publications they have. If you can help me get what I have on my list, I am willing to pay the price of gold.”
A conversation ensued. Manuel learned that the man first came in contact with Jehovah’s Witnesses during the 1950’s when he read the book Creation. But since the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was banned under the Portuguese government, little progress was made.
When he subsequently paid a visit to the man at his office, Manuel noticed that all the Watch Tower publications he had were wrapped in plastic and neatly filed. Manuel was able to supply the publications the man needed to complete his collection, and he arranged to conduct a Bible study with the man and his family.
All this spiritual planting and watering is starting to bear much fruit as God keeps on “making it grow.” There are strong indications that the harvest of righthearted individuals is going to yield a bumper crop in Mozambique!​—1 Corinthians 3:6; John 4:36.
Theocratic Advancement Despite Obstacles
Today, there are more than 50 congregations in and around Maputo city. However, there is not a single Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses to be found. Why is that so? Because of poor economic conditions, the congregations have not been able to build even though some have owned land for a number of years.a
Yet, such obstacles do not hinder progress. At present there are well over 5,000 home Bible studies being conducted in the southern part of Mozambique. So great is the demand for studies that certain priorities must be set. If someone requests a study, it is usually taken for granted that he will attend all the congregation meetings.
One congregation located in a squatter area recently had 189 at the Sunday meetings even though there are only 71 publishers of the good news. This large group meets in the open air in the courtyard of a home. The area is screened off from public view by a corrugated iron and reed fence. Before each meeting, the area is swept clean, and a large proportion of the audience, including many adults, sit on reed mats on the ground. What rapt attention they pay to the program! Since many new ones do not have a copy of The Watchtower with which to follow the study, they learn to pay close attention during the reading of the paragraphs, and most hands are up in response to the questions that the conductor asks.
Another congregation of 59 publishers regularly has more than 140 in attendance. They normally meet on an open terrace. But during rainy weather, the congregation squeezes into the two rooms of a small apartment. The overflow from the audience spills into the hallway, the kitchen, and the balcony. Once again, one cannot help but notice the appreciation and attentiveness as everyone, including many youths, follow the program intently.
Nowhere is the potential for future growth in Mozambique more apparent than at assemblies. Recently a circuit assembly was held at the old bullfight arena in the city center. Can you imagine the surprise on the part of the approximately 3,000 publishers when more than 10,000 attended the sessions?
“The Harvest Is Great”
Such experiences clearly indicate that there is still much work to be done in Mozambique. Some congregations have only recently received their first visit by the traveling overseer sent out by the branch office. They are receiving much-needed assistance to help them implement proper organizational procedures in the congregations.
The congregations also appreciate greatly the recent arrival of Gilead missionaries. Francisco, an elder in Maputo, observes: “This is a great step forward for us. We had the zeal. We had the love. Still, we were out of touch with many organizational matters. What we really need is someone with firsthand experience to teach us how things are to be done. Now, we are so happy to have the missionaries with us.”
The missionaries, for their part, are glad to be of service to their brothers. Hans, who was recently assigned to Mozambique after serving for 20 years in Brazil, sums it up this way: “Working in the Mozambican field is a great privilege! We sense that we are on the verge of a massive increase here. There is so much work to do. We could use another 10 or 20 missionaries just in Maputo alone.”
The theocratic momentum now picking up in Mozambique reminds one of Jesus’ urgent words: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matthew 9:37, 38) There is every reason to believe that Jehovah will answer that urgent plea in behalf of his servants in Mozambique.
Thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses spent 12 years or more in detention centers in northwestern Mozambique. When some of them recently returned to Maputo, the only material possession they had was a piece of cloth to wrap around their loins. What they had in abundance was faith! Generous contributions of food and clothing from their fellow Witnesses in nearby lands helped them to get a new start in life.
[Footnotes]
If a man is fortunate enough to find a job here, the average wage is from $20 to $30 per month.
[Picture on page 23]
The congregations enjoy a fine turnout for Christian witnessing on Saturday mornings
[Pictures on page 24]
Meet 5-year-old Jaimito. He was born in a detention camp. Today, Jaimito’s parents are happy to be back in Maputo. Each week Francisco, Jaimito’s father, gets the entire family together for a Bible study. Both parents spend much time training their children to be effective teachers in the field service. Jaimito enjoys placing literature at the central market place
[Picture on page 25]
The fact that congregations do not have Kingdom Halls at their disposal does not stop their progress. In most cases, more than double the number of publishers attend the meetings

