Joyfully Return to Help Interested Ones
1 Everyone who shares in the house-​to-​house work desires to help people who are interested. By giving such help, we experience deep joy and satisfaction. (Compare Psalm 126:5, 6.) This requires that we be prepared.
2 Preparation starts with keeping detailed information on our house-​to-​house record. Note the subject discussed on the initial call and the householder’s reaction. You may even want to make a note of how you want to begin the conversation when you return.
3 For example, if you referred to the Lord’s Prayer initially and then placed the “Government” brochure, you could briefly state something like this:
▪ “On my previous visit, we discussed how God’s will is going to be done on earth and that peace will be realized in all areas of life. In the brochure I left, please notice what it says on page 29 about the other blessings God’s Kingdom will bring to mankind.”
4 If the person was inclined toward disbelief in God, say something like this:
▪ “When I called earlier, we were discussing the point Paul made at Hebrews 3:4, giving logical reasons for concluding that there must be an intelligent Maker of all things.” Read the scripture again and refer to pages 4 through 9 of the brochure Does God Really Care About Us?, picking up where your initial presentation left off. Ask the question and then read the paragraph, allowing the householder to answer the question. If practical, invite him to get his brochure and consider the material together.
5 If the householder appeared satisfied, materially or otherwise, during your initial call, you could again refer to the tract Will This World Survive? and read what is stated on page 6. Ask the householder if he desires to live on a beautiful paradise earth. To help in further determining his interest, you might ask for his comments on an encouraging picture or statement in a magazine you are using.
6 This same basic approach can be used with an article you may have discussed in The Watchtower or Awake! Refer to the article highlighted on your initial visit and then mention another point of interest in the same article or one in another issue you have with you. If possible, read a scripture together and ask for the householder’s comments.
7 When sufficient interest is shown, a subscription may be offered. Usually this would be done only after the householder has demonstrated clear appreciation for several issues of the magazines.
8 Keep in mind your goal of starting a Bible study. Ordinarily it takes several calls to develop the interest to that extent. Show your personal concern for the householder by returning as soon as possible.
9 The good news that we proclaim causes great joy. (Luke 2:10) When interested persons respond to our efforts, this is certainly a cause for rejoicing. (Phil. 4:1) Let us reap such joy by returning to help the interested ones we find in the field.

