Meeting the Challenge of the House-​to-​House Ministry
1 The idea of going from house to house, making calls on strangers, presents a real challenge to many who take up pure worship. But genuine love for Jehovah helps a person meet this challenge, and even those who are very shy by nature have progressed to the point of becoming full-​time preachers of the good news.
2 It is clear from the Bible that the early Christians shared the good news of God’s Kingdom by going from house to house. (Acts 5:42; 20:20, 21) As Christians in this 20th century, we too share in this work. Our love for God and for our neighbor motivates us to do this work even though we may meet with indifference, annoyance, contempt, or direct opposition.
3 What Meeting the Challenge Accomplishes: Each time we call, we endeavor to sow a few seeds of truth, knowing that eventually the cumulative result may be the bearing of Kingdom fruit. (Eccl. 11:6) Individual circumstances change. Something may happen that could cause a householder to think about what one of us said at the door, and he may be more receptive the next time.
4 Our house-​to-​house ministry gives those who lean toward truth and righteousness the opportunity to learn about Jehovah and his purposes, starting them on the road to everlasting life. Those who are pursuing worldly pleasures are thus lovingly warned that they need to change in order to enjoy Jehovah’s approval. This ministry also makes known Jehovah’s name and brings honor to him, whether the householders listen or not.​—Ezek. 3:11.
5 Working in the ministry helps us develop the fruits of the spirit, such as unselfish love, joy, peace, and long-​suffering. (Gal. 5:22) It helps us to be humble and sympathetic, since it involves doing good for others. Keeping busy in Jehovah’s work serves to protect us from the world.​—1 Cor. 15:58.
6 Help to Meet the Challenge: New ones need to learn how to share in this most exciting work. They often lack confidence and may therefore become discouraged at the mere thought of going from house to house. We can discuss with them common objections and what we might say in response. We can practice using some of the fine suggestions in the Reasoning book on responding to conversation stoppers. Why not offer to help them prepare for the field ministry? They can also receive much help by regularly attending the meetings for field service and thereafter working with more experienced publishers. Working with a group can be very strengthening.
7 As we go from house to house, we have the privilege of representing our God, Jehovah. What greater honor could anyone have than actually being God’s fellow worker? (1 Cor. 3:9) If we rely on him, his spirit will help us meet the challenge of the house-​to-​house ministry.​—2 Cor. 3:5.

