Service Meetings for May
Week Starting May 3
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Sharing Successfully in Our Lifesaving Ministry.” Talk and demonstrations. After brief introduction, introduce three demonstrations based on paragraphs 2-5. After each demonstration, ask audience how presentation could be adapted to various circumstances in local territory. Conclude with encouragement to share fully in ministry this weekend.
15 min: The Importance of Family Spirituality. Talk by elder. Discuss need for family consideration of daily text, outlining how this might be done under varying circumstances and family schedules. Also emphasize need for family prayer at least once a day. This might be done at bedtime. Same principles would apply in divided households, single-​parent families, and families with no children. Family preparation also plays a part in getting the most from congregation meetings each week and being able to strengthen faith of others as well.​—Heb. 10:23-25.
Song 104 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 10
Song 27
10 min: Local announcements. Experiences recently enjoyed working with magazines and brochures. Have many publishers found sufficient interest to warrant offering subscription? (These should be lined up in advance with help of brother who handles subscriptions in congregation.)
15 min: “Meeting the Challenge of the House-​to-​House Ministry.” Questions and answers. Read and apply cited scriptures.
20 min: “Benefit Fully From the 1993 ‘Divine Teaching’ District Convention”​—Part 1. Audience discussion of paragraphs 1-16. Publishers should discuss appropriate points with their Bible students who will be attending the convention.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 17
Song 16
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society’s worldwide work.
20 min: “Joyfully Return to Help Interested Ones.” Audience discussion and demonstrations. Emphasize need to keep good records of interest found. From material in paragraphs 3-6, arrange for two demonstrations. These should reflect local circumstances and be adapted as needed.
15 min: “Benefit Fully From the 1993 ‘Divine Teaching’ District Convention”​—Part 2. Discuss with audience paragraphs 17-19 and carefully review “District Convention Reminders.” Include appropriate reminders based on information in The Watchtower of June 15, 1989, pages 10-20, or encourage family groups to review points in these articles before attending convention.
Song 54 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 24
Song 141
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Outline special field service arrangements for May 31.
20 min: “Youths​—Skillfully Direct Your Steps.” Question-​and-​answer coverage of material. After paragraph 3, have brief demonstration with younger publisher asking an older one to work with him in field service. Older publisher gladly accepts and suggests they review their presentations prior to working together.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk by elder on “Why Is It So Easy to Lie?” in December 15, 1992, issue of The Watchtower, pages 21-3.
Song 223 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 31
Song 207
10 min: Local announcements. Suggest talking points from Greatest Man book that could be used in June. Encourage publishers to review field service suggestions on back page of June 1993 Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Showing Appreciation for the Literature.” Question-​and-​answer discussion of material. Include demonstration of publisher in magazine work. Householder shows interest in Bible presentation and description of magazines, saying he will read them. Publisher then says: “I believe you will benefit from them as many others have. These magazines are distributed worldwide, with The Watchtower available in 112 languages. This work is supported by voluntary contributions. We accept small donations from those who want to support this work.”
10 min: Will You Auxiliary Pioneer This Summer? Interview some who have auxiliary pioneered during summer in past years. Encourage youths and others whose circumstances may allow to consider using vacation periods to best advantage. Some may be able to help cover seldom-​worked or isolated territory during summer months. Encourage those who will be finishing school to regular pioneer or to work toward that goal.​—2 Cor. 9:6b.
10 min: Does God Forgive Our Sins? Two elders prepare for a shepherding call. They discuss how to help a brother who is still troubled about past sins and wonders if God has forgiven him. Elders review material in Reasoning book, pages 81-4, and also Insight book, Volume 1, pages 861-2. They consider their need to deal kindly with this brother and to highlight Jehovah’s mercy and willingness to forgive. They also plan to emphasize need for personal effort on part of brother; confession alone is not sufficient. Elders will offer to check with brother from time to time, following through with spiritual assistance.
Song 214 and concluding prayer.

