Sharing Successfully in Our Lifesaving Ministry
1 The apostle Paul adapted his presentation of the good news that he “might by all means save some.” (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Likewise, we will be more successful in our ministry if we are alert to discern the householder’s interests and are prepared to adapt our discussion to his needs. This should not be difficult when offering The Watchtower and Awake! or one of our brochures.
2 After introducing yourself, you might begin by saying in your own words something like this:
▪ “Many people despair at the apparent inability of world governments to provide workable solutions to the problems of our times. Some even blame the governments for their problems. Do you think there could be a government able to care adequately for all our needs? [Allow for response.] Do you know we have a reliable promise of a government that will definitely do away with all the problems we face?” Listen carefully to the householder’s answer. Depending on what he says, be ready to branch off into one of several different presentations.
3 If there is an indication in the householder’s comments that he professes to be Christian, we could then ask if he prays the “Our Father,” or Lord’s Prayer. If he answers in the affirmative, we could recite the model prayer to the point where it says, “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (Matt. 6:9, 10) This proves that someday Jehovah’s will is going to be done here on earth. Reference can then be made to an appropriate article in The Watchtower or Awake! or to a brochure that follows through on this thought, such as page 3 of The Government That Will Bring Paradise.
4 If the householder evidences no faith in God, you could refer to Hebrews 3:4 and then turn to page 4 of the brochure Does God Really Care About Us? Read paragraphs 1 and 2 and ask the question listed at the bottom of the page. Or you could tie in appropriate material from a current magazine.
5 If the householder appears satisfied with his lot in life, you could raise the question:
▪ “Why should we seriously consider what the Bible says about the future of government?” Then we could use the information found in the Reasoning book on pages 154 and 155, mentioning briefly one or more of the eight reasons provided therein. If the householder demonstrates interest, use the tract Will This World Survive?, beginning with the first paragraph on page 2, to further the conversation.
6 Your initial call will not be entirely successful if you do not whet the appetite of the householder for another visit. Therefore, be certain to ask an interesting question and promise to answer it when you return.
7 From the material above, select what you feel comfortable in saying. Adjust these suggestions to fit your territory. Become familiar with the brochures, tracts, and magazine articles you are going to use so that you can quickly adapt your discussion to the needs of the householder. May we all prepare our presentations diligently “for the sake of the good news” and thus share successfully in this lifesaving ministry.​—1 Cor. 9:23.

