Showing Appreciation for the Literature
1 “To the making of many books there is no end.” (Eccl. 12:12) Many books are not worth the paper they are printed on. However, that is not the case with literature published by the Watchtower Society. It is valuable because it contains lifesaving spiritual food. It helps interested ones to come to know Jehovah, and it strengthens the faith of those who are already Jehovah’s dedicated servants.
2 We want to share our literature with others since we know they can benefit from it. Even though it is provided without charge, there are expenses involved in production and distribution. Therefore, we do not want to hand out the publications indiscriminately. If we are not sure of the householder’s interest, we will normally offer individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! or perhaps only a tract. We should call back on everyone who accepts literature, and if interest is shown at that time, we might offer another publication.
3 Some are hesitant to tell householders that the work is supported by voluntary contributions, but in most cases it is good to do this. This makes it clear to householders that our work is not commercial. It keeps to the fore that our objective is to preach the Kingdom good news and make disciples. It helps us to discern genuine interest. People often have money for things like tobacco and worldly literature. If they are sincerely interested in what you have told them, they will see the logic of contributing to support genuine Christianity. By explaining how the work is supported, we demonstrate our appreciation for the literature. We show we realize that it costs something to produce it.
4 When the matter of contributions is properly presented, many householders are pleased to help with our vital work. There may be times when you feel it is not appropriate to mention the donation arrangement, but generally it is good to mention it on the initial call when the householder is interested in reading the literature that we offer.

