Youths​—Skillfully Direct Your Steps
1 Our Father, Jehovah, takes a personal interest in the spiritual progress of young people. By wisely listening to his loving commands, youths not only make his heart glad but also find refreshment for their souls. (Prov. 27:11; Matt. 11:28-30) They allow Jehovah to provide skillful direction for their steps.​—Prov. 16:9.
2 Christ Jesus set the example in his youth as one who gained the approval of both God and men. (Luke 2:52) Youths today should strive to do the same. Skillful direction of a young person’s steps should be evident in his pursuit of spiritual things. At the age of 12, Jesus was known for his desire to talk to others about Jehovah. (Luke 2:46, 47) Young people today have shown a similar desire to explain their faith to others.​—w90 7/1 pp. 29-30; w87 12/1 p. 21.
3 What can you young ones do right now and especially during the coming summer months to “honor Jehovah with your valuable things”? (Prov. 3:9) Why not increase the time you usually spend in the work of preaching and teaching the good news, even perhaps as an auxiliary pioneer? You might be surprised by the increased joy and other benefits that naturally flow from an increased share in the ministry. This will also give you the opportunity to work in the field service with a greater number of different publishers. You may be able to start right now by inviting an experienced publisher or two to work with you this weekend.
4 Parents can give tremendous encouragement and assistance to their children through the use of practice sessions in addition to accompanying them in the ministry. Other mature ones in the congregation can take the initiative by asking young ones to accompany them in the door-​to-​door ministry and in the return-​visit and Bible-​study work. Close association with such spiritually strong publishers will build up the young ones and help them to “press on to maturity.”​—Heb. 6:1.
5 Every Christian has the need to improve his teaching ability. Youths are no exception. Do you young ones prepare thoroughly for assignments you may be privileged to give in the Theocratic Ministry School? Do you have a regular schedule for reading and personal study as well as for meditation? Do you readily make personal application of the material you consider? Do you prepare well for the meetings so that you will fully understand the material and be ready to offer comments? Do you take note of helpful points expressed during meetings and try to use the suggestions set out in Our Kingdom Ministry?
6 Do not pass up opportunities to share in cleaning the Kingdom Hall and to assist older or infirm brothers and sisters with chores or in other practical ways. Do not neglect to make your own regular contributions to help care for Kingdom Hall expenses and the Society’s worldwide work.
7 If we ‘keep on guard according to Jehovah’s word’ and allow him to direct our steps, he will lead us to happiness and increased privileges of service.​—Ps. 119:9.

