From Our Readers
Teen Pregnancy  The series “Teen Pregnancy—A Global Tragedy” touched my heart. (October 8, 2004) I was 16 when I became pregnant. I appreciate that you highlighted the importance of being supportive of the mother and that Jehovah cares for the baby, who hasn’t done anything wrong. Thank you for such a loving article.
M. R., United States
I presented this issue of Awake! to the head midwife at a nearby clinic. She remarked that many 14- and 15-year-old girls are giving birth, something formerly unknown here. She said she could use 20 copies of the magazine right away to give to adolescents and their parents.
I. R., Benin
I found out that I was pregnant a month before I turned 17. Telling my parents was by far the hardest and most heartbreaking thing I have ever had to do. I hope that youths read this article and take it seriously. I never thought it would happen to me!
D. C., United States
I became a mother at age 17. I was pressured into a marriage that quickly fell apart. It is painful for me to think that by rushing into a sexual relationship without knowing the consequences, I lost out on much that I could have accomplished during those years. I always try to counsel youths not to make this serious mistake. My most sincere thanks for your article!
N. C., Honduras
“Jehovah, You Found Me!”  I am 15 years old, and I thoroughly enjoyed reading the article “Jehovah, You Found Me!” (October 8, 2004) Nelly’s experience helped me to understand more fully the words of James 4:8: “Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you.” Thank you for that faith-strengthening article!
K. P., United States
The experience of Nelly Lenz convinces us that Jehovah is a loving God and that he will make it possible to find him if we keep seeking him.
M. K., Japan
It is comforting to be assured through articles like this that all of Jehovah’s sheep are so precious to him that wherever they are, he remembers and will sustain each one of them.
J. G., Canada
This article brought tears to my eyes. My parents are not Jehovah’s Witnesses, and they gave me a hard time. I am happy that Nelly remained steadfast in her determination to serve Jehovah.
K. L., Jamaica
I am 12 years old. It is very encouraging to know that no matter how many problems you have at home, Jehovah always helps you through them.
J. W., United States
It is good that Nelly shared her experience with us. It will help children in similar situations. And it is important for adults to remember these children. It is easy to forget that they have special needs in the congregation.
M. K., Denmark
I have never been so touched by an experience. I also know what it means to stand up for the truth on your own as a youth. For four years I was the only one in my home who served Jehovah. To read of Jehovah’s personal care for Nelly deeply touched my heart. Thank you for the upbuilding experience. Thank you, Nelly!
G. W., Germany

