page 1 
VOL. XXI. JANUARY 1, 1900. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Fallen from Grace vs. Collapsed 3 

The Federation of Babylon 4 

The Time of Opportunity is Short 5 

The Prospect for 1900 5 

To Him That Hath Used Shall 

More be Given 5 

A Fresh Call for Volunteers 6 

Poem: Our Elims— To My Beloved 

Pastor 7 

"The Word Was Made Flesh" 7 

"Jesus Increased in Wisdom 

and Stature" 12 

Interesting Letters 15 

Items: A Post Office Thief is 

Still Robbing Our Mail, etc 2 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

a ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 



is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church.— Acts 3:19-21; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



R2555 : page 2 



A POST OFFICE THIEF IS STILL ROBBING OUR MAIL! 

We specially request that no money be sent by mail. Altho 
this is mentioned in every issue quite a number fail to heed it. 
They thus not only lose the money sent but cause themselves 
and us trouble and postage writing about their losses. Furthermore 
they trouble others who properly send Postal Orders, Drafts 
or Express Orders; for the mail-thief frequently by mistake 
takes these (which he cannot use and must destroy lest they 
betray him). Hence the many who do right in this matter are 
put to trouble even tho they suffer no financial loss. If all 
would observe the proper rule, the thief would be spared temptation, 
and he would soon cease to rifle letters addressed to us— 
finding no money therein. 

One dear Brother sent a donation in money, which went 
astray. He wrote subsequently that his thought was— This is 
the Lord's money and for the Lord's cause and he will protect it. 
He erred in this, failing to realize that his course was a tempting 
of Providence: "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." 
(See Matt. 4:7.) Nor should we tempt our weak fallen 
fellow-creatures. 

page 2 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity. Inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2553 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



FALLEN FROM GRACE VERSUS COLLAPSED. 



MORE evident does it become, daily, that our 
Lord's declaration, "Babylon is fallen!" 
does not signify the outward collapse of "Churchianity;" 
but that nominal "Christendom" has fallen from 
divine favor;— just as the fall of national Judaism from 
divine favor, at the rejection and crucifixion of Messiah 
at his first presence, meant not the collapse at the 
moment of that religio-political system. The collapse 
of Judaism came after it had been fallen from divine 
favor for 37 years, viz., in A.D. 69-70; and during 
that interim God's true people, "Israelites indeed," 



were called out by the voice of the Gospel Dispensation. 

And just so now, the collapse of nominal Christianity, 

"Christendom" or "Babylon," is not to be 

expected until A.D. 1914, tho fallen from favor since 

1878. The collapse will be sudden and awful when it 

does come: and while only the few realize the fallen-from-grace 

condition of Babylon in the present, none 

will be ignorant of her collapse when it comes. But 

to know then will be too late so far as the little flock 

of overcomers is concerned;— they are all called now, 

during the interim, "Come out of her, my people, that 

ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not 

of her plagues"— punishment.— Rev. 18:2,4. 

The collapse of Babylon is graphically described 
by the Revelator as like the casting of a great millstone 
into the sea, saying, "Thus [suddenly], with 
violence shall that great city, Babylon, be thrown 
down and be found no more at all." Her sudden destruction 
is described as a great conflagration, and the 
declaration is made that it is because "the hour of her 
judgment [krisis]" will have come, that she will thus 
suffer overthrow or "plagues." "Therefore shall her 
plagues come in one day [prophetic time is a day for a 
year], death and mourning and famine, and she shall 
be utterly burned with fire, for strong is the Lord God 
who judgeth her." Whoever are worthy the name, 
"my people," will hear and obey the Lord's voice and 
come out of Babylon and "receive not of her plagues;" 
because their obedience in fleeing out as soon as they 
see Babylon's real condition will prove that they were 
never in real accord with her sins. Those who remain 
after seeing Babylon and her blasphemous doctrines in 
the light now shining are reckoned as endorsing the 
blasphemies and deserving the "plagues" most thoroughly 
—as much or more than the "tare" class of 
Babylonians, because they have greater light. 

Many err in not fleeing promptly when first they 
realize the true condition of affairs. Some say,— I will 
use my office or influence in Babylon, and then obey 
the Lord after I have gathered some of the "wheat." 
They forget that obedience is better than all else in 
divine estimation— better even than sacrifice. Are 
they wiser than God that they may even for a month 
advantageously or safely ignore his Word? Later on 
they find that even the "tare" class consider them as 
having for a time at least "dissembled" and misrepresented 
their own faith as well as misrepresented the 
faith of the denomination which they had agreed to 
uphold. Their influence which at first might have 
been powerful for the truth becomes vitiated by reason 
of their neglect to obey God's voice— by their attempt 
to guide themselves and to lean to their own 
understanding. 

Others say, I am free from Babylon in spirit, God 
knows! Altho my name is still on the denominational 
rolls, I take no interest in her affairs— my sympathies 



are all with the truth, and I rarely attend other meetings. 
But is this right— to be half out and half in 

R2553 : page 4 

Babylon? Is this the obedience required of an "overcomer" 

and pleasing and acceptable to God? Surely 

not. He publicly entered into a covenant with the denomination 

when he joined it, and he should faithfully 

live up to all the conditions of that covenant until he 

as publicly renounces or cancels his membership. 

Others say, I merely retain my membership in the 
church and sing in the choir, etc., for the sake of peace 
in my family: otherwise I would speedily withdraw. 
But is this "overcoming," or being overcome? The 
latter, surely: it is a balancing of regard for God and 
his Word, with regard for husband or wife or children 
or friends and their wishes. Thus the Lord tests us, 
whether we love houses, lands, reputation, friends, 
husband, wife or children, more than him! We should 
be prompt to obey and thus to show that to us God's 
will is superior to every other consideration. 

Additionally, we once said to a dear brother who 
made such a remark as the above: Brother, excuse the 
illustration, but it may help you to see your position 
on this question in its true light if I tell you of a matter 
which, seems to me, aptly illustrates your position 
in a way you have not thus far thought of it. It is 
this: In Chicago, at one of the great butchering establishments 
(perhaps at all) they have a trained bullock 
whose duty it is to decoy the cattle that are ready for 
slaughter. The bewildered cattle are naturally fearful 
of harm and would be difficult to drive to the 
butchering spot, but with the decoy bull they are easily 
led. He gallops up to the herd tossing his head and 
tail as a friendly greeting and then, wheeling around, 
he becomes their leader and gallops off along the narrow 
passage where they can go only single file. He 
knows well his business, and when near the killing 
place he steps aside into a little space provided for him 
alone, while the herd push one another along to their 
slaughter. Now, dear brother (we remarked), you and 
others in the nominal churches, who know better and 
who merely sing, or preach, or hold some petty "office," 
or merely help to count another one on the reports 
of Babylon's prosperity or to give another dollar 
to her millions, are like the decoy bull— using your 
knowledge and influence to the injury and bondage of 
others who, seeking the right way of true liberty and 
life, are looking to you for counsel and being misled 
by your example. The brother in question at once 
thankfully acknowledged the force of the illustration, 
and requested that some of the free "Withdrawal Letters" 
and tracts to accompany them be sent him for 
his use in getting free and setting a worthy example 
to others. 



THE FEDERATION OF BABYLON. 

"Christendom" was united in the dark ages, and 
the results were terrible, every way. The more truth 
and reformation came in, the more did "Christendom" 
split up. Had the reform continued, and had the 
light of truth shined still more clearly, the result 
would have been that split after split would have occurred, 
until each individual Christian would have 
stood free, and all denominationalism would have perished. 
This would be the ideal condition; for all the 
unions of the past and present are unscriptural and 
tend to impede the Christian's progress. They are 
mechanical unions, and not heart unions: they are the 

R2554 : page 4 

work of Satan, and not God's workmanship: they tend 
to prevent heart-union and foster errors, which otherwise 
would quickly die. Not until enlightened by the 
spirit of God's Word are any prepared to exercise the 
liberty wherewith Christ makes free indeed, and to 
come out from all false Christian unions or sectarian 
communions into that broad place which recognizes 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism and one Church, 
whose names are written in heaven. And only such are 
prepared for proper union on the same basis as that 
of the primitive church of Apostolic times. 

When, therefore, we from time to time in these 
columns allude to the growing evidences of a federative 
union among all the great denominations of Christendom, 
and when we point out that the Scriptures indicate 
such a union, let no one suppose that either we 
or the Scriptures approve of such a union, or consider 
that its influence will be favorable to either the truth 
or the "saints." Quite to the contrary, the influence 
will be baneful: whatever is encouraging or helpful 
to Babylon is proportionately injurious to the true 
Church. The various sects of Christendom realize 
that many of the doctrinal errors, which have heretofore 
bound their votaries helplessly and mechanically, 
will no longer hold as firmly as before, and they are 
supplanting these with new bonds of later device: viz., 
love of respectability and pride in denominational name 
and prosperity— a party spirit. And instead of the 
discredited doctrines (which can no longer be unfurled 
as standards, but which must be carried along 
tightly closed) they are raising the standard of moral 
and political reform, the banner of a new crusade. 

No one can say that their crusade is an evil of itself; 
and only the few who are spiritually minded (the 
true Church) in and out of their sects can so much as 
see that moral and political reform is a worldly work 
and not the commission of the Church which is anointed 
to preach, not such reforms, but the cross of Christ 



and complete regeneration of heart. 

Those who are looking for a union in Christendom 
in which denominational names and denominational 
lines will be obliterated, are looking for what they will 
never see until the great collapse comes, and the entire 
"Christendom" system, social, religious, political 

R2554 : page 5 

and financial goes down in the great anarchous trouble 

with which the present age will close. The union 

which will be cemented will be largely one of common 

sentiment and cooperation in moral and political reforms. 

And this federative union, as already pointed 

out, began in 1846 in the organization of the Evangelical 

Alliance. We are looking yearly for its final 

knot to be tied in some manner that will include with 

other Protestant denominations the Episcopal Church, 

and a working agreement with Papacy. 

Thus the "Image of the Beast" (Rev. 13) will 
receive life— vigor, energy— be made active. And 
that activity which will seem to promise great things 
for Babylon, and which will actively suppress liberty 
and be exerted powerfully against the spread of the 
truths now published by us, will be but the lifting up 
of the great millstone preparatory to its being violently 
and quickly destroyed, for it will soon be evident that 
such a new union of church and state (wholly different 
from that of the past) will be a union of the classes 
against the masses: and it will be the rising of the masses 
in revolution that will, as God's agency, hurl 
the Babylon system to utter destruction. 

THE TIME OF OPPORTUNITY IS SHORT. 



The more clearly we see present conditions and 
foresee those approaching, the more it should stimulate 
our zeal to be and to do while we have the opportunity 
—for a dark night approaches, wherein no man 
can work. Whoever desires to lay up treasures in 
heaven, by voluntarily sacrificing time, money, influence 
and other earthly considerations for the service of the 
Lord by service of the "brethren," should bestir himself, 
lest the harvest pass, and the summer of opportunity 
end, and he find that he has failed to offer his 
sacrifice which he presented to God theoretically when 
he was baptized into Christ's death. And whoever, having 
become nominally a member of the "royal priesthood," 
does not offer any sacrifice during this Gospel 
Day of sacrifice forfeits his place as a member of that 
priesthood— his name will surely be blotted out and 
the crown, apportioned to him on the strength of his 
covenant to sacrifice, will be set over to another who 
will appreciate and use the privilege of self-denial, self-sacrifice, 



suffering with Christ. 

THE PROSPECTS FOR 1900. 



It is our opinion that the year just beginning will 
be a very prosperous year for the truth. This is not 
merely "a wish, father to the thought," nor is it because 
the "Good Hopes" already sent in seem to give 
promise of funds for a wider spread of the truth; for, 
as an offset, we have noticed that our paper (the chief 
item of cost in our publications) will cost us nearly 
double what it did last year— in other words, a dollar 
will do only about sixty cents worth as compared to 
last year. No; but we have felt for several months 
past that Churchianity has reached and is at a crisis, 
where a cleaveage is sure to take place,— which will 
separate from her some true saints who hitherto have 
been perplexed respecting the Lord's will, but who 
will now gradually become convinced that "Babylon" 
is no longer his mouthpiece, but already spewed out 
of his mouth (Rev. 3:16), and that her evolutionary 
teachings are not of him but in radical opposition to 
his Word and plan. 

We have confidence that God's time is ripe for 
present truth to be more widely made known among his 
people as a part of the gospel which is either a savor 
of life unto life or of death unto death. We have confidence, 
too, that all the money and all the colaborers 
necessary will be forthcoming, and we are arranging 
plans accordingly. Those who cooperate will share 
the service and the blessings attendant; those who do 
not use their privileges will but mar their own blessings, 
but shall not hinder the work that is due to be 
done. "The Lord will provide!" Indeed, we expect 
that each year now will note rapid spread of the truth 
until "the door is shut;"— until the work is interfered 
with forcibly by outside influences. Then we shall 
understand that our work is done— that the "elect" 
have all been sealed, and that nought remains but to 
"stand" and assist others to stand. Indeed, this, as 
we all know, is a most important part of the present; 
for, while others are being reached with the truth, 
those already blessed are being assaulted by the Adversary, 
so that all may be tested and only the faithful 
be able to stand.— See Eph. 6:10-18. 

TO HIM THAT HATH USED SHALL MORE BE GIVEN. 



The "Volunteer" spirit is growing. Those who 
have served thus have been blessed and are more anxious 
for the conquest than they were for the first. 
They look abroad and see thousands blinded by the 



god of this world enlisting to kill and be killed, and 
they read the reports of the killed, wounded and prisoners, 
and the hardships endured, and the taxes to 
be borne; and then they say: How small is the service, 
how slight the hardship and suffering and self-denial 
our gracious King is willing to accept as "reasonable 
service" from us who have consecrated to him our all 
—even unto death— and to whom he has already given 
such rich rewards as well as promised us a share in his 
Millennial Kingdom. We are resolved that neither 
cares of this life, nor pride, nor self-ease shall hinder 
us from engaging in this battle against darkness and 
the influences of the Prince of Darkness. On the contrary, 
we will be yet more vigilant, yet more enthusiastic 

R2554 : page 6 

in planting the Truth, the standard of our King, 
where it can be seen by many now ignorantly fighting 
against him and it. 

Let none think of the "Volunteers" as illiterate 
"hand-bill-distributers." Quite to the contrary, these 
"ministers of the truth" who are reaching larger numbers 
and exerting a greater influence than if they occupied 
the chief pulpits of the land, are far above the 
average of those whom they serve— both in secular 
and in Biblical intelligence. One is a stove-manufacturer 
and dealer; several are storekeepers, one owning 
and successfully managing five stores; some are college 
graduates, architects and civil engineers; some are 
clerks holding remunerative positions of trust— one of 
the latter, besides doing diligent "Volunteer" work, 
economized rigidly his living expenses and accumulated 
five hundred dollars during last year, which he sent 
to our Society to assist in publishing more "good-tidings-amunition. 
Several are the chosen leaders of 

meetings in their various localities; several are stenographers 
(male and female); at least two are artists, 
one of these of distinction as a portrait painter; others 
are house-wives; others are mechanics, who, after a 
week of toil, find recreation and heart-refreshment by 
spending part of each Sunday as messengers (angels) 
of the Lord to carry to their "brethren" yet in Babylon 
the true gospel message,— "good-tidings of great 
joy which shall be unto all people" through "him who 
loved us and bought us with his own precious blood." 

Plenty of worldly business can command such 
servants because of the pay offered; but no other religious 
work has ever called for and gotten volunteers 
of this class, nor for a work of this kind, whose only 
pay in the present time is the divine blessing "a hundred 
fold more in this present time with persecution, 
—and in the world to come eternal life"— "glory, 
honor and immortality." No other gospel was ever 
worthy of so intelligent a class of servants: but as respects 
this gospel its most honorable servants feel that 



all that they have and are, are offerings far too insignificant 
to testify to God their new-found appreciation 
of his glorious character and plan. They feel impelled 
to pay their vows unto the Lord, to keep their covenant 

R2555 : page 6 

of self-sacrifice even unto death, because they 
have the genuine faith in the Lord's promises, which 
works by love and purifies the heart from pride and 
selfishness. 

A FRESH CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS. 



In the world's warfare defeat leads to fresh calls 
for soldiers: with us success calls for more "Volunteers" 
and more success and more blessing, "riches of 
grace" (with possibly more persecution and slander) 
and by and by "a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory." There is more, much more work 
to be done, and we are desirous that many more of the 
Lord's consecrated people should share the heart-cheer 
and character-strengthening which this service affords. 

Here is the very opportunity for which you have 
prayed— an opportunity for serving the truth, and the 
Lord and the "brethren." You wished and prayed for 
the needful talents to present these good tidings, and 
you hoped and prayed for opportunities and for means: 
and now, behold! the Lord has provided you all these 
in this "Volunteer" work. Notice that it is a "reasonable 
service" as no other is; because— 

(1) It is not an unreasonable misrepresentation 

of God's character and plan and methods with drum 
and tambourine, and singing of hymns to concert-hall 
tunes, misnamed divine worship and service. 

(2) It is not the unreasonable misrepresentation 

of the divine character and plan as preached in one-half 
the 200,000 pulpits of "Christendom" which blasphemes 
God's character and misrepresents his plan by 
declaring that only the saints of the present time will 
ever be saved— far less than one out of every thousand 
of the world's population;* and that the great mass, 
both of the living and the dead, will spend an eternity 
in torment indescribable. 

(3) It is not the unreasonable misrepresentation 

of God's character and plan presented in the other half 
of the pulpits of "Christendom"— which, ashamed of 
their "hell fire and damnation creeds," hypocritically 
acknowledge them, while actually they deny them and 
preach "another gospel" of Evolution and Higher Criticism, 
which makes void the Word and plan of God, 
and repudiates the cross of Christ and all necessity for 
his atoning sacrifice. 

(4) It is a "reasonable service" because it appeals 



only to reason and Scripture, as no other gospel message 
on earth or known among men appeals to these, 
and to no other authorities and standards. And it does 
this, too, in a most reasonable manner: not like some by 
making false professions and taking vows in order to 
get into pulpits and into college-professorships, and 
under good salaries, to capture the sects ("creeping 
into houses and leading captive silly women"), but by 
kindly proffering without money and without price the 
priceless jewel of consistent truth which from our own 
experience we know will bless every true recipient. 
Nor has the Lord given us cause for shame respecting 
the form in which our messages are delivered— they 
are neat, creditable to the most refined who engage in 
the service. And in turn "the adornment of a meek 
and quiet spirit" which the Lord's faithful take to this 
humble service (laying down their lives for the brethren) 



*One in a thousand of the world's population would be 
1,600,000. That many saints would be a power for good. 

R2555 : page 7 

is one of the strongest sermons or epistles of 
Christ-likeness that can be presented to those we may 
hope to interest, and it already has spoken loudly to 
those who at first were too prejudiced to read. 
(5) Could there be a more blessed or a more 
reasonable service than this? Nay, verily! We can 
fancy, indeed, that the heavenly angels look down 
upon our privileges and opportunities and fondly desire 
that in divine providence it might have been their 
privilege to join with us in this most reasonable, most 
honorable and most blessed service. 

THE PLAN OF CAMPAIGN FOR 1900. 



Confident of the reenlistment of the veterans of 
1899, we have prepared for them a new campaign 
which we believe they will heartily enjoy. We will 
get ready for Spring campaign hundreds of thousands 
of pamphlets which we believe you will enjoy using. 
We will call for Volunteers and reenlistments about 
March, so please be ready. 

Meantime most of the "volunteers" have plenty 
of work for the suitable weather between now and 
spring; and the spirit of the Lord— the spirit of love 
for the Lord, love for the truth and love for the "brethren" 
—is constantly constraining fresh volunteers for 
places not yet served with the booklet, "Bible vs. 
Evolution," and we are printing and will continue to 
print, plenty of these to supply the demand. 



The new booklets will be supplied only for the 
fields where the other distribution has been made. 
This free offer for this special work will not affect the 
regular selling prices of the booklets;— they are not 
free for any other kind of service, tho all are supplied 
at very low rates. We hope that we may have many 
and prompt responses to this call for Gideon's Band, 
armed with the Jubilee trumpet to give the joyful 
sound, and with lights in their vessels,— ready and 
willing to break the vessels, to let the light shine out 
while they cause the joyful sound of the real good 
tidings to sound throughout the land.— See 
Judges Chap. VII. 

page 7 

OUR ELIMS.-TO MY BELOVED PASTOR. 



Our way winds upward on the rocky steep, 
And narrow is the path our feet must tread; 

We still press on through shade or noontide heat- 
Pilgrims to Canaan through a desert led. 

The way is rough, and weary grow our feet, 

Yet faint we not— the goal is fair and sweet. 

Yet, as we onward urge our weary way, 
Sometimes a sigh escapes, a tear will fall; 

Our load grows heavy, and the glaring day 
And heat and wayside dust our hearts appal. 

Yet our Leader loves us well and notes our sigh, 

His help is sure, His presence ever nigh. 

We lift our eyes, and lo! a shelving rock 

And sparkling spring and waving palms are near; 

With glad and quickened feet and eager joy, 
We haste to this fair Elim-grove of cheer. 

We loose our sandals by the brooklet sweet 

And in its waters bathe our weary feet. 

And as we take again our onward way, 

We pluck fair blossoms, delicate and rare, 

We breathe their perfume sweet throughout the day, 
The rugged path has grown most strangely fair; 

And thus our Father in His tender love, 

Doth bless us and His loving-kindness prove. 

And thus, dear friend, as you go on your way, 
Walking this path our loving Master trod, 

With patient, trusting heart from day to day, 

Keeping the road that leads to "Home" and God, 

May these blest "Elims" often cheer your heart, 

That you may ever choose the "better part!" 

May blossoms, too, along your path be found, 



Blossoms of love, and true and kindly deed, 
Most fair and sweet— fragrant with tender thoughts, 

And loving gratitude— your earthly meed. 
And may I hope, dear friend, my gift may be 
One of these wayside blossoms sweet to thee? 

With much Christian love, "A happy Christmas and New Year. 
ALICE G. JAMES,-Illinois, Dec. 25th, 1899. 



R2555 : page 7 

"THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH." 

-JAN. 7.-LUKE 2:1-16.- 

"Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall 
save his people from their sins."— Matt. 1:21. 

JESUS is the topic of the International Sunday 
School Lesson course for the entire year 1900. 
It should be a very profitable study, for the more intimately 
we know our dear Redeemer in the light of the 
Scriptures the more we shall appreciate him, love him 
and seek to copy him. No other life than his could bear 
so continual and close a scrutiny, yet always be full of 
fresh revelations of moral dignity and character— any 
other life similarly studied and criticised would reveal 
its seamy side of weakness, sin and ignobility. 

Of the four records, only John's attempts to trace 
our Lord's genealogy to the heavenly source, and to 
show us that before he was made flesh he was a spirit 
being with the Father and a sharer of his glory— a god 
with the God. But all of the Evangelists are clear in 
their statement that he "was made flesh"— not 
that he remained a spirit being, and assumed flesh as 
clothing in which to appear to men, but, however explainable, 
that the life power of the spirit being, the 
Logos, became the life power of the human being, born 
of a woman and under the Law, subject to all the conditions 
and circumstances of the Jews. Matthew traces 

R2555 : page 8 

Joseph's genealogy; for altho the statement is clear 
that Jesus was not the son of Joseph, nevertheless, being 
adopted by him as his son, he might, without impropriety, 
inherit through him. Luke shows the 
genealogy of Mary, by which our Lord was actually 
related, according to the flesh, to our race and to the 
royal family of David through the line of Nathan.* 

The time of our Lord's birth was an auspicious 
one in several respects, and very evidently divine wisdom 
had exercised itself in respect to the world's affairs 
by way of preparation for this important event: 



(1) The spirit of world-conquering that began with 

Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom was favorable to it, in the 

sense that it brought the various families or nations 

of mankind into closer contact with each other, broadening 

their ideas. (2) This policy had resulted in the 

transplanting of peoples from one land to another, and 

thus had made them more cosmopolitan in their sentiments. 

(3) Israel and Judah, thus transplanted in their 

captivity to Babylon, became so attached to the new conditions 

that comparatively few of them availed themselves 

of the offer of Cyrus to return to their own land, 

only about fifty thousand of all the tribes, out of several 

millions. The Jews among the Gentiles were by no 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V., Chap. 6. 

R2556 : page 8 

means lost and had by no means abandoned all of 
their hopes in the Abrahamic Covenant nor all of their 
faithfulness to the Mosaic Law— altho they were lax 
in these matters and too full of a love of gain and ease 
to cultivate the spirit of Israelites indeed. Nevertheless, 
they had their influence amongst all the nations 
with whom they dwelt, and were witnesses to the hopes 
of Israel in the one God and in a coming Messiah, the 
Son of God, to be the world's Deliverer. (4) The 
triumph for a time of the Greek Empire had brought 
to the civilized world a highly developed literature— 
the Greek language had reached its zenith, and was 
the literary language of the civilized world. (5) The 
Roman Empire had conquered the world and was in 
the height of its power, and as a result there was a 
time of universal peace, and hence a more favorable 
time than any before for the announcement of the 
Gospel and for the safety of its representatives in passing 
from nation to nation. (6) Israel itself had reached 
probably its highest development, intellectually, morally 
and religiously, and additionally we are told in 
the Scriptures that "All men were in expectation" of 
the Messiah's coming.— Luke 3:15. 

It was just at this most appropriate time, as divinely 
arranged for, that Caesar Augustus, the Roman 
Emperor, issued his decree respecting the taxing of 
his worldwide empire. The decree was not merely an 
assessment of taxes, but was rather a census, or enrollment 
for taxation. But instead of sending assessors 
to the people, according to the present custom, the 
arrangement then was that every male citizen must 
report himself at the headquarters of his own family 
line. This was the occasion for the coming of Joseph 
and his espoused wife, Mary, the mother of Jesus, to 
Bethlehem, their native city or family city, for they 
were both of the house of David (tho through different 



lines), and Bethlehem was "the city of David." 
Thus in a providential manner and by a decree over 
which they had no control whatever, Joseph and Mary 
were brought to the very city in which most appropriately 
the great heir of David should be born, as had 
been foretold by the prophet— Micah 5:2. 

The noting of these little incidentals by which 
divine providence prepared for our Savior's birth and 
for the sending forth of the Gospel message, are 
strengthening to the faith of the Lord's people. Realizing 
God's care in the past over even the little things, 
gives a foundation for confidence in his wisdom and 
provision for the features of his plan which are yet 
future— the fulfilment of all the exceeding great and 
precious promises which centered in him who was born 
in Bethlehem. And so also a realization of the divine 
providence in the larger affairs of the divine plan stimulates 
faith also in the Lord's providences as respects 
the personal and more private affairs of his people. 
Let us more and more realize that, as even the smallest 
incidents connected with the birth of our Savior 
were ordered of the Lord, so also he is both able and 
willing to order all of the affairs of his spiritual children. 
Let us reason with the Apostle that, if God 
loved us while we were yet sinners, so as to make such 
careful provision for our redemption, much more now 
that we are no longer rebels, aliens, strangers, foreigners, 
but have become his sons, fellow-heirs with 
Christ and all the saints, we may have confidence in his 
love and in his providential care, that according to his 
promise all things shall work together for good to them 
that love him— to the called ones according to his purpose. 
-Rom. 5:8-10; 8:28. 

The same decree that brought Joseph and Mary 
to Bethlehem brought many others of the numerous 
family of David, and as the inns or hotels of that time 
were comparatively limited in numbers and in capacity, 
it is not surprising that the inn proper was full of 
guests when Joseph and Mary arrived. Indeed, it was 
rather the custom for many travelers to carry with 
them their own lodging outfit, and to provide for their 
own conveniences in the courtyard connected with the 
inns. And hence the experiences of Joseph and Mary 
were by no means exceptional. When therefore the 
Babe Jesus was born, a manger became his most convenient 
cradle. 

The city of Bethlehem still exists, and probably 

R2556 : page 9 

is not so dissimilar to what it was in that day, for in 
that land customs seem to have changed but little in 
centuries. A certain grotto is claimed to be the one 
which nineteen hundred years ago was the stable of 
the inn, and a certain stone manger is shown which, 
it is claimed, was the one in which the Babe Jesus was 



laid. Over this has been erected a Catholic church, 
and various ceremonies are continually performed in 
and about and connected with "the sacred manger." 
With such ceremonies we can feel little sympathy, believing 
them to be rather of the nature of idolatries. 
To us the center of interest is not the holy ground on 
which our Savior trod, nor the holy manger in which 
he lay as a babe, nor his holy mother; yea, tho we 
reverence his flesh, and are deeply interested in all 
that pertains thereto, especially in all its experiences, 
from the time of its consecration to death, at baptism; 
nevertheless, our still greater interest is in our risen 
Lord, the new creature perfected, the spiritual One, 
far above manhood, far above angels, principalities 
and powers and every name that is named— next to 
the Father, and exalted to his right hand of power. 
The Apostle voices this sentiment well, saying, "Tho 
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth 
know we him [so] no more"— our knowledge 
of him as the risen and glorified Lord and Savior 
thoroughly outshines all of our interest in his earthly 
life. (2 Cor. 5:16.) And yet his earthly life is interesting 
and profitable to us, as we have seen and shall see. 
Had the people assembled at Bethlehem realized 
who this was that had come to their city— that he was 
from the heavenly courts, that he was the Logos made 
flesh, that he had come to "save his people from their 
sins"— how gladly they would have welcomed him 
into the inn and have given to his use and comfort its 
choicest apartments ! But they knew him not, and 
hence lost this great privilege of ministering to him. 
Similarly, in every city and town where the Lord's 
people are (his true saints), there are many who would 
make them welcome and give them the best at their 
disposal, did they but recognize them as the messengers 
of Jesus and of the Heavenly Father; but as the 
Apostle says, "The world knoweth us not, because it 
knew him not." (1 John 3:1.) The disciple must not 
expect to be above his Lord, and hence, even when 
going upon missions of mercy and benevolence and as 
ambassadors for God, we should expect that the Lord's 
providence would furnish for us, not the most palatial 
conditions, but more probably very humble conditions. 
And when we find it thus we should rejoice that to 
some extent at least we have experiences which harmonize 
with those of our Lord. The Lord's people 
will obtain a blessing in proportion as they are prepared 
to receive all opportunities for God's service as 
divine favors and to appreciate them, no matter how 
humble the conditions: and it is noteworthy that 
neither Joseph, nor Mary, nor Jesus, nor the disciples, 
nor the Evangelist who recorded the incident, offers the 
slightest complaint or suggestion of dissatisfaction 
with the arrangement provided by divine providence. 
In proportion as they would have felt dissatisfied with 
the arrangements provided, in that proportion the divine 



plans would not have worked for their good. 

The vicinity of Bethlehem is a pastoral country, 
and today is covered with flocks. It was the custom 
at that time for the shepherds to remain with their 
flocks by night as a guard against thieves as well as 
against wild beasts. It was in this vicinity that David 
(afterward king), when a shepherd-boy protecting his 
flocks, slew on one occasion a lion and at another time 
a bear. The shepherds as a class were not particularly 
well educated people as respects schools, and yet 
many of them were thoughtful and thus secured, in 
their leisure time while watching their flocks, by reflection 
and by conversation, considerable knowledge, 
so that they might be termed an intellectual and thinking 
class of people— their minds being turned more to reflection 
on large subjects than are the minds of some 
who are constantly immersed in trade and mechanics. 
The shepherd whom God honored in making him king 
of his typical kingdom, was a great poet, and evidently 
much of his time while shepherding was given to 
the muse, and one of his most beautiful poems (Psalm 23) 
represents Jehovah himself as the Shepherd of his 
people,— his flock, for which he cares. It was to men 
of this thoughtful class, and no doubt men familiar 
with David's Psalms, and with the Messianic hopes 
therein set forth, that the Lord sent the first message 
respecting his Son made flesh. 

The description of the appearance of an angel, 
and of the fear which the brightness of his countenance 
engendered, is both simple and natural. All mankind 
more or less feels instinctively a fear of the supernatural, 
a trepidation at the very thought of being in the 
presence of the holy angels. And this is proper as 
well as natural, for all realize their own imperfections 
through the fall, fearing more or less that the results 
to themselves would be unfavorable if divine justice 
were laid to the line and to the plummet in respect to 
their affairs. All seem instinctively to realize their 
need of mercy at the hands of him with whom we have 
to do. And so it was with these shepherds; they were 
affrighted as they beheld the heavenly visitor in their 
midst; but his message was not one of justice nor in 
any sense of condemnation, but of divine mercy. He 
soothed them with the words, "Be not afraid; for behold 
I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall 
be unto all people." Can we wonder that joy took 

R2557 : page 10 

the place of fear in their hearts as they heard the gracious 
words? Surely not. And so it is with all who 
from that day to the present time have heard this true 
Gospel message, not merely with the outward ears, 
but truly, with the ears of their understanding— comprehending 
it. 
How false and how sad has been the understanding 



of this message by many of God's people as it has 
echoed to them down the ages! How few have heard 
it gladly, appreciatively! How remarkable that nearly 
all of the different churches and their thousands of 
ministers and hundreds of thousands of Sunday School 
teachers should unite in a complete contradiction of this 
message of the angels— a contradiction which not only 
wounds their own sentiments and grieves their own 
hearts, but which robs our dear Savior's mission of 
nine-tenths of its majesty, and thoroughly dishonors 
and maligns the name of our gracious Heavenly Father 
by its misrepresentation of the salvation which he has 
provided in Christ Jesus. 

Some perhaps may be surprised, and even shocked, 
at such an arraignment of the message which they and 
other well-meaning but blinded Christians are delivering 
in the name of the gospel— for the word "gospel" 
is derived from the words "good tidings." We are 
quite ready to believe that the vast majority of those 
who promulgate the bad tidings of eternal misery, as 
being the divine message and sentence to the vast majority 
of mankind, are wholly unaware of how seriously 
they misrepresent the divine character and government 
in the message which they carry to men;— they 
misstate the Gospel, not of intention, but of blindness, 
the very blindness mentioned by the Apostle as originating 
with the great Adversary— the blindness by which 
he blinds the minds of the vast majority, to hinder them 
from realizing the glorious light of God's goodness revealed 
in Jesus Christ our Lord.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

O, if we could only get all true Christians to study 
this tenth verse of our lesson, and to see the depths of 
its significance, it would quickly revolutionize the 
teachings of Christendom! But as our Lord declared, 
some of the deep things of the divine plan are hidden 
from many of the wise and prudent according to the 
course of this world, and are revealed only to the 
humble— the babes. Nevertheless, the testimony of 
God standeth sure, and all whose understandings have 
been opened and who have been enabled to comprehend 
some of the lengths and the breadths, and the 
heights and the depths of God's love, may rejoice that 
the ignorance of the world in general on this subject 
and the opposition of the great Adversary who is 
blinding them, cannot continue forever, but must soon 
give place, when the Lord's due time shall come;— 
when he who died on Calvary for the world's redemption 
shall begin his glorious reign by binding that old 
serpent, the devil, Satan, that he should deceive the 
nations no more for the thousand years of the Millennial 
reign. Then all shall see out of obscurity; then 
all shall discern what at present is the privilege of only 
the favored few to see, respecting the divine character 
and plan— that the message of the angel was true, 
every word of it— that the grand results to flow from 
the birth of the Savior in Bethlehem justified the message 



sent by the great Jehovah,— a good message of 
great joy which eventually shall be to all people— 
whose enlightenment and blessing shall have no hindrance, 
no restriction, and as a result all shall come to 
a knowledge of the truth and to an opportunity of 
availing themselves of the grace, mercy and peace 
provided for all in the great salvation secured by the 
ransom-sacrifice of our Lord Jesus. 

The angel further explained his great Gospel message, 
showing its basis, and declaring that all the good 
things mentioned should come to pass because the 
Savior, Messiah, had been born— the one so long looked 
for in Israel, the promised seed of Abraham in whom 
not only Israel should be blessed and exalted to honor, 
dignity and cooperation, but in whom also "all the 
families of the earth should be blessed." And let us 
here remark that the order of presentation used by the 
heavenly messenger, and evidently divinely ordered, 
is the proper presentation of this subject which 
should be adopted by all who seek to be used of the 
Lord as his ambassadors in the calling of the elect 
Church. First, there is the grand pronouncement of 
divine favor and blessing, that it is a cause for joy, 
and that ultimately it shall extend to every creature; 
secondly, there is the specific explanation of how all 
this is to be accomplished— through a Savior, a Deliverer, 
who, as stated in our Golden Text, in order to 
deliver his people from the wages of sin, death, into 
eternal life and blessing, must first of all save them 
from their sins. And we see from other Scriptures 
that this salvation from our sins signifies not only the 
payment on our behalf of the penalty for Adamic sin, 
but also, subsequently, man's instruction in righteousness 
and lifting out of sin; in which uplift each one is 
required to cooperate to the extent of his will and of 
his ability. 

So all teaching of the grace that is to come to 
mankind should be coupled with the philosophy of 
the salvation— the Savior made flesh and the flesh devoted 
or sacrificed for our sins, and the Savior glorified, 
that in due time after the selection of his Church 
he might, with her, according to the divine plan, establish 
his Kingdom of righteousness for the uplifting 
of the world of mankind out of ignorance, superstition 
and general degradation into which the great Adversary 

R2557 :page 11 

has gotten them through the fall and through his 
subsequent blinding and misleading. In this connection 
it is well to remember that our Lord's name, Jesus, 
signifies Savior, and that all who would be of the elect 
Church must have the spirit of the Bridegroom (as 
well as by faith be covered with the garment of his 
imputed righteousness): and that his spirit is one of 
opposition to sin to the extent of self-sacrifice. We also 



are to "resist unto blood [death] striving against sin." 
-Heb. 12:4. 

Then the angel gave the shepherds an intimation 
of the humble conditions under which this great King 
of earth was born into the world— as a babe, wrapped 
in swaddling bands and lying in a manger. This was 
necessary, not only to their identification of Jesus, but 
necessary also to bring down their thoughts from the 
great and grand results to its humble beginnings, lest 
they should be misled in their expectations. And as 
it is with every part of the divine plan, so also it 
should be in respect to all of our proclamations of the 
same. We are not only to tell of the future glory and 
greatness and grandeur, but we are to tell also of the 
present humiliation— not only of our Savior who humbled 
himself to take a low estate amongst men, and to 
die for our sins, but also to point out that the "elect" 
are called to walk in his footsteps, under similarly humiliating 
circumstances— to suffer with him, if they 
would reign with him; to die with him, if they would 
live with him. And thus also the prophets spoke not 
only of the glory that should follow, but also of the 
sufferings of Christ (head and body) which must precede 
the glory. (1 Pet. 1:11.) The lesson to every 
one who has ears to hear it is, "No cross, no crown." 
Let us, then, humble ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God, and rejoice in every step of the humiliation, 
that he may exalt us in due time to share the 
glories of his Son our Lord, and to share with him the 
grand work of blessing all the families of the earth. 

It was a fitting climax that, after the one angel 
had told the surprised shepherds of the good tidings 
of great joy for all people and was ready to depart, he 
should be joined by an angelic host, singing, "Glory 
to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will 
toward men." This was but a reiteration of the Gospel 
message already delivered. It declared that the 
work which should be accomplished by the babe just 
born, should redound to the highest glory and honor 
of Jehovah God, his Father. It declared also that 
through this work to be accomplished by Jesus should 
come to earth divine good will and consequently peace, 
—and all that these would imply in the way of blessings 
of restitution and privilege of attaining everlasting 
life. But how much in conflict with all this are the erroneous 
theories which have gained credence in Christendom, 
which teach that, notwithstanding the ransom 
which our Lord Jesus gave, and notwithstanding the 
turning aside of the original sentence upon our race as 
the result of the propitiation for our sins accepted by 
the Father, the vast majority of the human family 
will nevertheless, to all eternity, be in rebellion against 
God, and in torture will continually blaspheme his 
name;— and that without ever having had a full, reasonable 
opportunity to know the Savior or to accept 
his salvation. How strange that any should think 



that such a plan would be glory to God in the highest! 

How strange that any should refuse to see the very 
plain statement of the Scripture that God has provided 
through Christ that every member of the human family 
shall have a full opportunity of coming to a knowledge 
of the truth, and then of relinquishing sin and of 
accepting new life of righteousness under the New 
Covenant— and that then whoever still refuses and 
will not submit himself to this righteous arrangement 
shall be utterly destroyed from amongst the people- 
in the Second Death,— that none will be suffered to 
live in sin and opposition to God to blemish any part 
of God's dominions, but that all the incorrigible shall 
be as tho they had not been. In no other way can we 
possibly imagine that the time will ever come when 
there will be full peace among men. "There is no 
peace for the wicked, saith my God." 

The only solution which God offers respecting the 
establishment of peace is in connection with the establishment 
of his Kingdom, for which our dear Redeemer 
taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven." That will 
mean peace in its fullest and most absolute sense. The 
Scriptural proposition does not include the violation of 

R2558 :page 11 

any man's will, but merely the offering through Christ 
of an opportunity for his everlasting blessing and 
peace, or his cutting off in the Second Death if he fails 
to appreciate the divine offer. 

The shepherds having heard of God's grace manifested 
their interest by visiting and paying their homage 
to the Savior: and so each one who has heard of 
the grace of God with an appreciative heart can do 
nothing less than seek the Lord and do him reverence 
and serve his cause by proclaiming the gracious 
message with which he has been favored. Let us each 
do so, and thus more and more increase in our hearts 
the joys of the Lord and our appreciation of his grand 
gospel. 

Respecting the date of Jesus' birth, we hold that 
it was about Sept. 25th to Oct. 1st B.C. 1, and that the 
annunciation (Luke 1:28) was nine months earlier, 
namely Dec. 25th B.C. 2. The evidences re this position 
are given in detail in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., 
pages 54-62. 



R2558 : page 12 
"JESUS INCREASED IN WISDOM AND STATURE. 
-JAN. 14.-LUKE 2:41-52.- 



"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, 
and in favor with God and man." 

MUCH peculiar speculation has been indulged 
in respecting the childhood, boyhood and 
young manhood of our Lord Jesus, with which we 
have no sympathy whatever. The Bible student 
should confine himself to the Bible record, and not 
give loose rein to imagination and speculation more 
likely to be untrue than correct. Had the Lord foreseen 
necessity for information respecting this period 
of our Savior's career he undoubtedly would have provided 
for it in the inspired record. This does not 
imply that there was nothing noteworthy or commendable 
in our Lord's earlier life, but rather that by comparatively 
ignoring this the Lord would point us more 
particularly to the three and a half years of public 
ministry following his baptism, in Jordan, and by the 
holy spirit. In a word, the Lord thus points out that 
it was not the man Jesus whose words and acts were 
valuable to us and lessons for our emulation, but the 
words and acts of Christ Jesus, the Anointed Jesus- 
Jesus after he had been anointed with the holy spirit 
without measure. Nevertheless, keeping strictly within 
the lines of the little that is written in the Scriptures 
we may draw some valuable and helpful lessons from 
the boyhood and young manhood of our Master. 

Nothing is known respecting the first twelve years 
of our Lord's life, except that under divine direction 
his mother and foster-father took him down into 
Egypt, out of the reach of Herod, where they remained 
with him for a few months until after Herod's death, 
returning then to their home city, Nazareth in Galilee. 
It will be remembered that the occasion of the flight 
into Egypt was Herod's fear that a king should arise 
in the family of David, in harmony with the Jewish 
traditions, and that thus Herod's own family would be 
ousted from the kingly position. Herod was not of 
the family of David, nor a Jew at all— he was of the 
family of Esau, Jacob's brother. The story of the 
wise men coming from the East seeking a new-born 
king of the Jews will be remembered, and now Herod, 
learning of their mission, urged that when they had 
found the infant they sought they should inform him, 
Herod feigning that he also desired to do homage to 
the new king. But the wise men, under divine direction, 
ignored Herod's request. Subsequently, learning 
some of the particulars respecting the birth at Bethlehem, 
Herod caused the death of the male-children of 
that city of two years old and under— thus endeavoring 
to insure the death of the newborn king. It is not at 
all probable that the number of babes slaughtered 
under this decree was great; as the population of 
Bethlehem was small the number of male children of 
such an age would necessarily be few. 

The Golden Text informs us that Jesus grew like 



any other boy— that his development was gradual, 
both as respects physical and intellectual stature. We 
are not, therefore, to think of Jesus in boyhood's days 
as a sage a teacher, a healer, etc., as we find him 
subsequent to his anointing with the holy spirit. 
Nevertheless, we may properly suppose that the perfect 
boy would in many respects be keener and brighter 
than the average boy who inherits sundry imperfections 
from the fall.* 

The testimony respecting Mary and Joseph leaves 
no doubt that they were pious people, and this is confirmed 
by the first verse of this lesson, which informs 
us that it was their custom to go every year to the 
Feast of the Passover: this requirement of the Law 
was observed by the most devout Jews only. It is as 
unnecessary as it is improper for us to go beyond the 
Scriptural declarations on this subject, and to assume, 
as some do, that Mary herself was miraculously conceived 
and born free from sin. Indeed, if we had no 
record testifying to Mary's piety the fact that she was 
honored by the Lord above all other women, in that 
she was chosen to be the mother of Jesus according to 
the flesh, would prove her nobility of character and 
purity of heart;— for it is not even supposable that the 
Lord would so specially honor, bless and use any other 
than a noble character. Whom the Lord uses we 
may safely esteem honorable. 

Altho the Jewish Law does not so stipulate, tradition 
informs us that it was the custom to consider 
every boy who had fulfilled his twelfth year as "a Son 
of the Law," and to a certain extent from that age 
amenable to the requirements of the Law: and the 
narrative of our lesson seems to confirm this tradition, 
telling us that when Jesus was twelve years of age 
(in his thirteenth year) he accompanied the family to 
the Passover Feast at Jerusalem. Is there not a lesson 
here for all godly parents, suggesting that the training 
of the infancy period should be of such a character as 
to prepare the child for the consideration of sober and 
religious matters at the very threshold of boyhood? 
We think there is. And we think it a serious mistake 
made by some well-intentioned parents when they conclude 
that their children of twelve years have sufficient 
mind to have grasped the elementary principles of a secular 
education and to be prepared for higher studies 
of a secular character, but unfit for higher religious 
studies. The children who are ready at that age for 
higher secular studies have already been carefully instructed 
along elementary lines; and if any are unprepared 
for higher studies in religious matters it is 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V., Chap. 4. 
R2558 : page 13 



at least possible that their elementary religious training 
may have been neglected by their divinely appointed 
instructors— their parents. No Christian parent can 
avoid this his natural responsibility toward his children 
—in moral and religious training as well as in the 
secular and physical. 

The Feast of the Passover continued seven days, 
but it was the custom for many of the pilgrims from 
distant parts to remain over only two days, until after 
the principal ceremonies. It is probable that Joseph and 
Mary, in company with their kinsfolk, started on the 
return journey on the third day of the feast. It was 
customary for the women of a caravan to move on 
ahead, the men coming after, and a boy of Jesus' age 
might be with either of the parents and not be missed 
until nightfall; and so it seems to have been in this 
case. As one day had been spent in the journey, so 
another day was spent returning, and a third day in 
searching throughout the city; finally they found 
Jesus in the Temple, sitting with the teachers of the 
Law, the "Doctors." This was not so unusual as 
might at first appear; for at that time information 
was gained less from books and more from oral teaching, 
and the Doctors of the Law were supposed to be 
ready to instruct all who desired information, especially 
during the holy Passover week. Many young men 
availed themselves of such opportunities, and the custom 
seems to have been for the Doctors to sit on a 
special semi-circle of seats, while before them were low 
benches for the older students: the younger boys sat 
on the ground, literally "at their feet." Thus Paul, 
as a youth, was a pupil to Gamaliel, or, as the record 
reads, "sat at the feet of Gamaliel," to learn of him. 
Gamaliel was one of the chief Doctors of the Law in 
his day. 

We are not to understand that the boy Jesus was 
bold, and that he went before the learned men of his 
day to denounce them as ignorant and as incapable 
teachers, and to show himself off, as some precocious 
but ill-trained youth of today might attempt to do. 
On the contrary, we are to suppose the boy Jesus to 
have a well-balanced mind, which probably recognized 
the fact that he had lived but few years in the world 
and had comparatively small experience in life, and that 
he by no means knew all, but recognized many questions 
upon which he would like to have further information, 
and that he asked his questions honestly, 
with a desire and hope of obtaining satisfactory answers 
from the teachers who "sat in Moses' seat." 

The nature of the questions is not stated, but the 
time and surroundings would seem to indicate that 
they were of a religious character, and that the mind 
of Jesus was already grappling with the great questions 
which properly belonged to him as a member of the 
Jewish race to which God had made certain great and 



R2559 : page 13 

precious promises as the Seed of Abraham;— promises 
of divine blessing under Messiah, of exaltation to be 
the chief nation of the world, and of the subsequent 
privilege of blessing all nations and of being the 
mediaries through whom all mankind might be brought 
to the knowledge of God and to his service. From 
what we know of the operations of our own minds at 
the age mentioned, we may presume that Jesus was 
brimful of questions respecting the hopes of Israel, and 
no doubt from his mother he had received some intimation 
at least that divine providence had indicated 
that he himself was to bear some important part in 
connection with the fulfilment of the Scriptures; and 
he was seeking to know the part marked out for him 
by the Heavenly Father in the testimony of the Law 
and the Prophets. 

Altho he did not have a Bible in his home, that 
he could consult respecting the divine testimony, he 
did have the common privilege of the youth of his day 
of attending meetings in the one little synagogue of 
Nazareth, which was but a small country town. There, 
from Sabbath to Sabbath, he heard the Law read and 
to some extent commented upon, sometimes also the 
psalms and prophecies. With these sources of information 
the eager mind of the boy had grappled, and 
now, on the occasion of his first visit to the great city 
of Jerusalem, nothing attracted him so much as the 
Temple and its symbolical services, and happening 
upon a court or chamber in which the great questions 
of the Law and the Prophets were being discussed by 
the ablest teachers of the time, Jesus became so deeply 
interested and enthused in the Bible study that seemingly 
he forgot all earthly things, so intent was he in 
studying about the Heavenly Father's business— the 
plan of God, in which he himself was to be so principal 
an actor. 

Naturally his questions would be deeper and more 
logical than those of other boys of his age, and naturally 
the Doctors of the Law would be deeply interested 
in him because of this in conjunction with the modesty 
which we may be sure accompanied it. And as during 
these feasts great hospitality was exercised, especially 
toward strangers from a distance, Jesus was probably 
entertained by one and another of these new-found 
friends. 

The narrative records that, when found by Joseph 
and Mary, Jesus was both hearing the Doctors and 
asking them questions. There is a valuable lesson 
here for all young persons respecting their conduct 
toward their elders and instructors. How different the 
thought we get from this statement than we would 
have gotten had it read that they found Jesus instructing 
the Doctors, or attempting to teach them. We 



R2559 : page 14 

do not doubt for a moment that the Doctors were as 
much instructed by Jesus as he was by them, possibly 
more so on some points at least; nor do we doubt that 
if they were truly great men they would be humble-minded 
enough to receive instructions from any one- 
even from a child; and it is even intimated in the context 
that they asked Jesus certain questions, "and 
were astonished at his understanding and his answers." 
In both cases the proceeding was that of deference to 
the other, as implied in the asking of the questions: 
Jesus having deferred to the Doctors and asked them 
questions which manifested his depth of mind and 
clearness of understanding and logical reasoning, led 
them in turn to ask questions of him. 

This question plan we commend to all of the dear 
friends of the truth as a wise and proper one, no less 
to us of today than to the boy Jesus and to the Doctors 
of the Law. We have seen instances in which some 
of the Lord's dear people have greatly injured their 
influence in the truth by display of too large a degree 
of self-confidence, self-assurance, in speaking of the 
divine plan to others— especially to the learned. Meekness 
is a jewel wherever found, and is especially 
desirable as an adjunct and sling for the truth. Let 
the truth be shot forth with all the force it can carry, 
but always with meekness and humility; and the 
question form of suggesting truth will often be found 
the most forceful. 

Naturally Joseph and Mary were astonished to 
find their little son in the company of and receiving 
consideration from the greatest teachers of their day, 
and probably nothing was said to Jesus publicly respecting 
their disappointment and their subsequent 
search for him: probably when alone Mary upbraided 
him for his neglect to be with the caravan: yet she did 
this in a very kind and moderate manner, which seemed 
to indicate that it was a very unusual occurrence, which 
in turn speaks to us of parental obedience on the part 
of Jesus. 

Mary's expression, "Behold, thy father and I have 
sought thee sorrowing," has been questioned by some 
as being a confession that Joseph was the father of 
Jesus, but we answer, Not so; it would be unreasonable 
to suppose (1) that Luke would particularly trace the 
genealogy of Jesus through Mary, and ignore Joseph, 
and subsequently imply that Joseph was the father of 
Jesus; (2) Joseph having accepted Mary, accepted also 
her son, Jesus, and became his foster-father, and 
under just such circumstances today the child would 
be taught to consider such an one a parent, and to call 
him "father." (3) It is not at all probable that the 
story of the immaculate conception of Jesus was ever 
made known to any but the closest members of the 



family, and it is highly improbable that the subject 
had ever been discussed with the boy Jesus, only twelve 
years of age,— nor would it have been proper to do so. 
Mary's language, therefore, is entirely consistent with 
all the facts set forth in the Gospel narrative. 

Quite possibly the mind of the boy Jesus, while 
investigating the subject of his own responsibilities 
toward the Heavenly Father and his plan, had wondered 
whether or not his mission might not in some 
degree begin with his thirteenth year, since at that 
time he was recognized as a "son of the law." Quite 
possibly some of his questions before the Doctors of 
the Law were along this line, and quite probably he 
had finally about reached the conclusion that the types 
of the priestly office indicated clearly that his mission 
would not begin until he was thirty years of age. 
His reply to Mary's chiding was along this line: Did 
you not expect me to be about my Father's business? 
Did you not know that I had reached the age when I 
am a "son of the Law," and that therefore certain 
responsibilities have come upon me in respect to the 
Heavenly Father and his Word and his plan? And 
then, as tho remembering the conclusion that he had 
just reached in discussing the subject with the Doctors, 
he broke off the conversation, yielded himself to their 
wishes, and accompanied them to Nazareth, making 
(so far as recorded) no further suggestion of any other 
than the ordinary course of life until he had attained 
the age of thirty years. This is expressed in the 
words, "And he was subject unto them." Joseph and 
Mary realized clearly that the boy was more than ordinary, 
very extraordinary indeed, yet they did not 
fully comprehend the situation nor fully grasp the import 
of his words. Nevertheless, Mary treasured this 
with the other peculiar testimonies respecting him in 
her heart, and doubtless it was from her lips that Luke 
received the information contained in our lesson. 

Tradition declares that Joseph died while Jesus 
was yet young, and that the latter took up the carpenter's 
trade and became the support of the family. 
This finds some support in the Scriptural testimony 
where Jesus himself is called a carpenter, and his 
mother and brethren are mentioned, but Joseph is ignored. 
(Mark 6:3.) Furthermore, no reference is made 
to Joseph in connection with our Lord's ministry, tho 
his mother and his brethren are several times mentioned. 
It is quite probable, then, that the long period 
of eighteen years of our Lord's life, from the time of 
the incident of this lesson to the time of his baptism, 
was spent in the performance of the ordinary duties of 
life. What a thought this gives us with respect to our 
Lord's development of patience— patiently waiting 
until the Father's time should come and he should begin 
his ministry; patiently studying meantime, as best 
he could, to know more and more of the Father's will 



R2559 : page 15 

and plan; patiently waiting for the baptism of the holy 
spirit, which would enable him to fully comprehend 
the situation and his own personal relationship to it. 
What a lesson there is here for all his followers, and 
everyone of us may well realize the truth of the words, 
"Ye have need of patience," and again, "Let patience 
have her perfect work." What a lesson there is for 
us also in the thought that we are not to attempt to 
hasten the divine plan, but to wait patiently for its 
unfolding— not to attempt to begin any work for the 
Lord unless we are sure that his time has come, and 
that he has called us to do it; then, like our Lord, to 
be instant in season and out of season, when convenient 
and when inconvenient, under favorable and unfavorable 
conditions; to do with our might what our 
hand has found to do,— what the Lord has called us 
to do. And we gather the further thought that the 
most humble forms of labor are honorable when they 
are ours in harmony with God's providence. 

Happily for us, we are not born under the Law 
nor under the limitations which hinder us from receiving 
the call and responding to it before thirty years of 
age. On the contrary, under the New Covenant of 
grace it is our privilege to present our bodies living 
sacrifices to the Lord's service at as early an age as 
our knowledge of divine things and our enlightened 
judgments will permit. We, instead of waiting to 
grow to the fulness of stature mental and physical, are 
permitted to begin at once, as members of the Royal 
Priesthood, and to be growing at the same time we are 
serving. But let us not forget the necessity for growth, 

R2560 : page 15 

—adding to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, 
and to knowledge self-control, and to self-control patience, 
and to patience godliness, and to godliness 
brotherly-kindness, and to brotherly-kindness love.— 
2 Pet. 1:5-8. 

"In malice be ye children, but in understanding 
be ye men. "-1 Cor. 14:20. 



R2560 : page 15 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In regard to the work 
here in Boston the report is good. The Volunteer work 
is blessing all who engage in it and goes on grandly. 
Scarcely a Sunday but that we distribute the tracts at 
some church where the preacher's theme is Evolution. 
Two Sundays ago the Pastor of Tremont Temple 



preached a sermon advocating the doctrine of Evolution. 

This is the largest Protestant church in New 

England (congregation of 3000 and over), and the 

Pastor is the gentleman who notified police headquarters 

last June to have a stop put to further distribution 

of our tract. But he did not succeed. We are finding 

more work than was at first anticipated and are giving 

more books. Our report for month of November is as 

follows:— Nov. 5th in Dorchester 11 churches, 1024 

booklets; Nov. 12th in W. Roxbury and Jamaica Plain 

14 churches, 986 booklets; Nov. 19th in Dorchester 

and Roslindale 18 churches, 1269 booklets; Nov. 26th 

in Newton 13 churches, 1444 booklets; also in Brookline 

during month 4 churches, 154 booklets; total of 

60 churches, 4877 booklets; average 81.2+. We find 

churches larger than we anticipated. Quite a number 

with congregations of from 300 to 600 which accounts 

for our using more booklets than expected as well as 

the larger average. We still have 25 to 30 (brethren 

and Sisters) engaged in work, and tho we have accomplished 

a good work, the end is not yet. We are 

anxious to do all the important towns accessible by 

electric cars, provided you can keep us supplied. We 

leave that part for you to decide. Unquestionably all 

who work are receiving blessings, and are being built 

up in zeal and love in the Lord's service. 

Sr. G. desires to be remembered. Your brother, 
in love and service of our Redeemer, 

ALEXANDER M. GRAHAM,-Massachusetts. 

[We are filling orders right along. Let the good 
work proceed. God bless the "Volunteers." EDITOR.] 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am glad that at last 
I have concentrated my mind enough to write to you. 
Not till Mrs. Boehmer was here did I read and study 
anything in the truth so much as to do me any good, 
but while she was here my whole attention was turned. 
She gave me Vol. I. of M. DAWN but at first I could 
not read it without a great deal of will power. I read 
it only to show her I used the gift— it seemed so uninteresting. 
But at last it grew more interesting and 
I devoted most all of my time to reading it and I gave 
up almost all of my play especially with everybody 
but my brother and sister. (Do you consider this 
wrong on my part?) And I went to all the DAWN Circles 
and meetings here while she was with us, and 
mamma said the holy spirit was upon me. 

When Sister Boehmer left us all of my holy interests 
seemed to die out of me. I could read nothing 
Scriptural so that I could remember it or act upon it in 
my daily course of life. I think the reason why God 
let it happen so was because I got to thinking I was 
far ahead in the race and looked boastfully down on 
my neighbors. (Don't you think so, too?) But I went 



to meeting every Sunday and learned O, so much 
good! from Brother Wright and I think he is the best 
leader that could be chosen— that is, a human leader. 
But I could remember nothing through the week. 

Now here is another case: A large "tough" is always 
trying to catch us for no reason at all but he 
claims for an excuse that we throw stones at him, but 
we did not. I wrote to Bro. Boehmer about it and he 
said I should avoid him as best I could, and in doing 
this I am obliged to run sometimes or get hit. Now do 
you consider this right or wrong? Twice we stopped 
and asked him what he wanted but he only hit us. 

When Bro. Boehmer was here he said it would do 
me good to enter a gymnasium which I did the 1st. of 
Nov. It is in a Congregational Church; I am also entitled 
to a privileges of boys' club and six lectures. Do 
you think I will fall into wrong there? 

Here is $1 which will at least be enough to make 

R2560 : page 16 

one WATCH TOWER which will help some one along 
just like the TOWER of Nov. 1. issue helped me along; 
especially the articles about Nehemiah which induced 
me to write. So many things fit my case exactly,— like 
where it says while we are in the truth we will be 
assailed the most, and when we get drowsy and lazy 
about studying the truth we will not be assailed. 
This is exactly right because it went so with me and 
I shall be happy in the hardest of earthly troubles. 
Your remark that each should build the walls near his 
home, has opened my eyes enough to see that I was in 
the wrong, because I do better in school and away from 
home than I do at home. Now I will try to do the best 
I can at home but will not lose my good part away 
from home. 

I felt like opening my whole heart to you, and I 
have done it with the best intentions. I hope that your 
answer to this letter will come soon and bring tidings 
that will do me good. 

Yours sincerely, HUGO KUEHN,-Ohio. 

[REPLY:— I am always deeply interested in the 
young who give their hearts to the Lord. My Christian 
life began at about the same age as your own (13), and 
I know how great a blessing it is to become a soldier 
of the cross at an early age. At no time do we more 
need divine wisdom and grace than in boyhood and 
entering manhood, and how comforting it is to all 
such to be able to realize that having committed their 
all to the Lord he is caring for them, guiding and 
shaping their affairs in the course which will be most 
to their advantage as respects the present and the eternal 
life. 

In re the rude youth disposed to attack you with 
stones: My advice would be that you go to play in 
another quarter, and that generously you consider that 



the man may be just as much unbalanced in mind or 

as soured in disposition as some who in the language 

of Scripture, "Shoot out arrows, even bitter words, 

at the righteous." (Psa. 64:3.) On the whole I believe 

that those who throw literal stones are much less dangerous 

than some who are outwardly more decorous 

who have the "poison of asps under their lips" (Rom. 3:13), 

and who backbite, speak evil of and slander 

others— even the Lord's "brethren." Let us thank 

God that the time is coming when there will no longer 

be in the world any except those who have the "spirit 

of a sound mind"— the disposition of the Lord.— 

2 Tim. 1:7. 

Respecting your attendance at a gymnasium, and 
the hearing of lectures: It would seem to me that no 
evil need result from merely availing yourself of these 
privileges, and should advise that you do so, unless 
there would be something in the way of a bondage 
connected with this— some obligations— and quite likely 
there are none that would be objectionable in such 
a club. With much Christian love, Your brother and 
servant in the Lord, THE EDITOR.] 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 

DEAR BRETHREN: -The Volunteer distribution 
of the booklets, The Bible versus the Evolution Theory, 
has been completed in the District of Columbia, after 
a campaign lasting seven months. 14 Volunteers- 
brothers and sisters— visited 154 churches and distributed 
10,934 booklets, besides other tracts. The congregations 
in the various churches varied all the way 
from 400 down, the average attendance being 7 1 . 

This work was taken up in accordance with the 
offer made in TOWER of April 15th, '99, it being our 
desire in this manner to show our love and appreciation 
of the Lord and his truth— by engaging in a work 
which might result in the blessing of his true "brethren." 
The work has progressed with perfect harmony 
of hearts, hands and a willingness to serve in any 
channel, however humble, and has most evidently been 
under divine direction, for we have had many indications 
of providential guidance in selection of churches 
to be worked, etc. 

We have been greatly blessed in this work which 
has given us many opportunities for letting our light 
shine for the Master,— upon some occasions the brethren 
being invited within the church building to explain 
the object of the visit and something of God's 
plan as testified to in the literature distributed. We 
were well received on the whole, notwithstanding 
some cases of opposition. We are thankful to God 
for these great privileges of serving his truth, and also 
to Brother Russell and the Tract Society as instruments 
in his hands. We are still "Volunteers," and ready 



to carry the good warfare into the adjacent towns with 
the booklets still on hand. 

With love to all who are similarly engaged in the 
Volunteer work, Your fellow "Soldiers," 

THE CHURCH AT WASHINGTON, D.C. 



page 16 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-I am feasting on the wonderful 
and comprehensive subject of the atonement, as 
set forth in the new volume of DAWN. The more I 
study and comprehend its beautiful harmony and reasonableness, 
the more I am constrained to lift up my 
heart in thankfulness to our loving Heavenly Father 
who has designed such a beautiful plan for the redemption 
of mankind. And so, as the marvelous light 
shines in my heart through the merit of Jesus Christ, 
I can constantly say, Praise God for the truth! Praise 
him for the wondrous things made known! 

With much love in Christ and kindest wishes for 
your welfare, spiritual and temporal, I remain, 

Your brother in the service of Immanuel, 

JAMES McFARLAND,-Colporteur. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Herewith I send 
you five dollars; after paying for enclosed order put 
balance into the Tract Fund— some of it is from my 
daughter. I have read the fifth volume of DAWN once, 
and am going over it a second time, finding the references. 
It is the best of the DAWN series, if there is 
any best to them; they are all so wonderful and grand! 
But I think the last one has the most meat in it, now 
due for the household of faith: I enjoy it so much, I 
do not know when to stop reading it. And some parts 
are so good. I read them over and over again, till I am 
satisfied, and thank God, our Father, that he has blessed 
Brother Russell with wisdom and understanding, to 
write things so plainly. May God continue to bless 
and keep you faithful unto death! 

Your Sister, in hope of the coming Kingdom, 
MRS. J. A. MARWOOD.-Nebraska. 



page 17 
VOL. XXI. JANUARY 15, 1900. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



New York's One Day 

Convention, Jan. 21st 18 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Churches as Social Clubs 19 

Christianity in Japan 20 

Poem: A Little While 21 

Preaching of John the Baptizer 21 

Consecration Followed by 

Temptations 26 

Temptation to Use Spiritual Favors 

for Personal Profit 29 

Tempting God by Unauthorized 

Efforts 30 

Temptation to Obtain Desired Good 

Results by Compromise 31 

Interesting Letters 32 

Higher Prices for Cheap Bibles 18 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



NEW YORK'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION, JAN. 2 1ST. 

Friends of the truth have recently started a meeting at Willard 
Hall, Grand Opera House Block, 23rd Street and 8th Avenue, 
New York City, of which we hear good reports. It is said to be 
quite convenient to Jersey City by ferry and generally accessible. 

These friends have sent an urgent request that the editor 
of this journal shall be with them on Jan. 21st, and he has accepted. 
Meetings are regularly held at above hall every Sunday 
afternoon, but for this occasion (Jan. 21st) there will be preaching 
service at 10:30 A.M., and another at 2:30 P.M. Rather, we 
might say, there will be an all-day meeting with noon intermission 
for luncheon at nearby restaurants. 

Friends in general are invited, and many residing within a 
radius of fifteen miles from New York City are expected. All 
such will be warmly welcomed; and each is requested to introduce 
himself to the editor. 



Morning topic— "Blessed are the people who know the joyful 
sound." Afternoon topic— The Necessity of Justification as 
Precedent to Sanctification and Begetting of the Spirit. 



HIGHER PRICES FOR CHEAP BIBLES. 



The rise in price of paper, leather, etc., has caused an advance 
of prices in many Bibles quoted in the Dec. 1st, '99, WATCH 
TOWER, as follows:- 
To Bibles quoted under 45 cents add 5 cents each. 

at 50 cents to 95 cents add 10 cents each. 

" " " at $1.00 and $2.00 add 15 cents each. 

The higher priced Bibles are less affected;— no change 
as yet. 



R2561 :page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
CHURCHES AS SOCIAL CLUBS. 



REV. JOHN WATSON, widely known in 
"orthodox" circles (as "Ian Maclaren," his 
literary nom de plume), wrote for publication recently, 
that in his judgment the churches of various denominations 
are rapidly becoming social clubs— ceasing to 
appreciate or use the place hitherto considered the true 
position of the church. The text for his criticism was 
found on a printed postal card sent out by an American 
Y.M.C.A., which read word for word as follows: 

"DO NOT FORGET 

"The next Social. 

"The next Candy-pull. 

"The next Entertainment. 

"The next Song Service. 

"The next Gospel Meeting. 

"The next Meeting of the Debating Club. 

"The next Chicken-pie Dinner. 

"The next date when you ought to make the 

secretary happy with your cash." 

Commenting upon this card, he says:— 
"This remarkable list of operations, combining 
evangelistic zeal, creature comforts, and business 
shrewdness, requires no commentary; the items give 
us a convincing illustration of an up-to-date religious 
institution— a veritable hustler of a Y.M.C.A. 



"The Christian church and a Y.M.C.A. are of 
course very different institutions, and the latter is free 
from any traditions of austere dignity, but one is not 
surprised to find that the church has also been touched 
with the social spirit and is also doing her best to make 
religion entertaining. One enters what is called a 
place of worship and imagines that he is in a drawing-room. 
The floor has a thick carpet, there are rows of 
theater-chairs, a huge organ fills the eye, a large bouquet 
of flowers marks the ministers place; people come 
in with a jaunty air and salute one another cheerily; 
hardly one bends his head in prayer; there is a hum of 
gossip through the building. 

"A man disentangles himself from a conversation 
and bustles up to the platform without clerical garb of 
any kind, as likely as not in layman's dress. A quartet 
advances, and, facing the audience, sings an anthem 
to the congregation, which does not rise, and later 
they sing another anthem, also to the congregation. 
There is one prayer, and one reading from Holy Scripture, 
and a sermon which is brief and bright. Among 
other intimations the minister urges attendance at the 
oyster supper, when, as is mentioned in a paper in the 
pews, there will be oysters and meat— turkey, I think 
—and ice-cream. This meal is to be served in the 
'church parlor.' 

"No sooner has the benediction been pronounced, 
which has some original feature introduced, than the 
congregation hurries to the door, but altho no one can 
explain how it is managed, the minister is already 
there shaking hands, introducing people, 'getting off 
good things,' and generally making things 'hum.' 
One person congratulates him on his 'talk'— new name 
for a sermon— and another says it was 'fine.' 

"Efforts have been made in England also to make 
church life really popular, and, in one town known to 
the writer, with some success of its own kind. One 
church secured a new set of communion plates by the 
popular device of a dance; various congregations gave 
private theatricals, and in one case had stage property 
of their own. Bible classes celebrated the conclusions 
of their sessions by a supper; on Good Friday there 
were excursions into the country accompanied by a 
military band, and a considerable portion of the congregational 
income was derived from social treats of 
various kinds. This particular town is only an illustration 
of the genial spirit spreading throughout the 
church in England. One minister uses a magic lantern 
to give force to his sermon; another has added a tavern 
to his church equipment; a third takes up the latest 
murder or scandal; a fourth has a service of song; a 
fifth depends on a gypsy or an ex-pugilist. 

"If this goes on, the church will soon embrace a 
theater and other attractions which will draw young 
people, and prevent old people from wearying in the 
worship of God. 



[Contrasting these modern and irreverent and unscriptural 

R2561 : page 20 

methods with those of the past, Dr. Watson 
continues:—] 

"Perhaps it may be the perversity of human nature 
which is apt to cavil at new things and hanker 
after the good old times— which were not always good, 
by any means— but one is not much enamoured with 
the new departure, nor at all convinced that what may 
be called for brief the 'candy-pull' system is any improvement 
on the past. After a slight experience of 
smart preachers, and church parlors, and ice-cream 
suppers, and picnics, one remembers with new respect 
and keen appreciation the minister of former days, 
with his seemly dress, his dignified manner, his sense 
of responsibility, who came from the secret place of 
divine fellowship, and spoke as one carrying the message 
of the Eternal. He may not have been so fussy 
in the aisles as his successor, nor so clever at games, nor 
able to make so fetching a speech on 'Love, Courtship, 
and Marriage.' 

"There are no doubt many points in which the 
congregation of the present has advanced on the congregation 
of the past, but it has not been all gain, for 
the chief note in the worship of the former generation 
was reverence— people met in the presence of the Eternal, 
before whom every man is less than nothing. And 
the chief note of their children, who meet to listen to 
a choir and a clever platform speaker, is self-complacency." 
—The Ladies' Home Journal. 



We have frequently pointed out these same tendencies, 
but we are glad to be able to quote the words 
of another— of one who stands so high in Churchianity. 
But Dr. Watson will ere long find that he must 
not criticize "Babylon;" and that if he persists he will 
lose caste with the lords thereof. So conservative a 
journal as The Advance has already intimated that 
"Candy-Pulls" and other modern methods of making 
Christianity attractive must not be interfered with by 
"old fogies." 

And so say we! Let the innovations proceed— 
they are essential to the very existence of "Babylon." 
And besides, the sooner the social Churchianity clubs 
act out their real sentiments all along the line, the 
better it will be for true Christianity, whose separation 
from Churchianity is now due to be accomplished in 
this harvest time— "wheat" from "tares." The more 
it becomes apparent that, with the vast majority, religion 
is merely "a form of godliness," the more will those 
who have the power of it as well realize the width of 
the gulf which really separates the two classes in divine 



estimation. The louder grows the revelry and 
irreverence and the scoffing at God's Word by "higher 
critics" and the boasts of Evolution, the louder in the 
ears of the Lord's true saints will sound the Master's 
command: "Babylon is fallen, is fallen! Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:2,4. 



The Editor of the Washington City Times gives 
his opinion of some of the methods of Churchianity, 
thus:— 

"A sensational Brooklyn preacher lately discoursed 
on subjects like these: 'Would Christ Belong to a Labor 
Union?' 'Would Christ Go to a Brooklyn Theater?' 
and so on. It is rather difficult to conceive the 
moral status of people who actually approve of sermons 
of this sort. Undoubtedly a large part of the audiences 
which they attract come from mere curiosity, as they 
might come to any other sort of show; and they might 
as well be at the theater for all the good that it is 
likely to do them. One of the most deplorable features 
of modern American life is the tendency toward sensationalism 
in the pulpit. It is bad from every point 
of view. It excites emotions which are in no way religious, 
and are all the worse for passing under that 
name. It is in execrable taste, it misleads people to 
a sort of contempt for religion, and it makes the 
churches which indulge in it odious. 

"It has grown out of another bad feature of our 
modern life— the plutocratic ideal. Any sensible person 
may easily understand that when the attraction of 
a church for its members depends on this sort of thing, 
and on the ability of the people of the church to dress 
well and pay for a handsome building and a showy 
choir, there is no more real religion in the whole business 
than there is in a circus.... 

"It would be much more to the point for the sensational 
preacher above quoted to ask himself, in private, 
whether his church is the kind which Christ 
would be likely to approve, or if it is full of money-changers 
and the sellers of doves. 

"It is time that sensible and thoughtful religious 
people in this country understood what a church is 
really intended to be. It should not be a bad imitation 
of fashionable society, with all the meannesses, caste 
distinctions, pettiness, and jealousy of that society, 
veneered over with a coating of formal religion...." 

CHRISTIANITY IN JAPAN. 



Not long since Japan was considered the brightest 
example of progress in Christian missions, and with 



good reason. Everything coming from Europe or the 
United States was looked upon with favor— the Christian 
religion included. In a few years the number of 
converts to various shades of nominal "Christianity" 
ran up to 40,578 in 1878. However, a great change 
has occurred there: and within the past two years the 
total converts claimed by all denominations is only 403. 

The beginning of this change of sentiment seems to 
have dated from the time that the different denominations 
began more or less to compete. It would seem that 
at first denominational and creed differences were considerably 
hidden from the Japanese, and they seem to 
have embraced Christianity in something of its simplicity 
of spirit if not of doctrine. However, when they 
began to send some of their young men to American 
and English colleges, the fact of the great varieties 
of contradictory doctrines, all claiming to represent 

R2562 : page 21 

Christ's teachings, became known, and was naturally 
followed by denominational reapings, chiefly, we believe, 
Presbyterian. 

The Japanese are a practical people, and concluded 
that, if Christians of the West were so confused and 
divided respecting the teachings of the Bible, the Japanese 
could properly exercise their own judgments on 
the subjects also. In doing so they are rapidly tending 
toward agnosticism, doubt, uncertainty, unbelief, just as 
thinking people everywhere are doing, except as they 
get the truth and with it the spirit of a sound mind. How 
we would like to put into the hands of these Japanese 
and all truth-seekers the light of present truth showing 
forth the divine plan of the ages. We are on the 
lookout for the Lord to bring forward to the light 
some earnest, fully consecrated Japanese capable of 
presenting the plan by translating DAWN, VOL. I., presenting 
it to his Christian countrymen. We thought 
we had found the one two years ago, but it proved 
otherwise;— Christianity was unpopular, but the truth 
much more so— too unpopular for him. 

Rev. Dr. Christlieb, for years the representative 
of the "Evangelical Protestant Mission Society" of 
Germany, discussed the set-back in Japan in a volume 
just published, entitled, "The Tendencies of Japanese 
Civilization and Christianity," in which he explains:— 

"The opposition now generally entertained by the 
Japanese against the Christian church is due to the 
changed attitude which they have in recent years developed 
in so marked a degree to all influences from 
abroad— a conservative reaction of a pronounced type. 
This return to nativism is largely due to the easy success 
in the war with the Chinese. This reaction from 
the former enthusiasm for innovation has assumed a 
particularly determined character. The Japanese have 
reached the conclusion that they had been too hasty 



in discarding the old in favor of the new, and this 
spirit has found its way even into the Christian elements 
of Japan, which aspired to the establishment of a 
church independent of the churches in countries that 
have been Christian for centuries. Altho the Japanese 
have known Christianity only for thirty years and there 
is scarcely a single adult native who has been a Christian 
since his childhood, yet they began to regard 
themselves more capable to develop a Christian culture 
and life than those who brought them the new faith. 

"These ideas and ambitions are largely due to the 
fact that attempts were made to build up a Christianity 
wholly divorced from the national character of the 
people. The reaction is, to a certain extent, the result 
also of the radical anti-Japanese type of life that representatives 
of Western Christianity aimed to develop, 
completely ignoring the many excellent traits that 
make up the national character of the people. 

"Still another element that has entered into this 
reaction is the fact that the Japanese, who is naturally 
not too deep intellectually and who is but half civilized, 
has been made acquainted with Western agnosticism 
and atheism as found in the writings of Schopenhauer 
and Herbert Spencer. Through these a certain dangerous 
contempt for the supernatural has been developed, 
especially among the younger generation. All 
these factors and others have united to produce the 
modern opposition to Christianity in the Japanese 
empire." 

R2568 : page 21 

A LITTLE WHILE. 



A little while with weary feet to tread the narrow way, 

A little while, the time will not be long, 
A little while the sinless One to follow day by day, 

A little while to suffer and be strong. 

A little while with faltering tongue to testify for God, 

A little while to suffer scorn and shame, 
A little while with voice and pen to spread the truth abroad, 

A little while to glorify his name. 

A little while with humble faith to wage the goodly fight, 
A little while, grasp firm the two-edged sword, 

A little while, Satanic hosts shall all be put to flight, 
A little while, then, trust thou in the Lord. 

A little while, a little while, Oh, let this be our song, 

A little while, lay not the armor down; 
A little while, a little while, the strife will not be long, 

A little while, and we shall wear the crown! 

-GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R2562 : page 21 

PREACHING OF JOHN THE BAPTIZER. 

--JANUARY 21. -LUKE 3:1-17.- 

"Prepare ye the way of the Lord." 

DOUBTLESS many commenters on this lesson 

will claim that John the Baptizer's ministry 

began with the year A.D. 26, and by positiveness of assertion 

seek to make up for their lack of evidence on 

this subject. Let all therefore bear in mind that such 

a dating of John's ministry will be purely arbitrary, 

to make it conform to the erroneous view which prevails 

among scholars in respect to the date of our Lord's 

birth. It should not be forgotten, however, that, altho 

it is well established from the Scriptures that our Lord 

was six months younger than his second-cousin, John, 

there is no other Scriptural date which so closely and 

definitely connects the history of our Lord and of John 

the Baptizer with general history, as does the statement 

of this very lesson, that John began his ministry (when 

he was thirty years of age) in the fifteenth year of the 

reign of Tiberius Caesar. Those who claim that Jesus 

began his ministry A.D. 27, instead of A.D. 29, claim 

that John's ministry began in A.D. 26; and in order to 

make this fit with the statement of the first verse of 

R2562 : page 22 

this lesson, they are obliged to count the reign of Tiberius 
Caesar two years before its admitted date. For a 
particular discussion of this subject, however, we must 
refer our readers to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.54. 

Of John it is written that he was filled with the 
holy spirit from his birth. But we must not misunderstand 
this to mean that he was begotten of the holy 
spirit, in the sense that Christians are begotten of it, 
for he lived before the time of spirit-begetting— in the 
Jewish age, not in the Gospel or Christian age. Thus 
our Lord said of him that, altho there had not arisen a 
greater Prophet than John, nevertheless, the least in 
the Kingdom of God is greater than he— the least one 
in the house of sons is on a higher plane than the greatest 
one in the house of servants. (Matt. 11:11; Heb. 3:5,6.) 
The Apostle again explains that "the holy spirit 
was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." 
-John 7:39. 

In harmony with this we must understand that 
John was filled with the holy spirit, holy power or influence 
from God from his birth, after the same manner 
that the other prophets throughout the Jewish age had 



been under that holy spirit. The expression would lead 

us to understand that, altho John was not borne immaculate, 

as was Jesus, he nevertheless was well born, 

under holy influences, which tended to develop in him 

natural characteristics suitable to the mission he was intended 

of God to fulfil. This does not involve the thought 

of divine interference with the free will of the individual, 

for Paul tells us that he also was chosen of God 

from his birth to be a special servant to do a special 

work. (Gal. 1:15.) Nevertheless, the Lord did not interfere 

with his exercising his own free will, even permitting 

him to go so far into blind error as to become 

the persecutor of the Church. And even when the Lord 

rebuked him in the way to Damascus, that was not an 

interference with his will or nature, but merely a removal 

of his blindness, his ignorance, permitting his 

true will to come into exercise. And so no doubt others 

of the Lord's people from time to time have been from 

earliest childhood special subjects of divine Providence 

which has guided and shaped their experiences without 

interfering with their wills, so as to make of them special 

instruments for the accomplishment of divine 

purposes. 

Of John's life from infancy to manhood we know 
nothing except the bare record, "The child grew and 
waxed strong in spirit, and was in the desert until the 
day of his showing unto Israel" (Luke 1:80)— not in 
the sandy deserts, but more properly in the wilds, the 
uncultivated regions, perhaps in the "hill country," 
where his parents resided at the time of his birth. Possibly 
a part of the Lord's providence in respect to John's 
training for his work consisted in the ordering of the 
affairs of his parents, so that possibly they were forced 
by circumstances to reside in such a wilderness-home, 
where they would have comparatively little intercourse 
with others, and where John, probably as a forester, 
would have the experiences which the Lord saw would 
best fit him for the work intended. All Christians 
should learn to trust to the Heavenly Father's guidance, 
remembering his special promise, which is applicable 
to each one who is in Christ, viz., that "all things shall 
work together for good to them that love God," and 
remembering this they should be content with the lot 
which Providence seems to mark out for them— not indolent, 
but content, when they have done all that their 
hands find to do,— not restless, peevish, dissatisfied, 
complainers against God and his providence. "Trust 
in the Lord and do good." It may be that the Lord is 
fitting and preparing us individually for some special 
service, and that the permitted experiences alone will 
prepare us for that service. Indeed, we know from the 
Word that God designs his "elect" for joint-heirship 
with our dear Redeemer in the glorious Millennial Kingdom; 
and we can well realize that because of our imperfection 
we need much moulding and fashioning, chiseling 
and polishing to make us "meet for the inheritance 



of the saints in light." We are to remember also that 
we are incompetent to judge of our own imperfections, 
and hence incompetent to judge of the experiences 
which would be most helpful to us. It is difficult for 
us sometimes even to see ourselves as others see us; 
much more difficult, undoubtedly, it would be to see 
ourselves from the divine standpoint. Here faith in 
God comes to the front— "This is the victory which 
overcometh the world, even your faith." 

The time of John's "showing" or presentation to 
Israel was undoubtedly the time when he reached the 

R2563 : page 22 

legally required thirty years of age; and then it was 
that the word of the Lord came unto him, causing him 
to begin his mission. We are not to think of this expression 
as having to John the same signification as it 
has to us who are of this Gospel age. The word of God 
came to John as a prophet, for our Lord declared,— 
"There hath not arisen a greater prophet than John the 
Baptist." The Lord made clear to John that the time 
had come for the beginning of his ministry, not merely 
by an impression or surmise, but with positiveness, as 
in the case of all the prophets. In harmony with his 
commission he went to the thickly settled regions in 
the vicinity of the River Jordan, preaching repentance 
—that the people should reform— and baptizing in the 
Jordan those who professed a reformation. For this 
reason John sought the pools or deep places of the 
river;— for instance, he went to Enon, near to Salem, 
"because there was much water there"— a pool sufficiently 
deep for the purposes of immersion. 

R2563 : page 23 

We are not to fall into the too common error of 
supposing from the record that John preached to the 
people that repentance and baptism would work for them 
a remission of their sins. To so interpret these words would 
put them in direct conflict with the entire testimony of 
the Scriptures, which is to the effect that without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. The 
usual representation of this subject is therefore clearly 
in error. To the contrary, we are to understand this 
verse to mean that John preached a baptism signifying 
repentance unto, or preparation for, a remission of sins. 
The time had not yet come for the blotting out of the 
sins, and John neither had nor could have obtained 
authority to declare sins remitted because of repentance 
and baptism. Had it been possible for him to have 
made such a proclamation, truthfully, it would have 
proven that there was no necessity for the coming of 
our Lord Jesus to give himself a ransom for Israel and 
for all the families of the earth. If repentance and 
immersion in water would bring the forgiveness of sins, 



the "Savior and a great one" whom God had promised 

to Israel for so long would have been wholly unnecessary. 

But when we view John's work and preaching 

as merely a preliminary one, to make ready a repentant 

people, desiring to have their sins forgiven, desiring full 

at-one-ment with God, and expecting a Savior to accomplish 

all this,— then all is harmony. 

And this thought, that the remission of sins was a 
work future from John's day, a work to be accomplished 
by Christ, is fully borne out by the succeeding context, 
a quotation from Isaiah the Prophet, which has not even 
yet been fulfilled, but includes the entire work of the 
Millennial age. That age will be one for remission of 
sins and blotting out of sins, and the full reconciliation of 
so many as will accept God's grace in Christ under the 
New Covenant. (Compare Acts 3:19-21.) In that time, 
under those favorable conditions, and not before, will 
the statement be fulfilled, "All flesh shall see the salvation 
of God." 

We are to bear in mind that John's work as a messenger 
was exclusively to Israel, and had nothing whatever 
to do with any of the Gentiles. To Israel he acted 
as the Elijah or Forerunner of Messiah in the flesh, seeking 
to induce that nation, in its "harvest" time, to accept 
the formal offer of God's Kingdom by accepting 
Jesus as the King. But John's mission was not successful 
to his nation, and profited only a few of the 
people; those few who believed John's testimony, and 
received it into good and honest and repentant hearts, 
were prepared to receive Jesus and to appreciate and receive 
the remission of sins offered by God through him. 
The remainder of that nation, rejecting John's teaching, 
and being in an unrepentant condition of heart, were 
not properly exercised, were not ready for Jesus, and 
did not appreciate the offer of remission of sins through 
his blood as a consequence, and as a nation were rejected 
of God and wholly overthrown. 

While John thus acted as the Elijah in introducing 
Jesus in the flesh to fleshly Israel, and gathered out a 
certain class who were ready to receive Jesus, and who 
were blessed by him, so we see that in God's plan there 
is a greater antitype of Elijah than was John, as there 
is a greater Christ than was our Lord Jesus. The greater 
Christ is the spiritual one, "The Lord from heaven"— 
"Now the Lord is that Spirit." And this glorified spirit 
Lord is the Head of "the Church which is his body," 
and this body of many members will, in "the first resurrection," 
be made like him and to share his glory, and 
with him and under him constitute the great Messiah, 
who shall take unto himself his great power and reign, 
establishing God's Kingdom amongst men, and causing 
his will to be done "on earth as it is done in heaven." 
(Matt. 6:10.) The coming into power of this great 
Christ, the spiritual Christ (head and body) constitutes 
the Second Advent to mankind— "the manifestation of 
the sons of God" for the deliverance of the groaning 



creation. (Rom. 8:17-19.) Thus the Second Advent of 
Christ the Head (with the Church his body) will be 
seen to be on a very much higher plane than was the 
first advent of our Lord in the flesh, altho the first advent 
was all-important in that without it and its sacrifice 
for sins there could have been no Second Advent of 
Jesus, the Head, in the glory of Kingdom power, and 
there could have been no glorified members of his body 
to be associated with him. 

After thus noting the relationship of the two events, 
it is proper for us to note also that as the blessings of the 
first advent were offered to nominal fleshly Israel so the 
presentation of the blessings of the Second Advent will 
be to nominal Spiritual Israel ("Christendom"), and as 
a Forerunner or herald was appropriately sent to fleshly 
Israel, to prepare them for the first advent, likewise 
it would be appropriate that a proportionately greater 
Forerunner should precede the Second Advent, and seek 
to make ready therefor all nominal Spiritual Israelites. 
As we have already shown,* this greater Elijah, who 
heralds the spiritual Christ, is composed of many members; 
Jesus in the flesh was himself the Head of this 
Elijah class, and all of his true followers, who will be, 
when glorified with him, members of the glorious 
Christ, will have previously been in their earthly lives 
members with him of the Elijah class, whose mission 
it is to show forth the principles of righteousness and 
true holiness, and to exhort both by word and conduct 
all men to repentance and to preparation for the Second 
Advent— the glorious appearing, the setting up of the 
Messianic Kingdom, the actual blotting out of sins, the 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 8. 

R2563 : page 24 

straightening of every crooked way, the leveling up of 
deep crevices of character, the leveling down of the 
hills of pride to the proper level of humility; and in 
every sense of the word seeking to prepare all flesh to see 
the salvation of God. 

Nevertheless, we are to remember that the Scriptures 
distinctly indicate that the testimony of this greater 
Elijah will be equally unsuccessful with that of the lesser 
antitype of Elijah, John the Baptizer. The Church 
in the flesh has not succeeded in making straight the 
paths of the Lord for a triumphal entry to his Kingdom 
upon the earth. A few have heard, but the message 
has utterly failed as respects the vast majority, even 
those who profess respect for and to be waiting for the 
Kingdom. Nevertheless, all God's good purposes will 
be ultimately accomplished, tho necessarily introduced 
by troubles, calamities, distress upon "Christendom," 
in the end of this age or "harvest" time, similar 



to those troubles which came upon fleshly Israelites who 
were unready for the Savior, and "knew not the time 
of their visitation," at his first advent. All this unreadiness, 
however, shall not hinder the work of the 
Messiah. As at his first advent he gathered all Israelites 
indeed to the new dispensation, so now he will 
gather his elect "little flock" to himself; his Kingdom 
will be established; it shall rule over all; it will accomplish 
the straightening of every crooked path; it will 
level up the path of righteousness and holiness, and 
make of it "a highway" freed from stumbling blocks 
of error and from Satan's deception. (Isa. 35:8,9.) All 
mankind then brought to a knowledge of the truth will 
have the privilege of progressing through the times of 
restitution up this grand highway of obedience to the 
grand perfection lost for himself and his race by father 
Adam's transgression, but redeemed for Adam and his 
race by the precious blood of Christ. All flesh indeed 
shall see the salvation of our God, and so many as will 
may share therein, for this is the blessing which God 
has provided for all the families of the earth, through 
the true spiritual Seed of Abraham— Christ and his 
elect Church. -Gal. 3:16,29. 

It would seem that John's ministry at first was 
somewhat popular, notwithstanding his probably uncouth 
"backwoods" appearance and great plainness of 
speech; so that great multitudes came to him: amongst 
these were some who seemed to John to be so vile that 
he could not properly accept them until they had given 
some proofs of reform. These he denominates "children 
of vipers"— very harsh language, we would be inclined 
to say. We are not to understand that such 
language is proper to be copied by the Lord's people of 
to-day. We are rather to suppose that there were special 
conditions at that time which made this language 
appropriate, and that John, as a prophet, was divinely 
guided into giving this sharp reproof. The Lord's people 
of the Gospel age are instructed on the contrary to 
speak with meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
etc.,— "in meekness instructing those that oppose 
themselves"— "reproving with all long-suffering." 
The Lord's people of today are under general instructions 
of God's Word, as regards all their conduct, and 
are not to depart therefrom unless it would be under 
special divine direction, as were the prophets of old— 

R2564 : page 24 

such as is not given to any at the present time so far as 
we are aware. 

When John speaks of his hearers "fleeing from the 
wrath to come," we are not to get the thought that he 
preached, or that the people believed in, the doctrine of 
eternal torment, and that the words referred to this. 
Quite to the contrary, there is no such teaching in the 
Scriptures. The "wrath to come" referred to by John 



prophetically was the trouble that was about to come 
upon that nation unless they would receive Messiah, 
who had not yet been offered to them, but who would 
shortly appear, and for whose appearance they were to 
make ready by true repentance and baptism. The 
"wrath to come" did come upon the nation because of 
its rejection of Messiah, as our Lord and the Apostle 
Paul specially testify. (See Luke 21:23; Rom. 9:22; 
1 Thes. 2:16.) It burned fiercely against them in the 
great time of trouble which led to the collapse of their 
national polity in A.D. 69-70, and they have been under 
that wrath and unable to reestablish themselves as a 
nation from that day to the present time. We shall 
find confirmation of this interpretation of the "wrath 
to come" further down in this lesson. 

In John's preaching he found one difficulty, and 
that was that his hearers were imbued with the 
thought that they were God's specially chosen, "elect" 
people, whose glorification had been foretold in the 
prophets, and that since there were no better people in 
the world it was unreasonable to suppose that God 
would pass by the very best. They reasoned that he 
must take some, in order to fulfil his promises; and that 
they were not only the most obedient to his Law outwardly, 
but also were the natural seed of Abraham, to 
whom the promises were made. Likewise the principal 
opposition to the teaching of holiness, entire consecration 
to the Lord, today throughout "Christendom," is 
the same error. A false theory has gotten into the minds 
of Christian people, which leads them to reason that 
holiness cannot be essential to the Lord's favor. Their 
process of reasoning is this: Out of the sixteen hundred 
millions of the world's population there are only about 
three hundred millions that make the slightest profession 
of Christianity, and this includes all the Greek 
Catholics, Roman Catholics, and what Bishop Foster 
(M.E.) designated the "ring-straked and speckled" of 

R2564 : page 25 

Protestantism— infants and all. Now, say they, God 
must certainly intend to have some, and if he takes all 
kinds of Christians he will have only comparatively 
few, and if merely an ambition to be ahead of the devil 
were to move him, he could scarcely reject any who claim 
to be Christians, and who are even half-way decent. 
Consequently they reason that holiness to the Lord, 
sanctification of thought and word and deed, cannot be 
essential to divine favor, and is therefore rather carrying 
matters to an extreme. The declaration that only 
"the pure in heart shall see God," and that "without 
holiness no man shall see the Lord," are, to them, extreme 
statements, and must be passed by, or else the 
word "holiness" must be considered as used in olden 
times in a very restricted sense, as meaning not openly 
or violently wicked. 



Thus we see that the antitypical Elijah to the Jews 
encountered the same difficulties that are encountered 
now by the antitypical Elijah ministering to nominal 
spiritual Israel. But note John's answer; he laid down 
the conditions very strictly: Do not permit yourselves 
to be deceived into thinking that God is under compulsion 
to accept such as you, and that otherwise his word 
would become void; do not think that he could not get 
children of Abraham that would be purer than you, 
and therefore that he must take you; God is unlimited 
in power and unlimited in resource, and, if necessary, 
he could raise up children to Abraham out of these 
stones— out of some that you consider as far from the 
possibilities of being Abraham's children as tho they 
were these stones at your feet. And similarly we answer 
"Christendom" today, that God utterly rejects 
hypocritical Christianity, as represented by the vast 
majority of its professors, still blinded by the god of 
this world, and ignorant of the true character of God 
and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent; because not pure 
in heart, not consecrated fully to the Lord. Would that 
we had a trumpet voice that we might tell the millions 
of nominal Christendom the true state of the case, and 
would that they had circumcised ears to hear and reform, 
and be prepared for the glorious events now due 
to be ushered in,— without being obliged to pass through 
the great trouble time. All we can assure them is that 
God will find the full number of his elect, and that the 
full number is nearly complete now, and that in all it 
is but a "little flock" to whom it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom; and that soon these will 
all be glorified with their glorious Head and Lord, and 
that then the Kingdom established will be revealed to 
bless all the families of the earth. Nevertheless, we 
deeply sympathize with them in the fact that their condition 
necessitates that the introduction of the Kingdom 
shall be with a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation, and, thank God, shall never again 
be.-Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21. 

John, proceeding with his discourse, points out to 
his Jewish hearers that the time of judgment had come 
upon their nation. The axe was laid at the root of the 
trees; every Israelite who was not an Israelite indeed 
was to be overthrown, and to be cast into the "fire" of 
trouble with which that age and national polity terminated. 
The three and a half years of our Lord's ministry 
to the Jewish nation, and their final rejection by 
him, are represented by the barren fig tree parable, in 
harmony with the statement of John foregoing.— See 
Luke 13:6-9. 

John evidently struck the chord of fear to some 
extent, but he struck it properly. There is a proper 
presentation of the truth, and a proper fear of God and 
his retribution, which may properly be kept before the 
mind of the transgressor; but this is wholly different 
from the terrorizing fear of eternal torment, which plays 



so important a part in all the theological teaching, directly 

and indirectly, today, and which has driven some 

to insanity, some to skepticism and infidelity, and has 

hindered the great majority even of saints from appreciating 

the true character and plan of our God. Let us 

present the wrath to come, truthfully, not misrepresenting 

the character of our God; for assuredly God will not 

hold them guiltless who blaspheme his holy name. 

Under John's preaching the people began to inquire 
what course they should pursue, and summing the matter 
up John's instruction was that they should practice 
justice, mercy, love, generosity; they should avoid violence, 
extortion, etc.; and should seek to be content 
with such things as they had. This was excellent advice, 
and undoubtedly those who followed it would be 
in just the right condition of heart and mind to welcome 
the Lord Jesus, and his good tidings of remission of sins 
through his blood and thus to become reconciled with the 
Father. And similarly if any now inquire respecting 
the coming trouble, the wrath that is to come in the 
end of this age upon "Christendom,"— What must we 
do? We answer them,— Practice righteousness, truth, 
godliness, kindness, benevolence, justice, trust in the 
Lord, seek to walk in his ways. Or we may quote them 
the words of the prophet, specially bearing upon this 
time, viz., "Seek meekness, seek righteousness; it may 
be that ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
(Zeph. 2:3.) And furthermore, we may rely upon it 
that those who thus seek righteousness, etc., will be the 
ones most ready to welcome our King, and his Kingdom, 
and we may be sure that when in this harvest 
time some fail to make their calling and election sure, 
and prove themselves unworthy of the crowns apportioned 
to them, the Lord will be pleased to select from 
among such penitent seekers of righteousness some as 
substitutes to complete his elect Church. 

So powerful was John's presentation of the truth, 

R2564 : page 26 

that the people began to wonder whether or not he 
might be the Coming One, the Messiah, but he set the 
thought at rest speedily, assuring him that he was so 
inferior to the Messiah that he would be unworthy the 
honor of doing toward him the most menial service of 
removing his sandals. Then, having given them a little 
glimpse of the character of Messiah, he proceeded to tell 
them respecting his work, that it would be higher than 
his own, and that those who received him would receive 
a higher baptism also: "He shall baptize you with the 
holy spirit and with fire"— some of them (the few) with 
holy spirit, the remainder (the mass) with the fire,— 
judgments, the great time of trouble which destroyed 
their national life and many individual lives. 

He gave them an illustration of the matter, showing 
them that they had reached the harvest-time of their 



age, and that now a separating was to be expected— the 

separating of the true wheat from the chaff; and he represented 

our Lord's work with Israel as being that of a 

reaper winnowing the "wheat," freeing it from the 

"chaff" element. How forceful was the figure! how 

true the facts ! Our Lord indeed gathered from that 

nation all the true "wheat," we may be sure that not 

a solitary grain was lost. All that wheat was gathered 

into his barn, into a place of safety, into a higher dispensation, 

—they constituted the beginning or first 

members of the Gospel Church. It was upon this wheat 

class that the holy spirit came at Pentecost, and it has 

abode with this true Church since. After the separating 

(winnowing) of the "wheat," and the gathering 

into the barn, and its baptism of the holy spirit, in due 

time, the "chaff" of that nation was burned up with 

unquenchable fire— a time of trouble which nothing could 

stop or hinder. It will be remembered that various 

steps were taken to hinder the destruction of the nation 

of Israel, but all failed: even the Roman Emperor was 

desirous of preserving the nation, and of establishing 

R2565 : page 26 

order there, and the Roman army went not to destroy 
them but to establish peace in their midst; but the Lord 
had declared that the fire of trouble which he enkindled 
should not be quenched by any power, that it should 
do its work to the full; and it did. 

Likewise it will be with the great "fire" of trouble 
with which this Gospel age shall end, and into which 
the "tare" class of Christendom will be cast; it will not 
be an utter destruction of life (altho many lives will 
perish in the great trouble of this Day of Wrath), but 
it will completely consume earthly governments and 
Churchianity in a fire of anarchy. Nothing shall quench 
that fire, or hinder that utter destruction of present 
systems. But praise God that when this fire shall have 
consumed the stubble and the falsities and deceptions 
of present institutions, it will have but prepared the 
way for the great blessing which he has designed and 
provided for in his coming Kingdom. This "fire," 
and the blessing to follow it, are particularly referred 
toinZeph. 3:8,9. 



R2565 : page 26 

CONSECRATION FOLLOWED BY TEMPTATIONS. 
-JAN. 28.-MATT. 3:13-4:11.— 

"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." 
AFTER JOHN had been preaching and baptizing 



for about six months, about September, A.D. 
29, Jesus, who had been residing in Galilee and was 
nearing his thirtieth birthday, set out to find John and 
to be baptized of him and to begin his public ministry 
at the earliest possible moment. He was to be a Priest 
as well as a King for his people, "a Priest forever after 
the order of Melchisedec," and the Law required of a 
priest that he be at least thirty years of age. Hence 
Jesus' ministry was hindered from beginning until this 
age was attained, but he was free to begin it at the earliest 
possible moment after that time. 

He was of course acquainted with his second-cousin, 
John the Baptizer, who evidently well knew of his upright 
life and unimpeachable character, and who was 
astounded to have him apply for baptism, whereas the 
class John was seeking was the renegade and sinful. 
According to the original reading, John "would have 
hindered him, saying, I have need to be baptized of 
thee, and comest thou to me?" Realizing that Jesus 
had no sins to wash away, it seemed to John inappropriate 
that this ceremony should be performed upon 
Jesus, for we are to remember that John's baptism was 
merely a baptism unto repentance— reformation— and 
not Christian baptism.— See Acts 19:4,5. 

Our Lord did not attempt to explain to John that 
he was introducing a new baptism, not for sinners 
but exclusively for holy ones, and not, therefore, in any 
sense of the word symbolic of the cleansing from sin, 
but symbolic of a sacrificial death for the sins of others. 
It was not then due time to explain Christian baptism, 
and to have done so would merely have confused John 
and those who might have heard, without profiting him 
any, because the new baptism belonged to the new dispensation 
which did not begin until Pentecost, except 
in the person of our Lord Jesus himself. And in any 
case the force and meaning of the symbol is merely 
what is understood by the baptized one. It is perhaps 
well that we call special attention to this point, in view 
of the fact that a large and influential body of Christian 
people* are even today practicing John's baptism, "for 
the remission of sins," wholly failing to realize the import 
of the new baptism— Christian baptism— first symbolized 
by our Lord Jesus himself. 

Our "Disciple" friends will not dispute the Scriptural 
statement that our Lord Jesus was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners, and hence that he had no 
sins to wash away, and consequently that for him John's 
baptism of reformation would have been worse than meaningless; 



*The Christian denomination, otherwise termed "Disciples. 
R2565 : page 27 
it would have been a contradiction of fact and 



contrary to faith; and "whatsoever is not of faith is sin." 
Hence it would have been wrong for our Lord Jesus to 
have been baptized for the remission of sins— John's only 
understanding of baptism. We may be sure, therefore, 
that since "in him was no sin," his act of baptism 
was the first of a new order of baptism— practiced by 
his followers after Pentecost. (Acts 19:4,5.) We here 
note the fact that Christian baptism is only for believers 
in Christ— not for unbelievers, not for sinners. Faith in 
Christ is the justifying power; we are justified through 
faith in his blood. When justified we are ready for 
Christian baptism, and not before, but when justified 
we have no sins to wash away, being "justified freely 
from all things." To the Christian believer, baptism 
symbolizes precisely the same thing that it did to his 
Lord, viz., consecration— the full surrender of his will, 
his life, his all, to the Heavenly Father's will. By such 
a surrender of his will he becomes dead to the world, to 
earthly hopes and aims, and becomes alive toward God, 
to walk in newness of life, and by and by to have that 
newness of life actually, as a sharer with Jesus, his Lord, 
his Redeemer, in the "first Resurrection." All this is 
symbolized in the proper Christian baptism. 

Our Lord, being free from sin, required no justification 
by another, and when he had reached manhood's 
estate presented himself wholly, unreservedly, to do 
the Father's will. At the moment of consecration his 
earthly life was yielded up as a sacrifice for the sins of 
the whole world,— and this was symbolized by his immersion 
in water. The remaining three and a half years 
of his life were already on the altar, and he merely 
waited for his sacrifice to be consumed, crying with his 
last breath, "It is finished!" Likewise he has invited 
all of his faithful, elect Church to become joint-sacrificers 
with him, and ultimately to become also his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom to be given to the Royal Priesthood. 
As Jesus' baptism, therefore, signified his death 
sacrificially for sins, so the baptism of Christians symbolizes 
their participation with the Lord in his sacrifice 
(after they have first been justified by faith freely from 
all things by the merit of his blood). In our Lord's 
case the consecration was quickly followed by the symbol, 
and with his followers the consecration should be 
followed by the symbol as quickly as they recognize the 
meaning of the symbol,— which for centuries has been beclouded 
and obscured. 

Quickly following our Lord's consecration and its 
symbolization came the evidence that his sacrifice was 
accepted of God: the heavens were opened unto him. 
This probably signifies that he was granted a vision of 
heaven, confirming to him his relationship to the Father, 
and connecting up the interim of his experience as a 
man with his prehuman experiences: and there came a 
voice declaring him to be God's well-beloved Son, and 
he as well as John (John 1:34) witnessed a manifestation 
of the divine blessing descending upon him like a 



dove. We are not informed that the people saw the 
heavens opened, heard the voice and saw the dove; on 
the contrary, the records seem to indicate that only 
Jesus and John saw and heard, and that the latter was 
granted the privilege to the intent that he might bear 
witness to the fact. 

A dove was a favorite figure with the Jews as an 
emblem of peace and salvation. Indeed, Noah's dove, 
with its olive branch, seems to have become a symbol 
to all civilized peoples. It was most appropriate, therefore, 
that since some figure was to be used as an outward 
evidence of divine blessing, the dove should be 
that figure. Yet we are not to suppose that the holy 
spirit is a dove, nor that it has bodily shape like a dove, 
but as instructed in all the Scriptures, that it is a divine 
power or influence. The dove represented fittingly the 
meek and quiet spirit which is one of the striking ornaments 
of all those who possess the spirit of holiness 
unto the Lord. Such experiences as these which our 
Lord enjoyed are not granted to his followers nor to be 
expected today,— neither the voice nor the opened 
heavens, nor the dove. The coming of the holy spirit 
to the Church at Pentecost was signalized by an outward 
demonstration, which serves the entire Church throughout 
the age. Such outward demonstrations were essential 
at the beginning, as assurances to us that we are not 
following some vain imaginations of our own or other 
men's minds in respect to the holy spirit, and now we 
merely have the realities, which at first were symbolized 
or represented in tangible form. All who, after believing 
unto repentance, are justified from their sins, and 
subsequently present themselves to the Lord to be baptized 
into his death (Rom. 6:3), receive an opening of 
the heavens before them in the sense of an opening of 
their minds to see heavenly things, to appreciate spiritual 
matters; as the Apostle declares, "God reveals them 
unto us by his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, 
yea, the deep things of God,"— things which "eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the 
heart of [the natural] man." (1 Cor. 2:10.) They also 
by faith hear the voice of the Father, speaking unto 
them, saying that, having thus come unto him through 
Jesus, and having thus consecrated their lives to him, 
they are now beloved sons, accepted in the well-beloved 
One. They also receive the blessing of the holy spirit, 
in the shedding abroad in their hearts of the peace-giving, 
meek and gentle spirit of holiness, and this becomes 
more and more a reality with them as they become more 
and more "filled with the spirit." 

Jesus was led of the spirit— his own spirit, illuminated 
by the spirit-baptism which he had just received 

R2566 : page 28 

—to go apart from John and the concourse of people 

into quiet solitude, and for this purpose he chose a wilderness 



place. Mark says he was impelled or "driven" 
of the spirit into the wilderness. The thought we get 
is that there was a great pressure upon our Lord's mind 
at this time. In a previous lesson we noted his study 
at Jerusalem at an early age respecting the "Father's 
business," and how he should go about it. We found 
the Law instructing him that it would not be proper for 
him to engage in the Father's business until he was 
thirty years of age, and that in consideration of this 
fact he desisted and served his parents. The momentous 
time for which he had been waiting for eighteen 
years had come. He hastened to present himself at 
the earliest moment, that his service should not be delayed; 
but now, under the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit, instead of beginning his ministry precipitately, 
he felt that he must know definitely the proper course 
to pursue: he must not make a mistake at the very out-start 
of his service; he must know the Father's will, 
that he might render his service in harmony therewith. 
Such motives impelled him to seek solitude for thought 
and prayer, and for reviewing the various Scriptures 
which hitherto he had studied and but imperfectly comprehended, 
but which now began to be luminous under 
the influence of the holy spirit which he had received. 
How proper it would be that all of the Lord's people, 
when they have made a consecration of themselves 
to the divine service, should be impelled by the new 
mind, the new spirit, to go apart first and to commune 
with the Father, and to study his Word respecting how 
they should render their lives most acceptable in his 
service! Were this course pursued how many lives 
would be totally different from what they are; how many 
failures and changes and turnings, hither and thither, 
would be avoided! Our Lord expressed the matter in 
one of his parables, when he said that anyone taking 
up his cross to follow him should sit down first and 
count the cost— learn what the Father's will would be, 
as well as the results to be sought. And if any of God's 
dear children have neglected thus to seek the right path 
at the beginning of their consecration, we refer them to 
the example of our dear Master, who was wise in this 
as in all things, having not only the spirit of a sound 
mind, but a sound mind itself, through which that spirit 
operated perfectly. However, our study of the divine 
will need not be so completely alone as was our Master's 
—we have "brethren," he had none, being himself the 
forerunner. We may profitably take counsel of such 
as give evidence of faith in and consecration to God, 
that we may learn the more quickly and the more thoroughly 
the Father's will concerning us: especially may 
we have the aid of the words and example of our elder 
Brother, Jesus. We must never forget, however, that 
our consecration is to the Father's business, and that 
brethren can only be really helpful to us as they assist 
us in understanding the Father's plan and our part 
therein: otherwise they might become hindrances by 



substituting their own or sectarian plans and seeking 
our consecration thereto. 

Our Lord's temptations may be said to have begun 
at this point— those temptations in which "he was 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin." It was not 
the boy Jesus, nor the youth Jesus, that was tempted 
"as we are." And our Lord's temptations after his 
consecration were not like the temptations which beset 
the world, but like the Church's temptations. In other 
words, our Lord was reckoned a new creature from the 
time of his consecration at Jordan, as we are counted 
new creatures in him from the time of our consecration; 
and it was the consecrated Jesus who was tempted and 
tried like as his consecrated followers are tempted and 
tried. We shall see further evidences of this as we proceed 
to notice the character of our Lord's temptations, 
and to compare them with the temptations which come 
to his consecrated "brethren." Many have wondered 
why their temptations seemed to commence after their 
consecration to the Lord, rather than before: seemingly 
they expected that after consecration the Adversary 
would flee from them, and they should have little or no 
temptation— totally misunderstanding the divine arrangement. 
Such temptations or tests of character as 

come to the consecrated are not appropriate to the unconsecrated: 
the present is not the judgment day of the 
world, but the testing time for the Church. 

It would appear that our Lord's temptations progressed 
throughout the entire forty days, but that the 
three temptations specifically described were the culmination 
of that period of testing. We may imagine our 
Lord in the wilderness solitude, intently thinking over 
the various prophetic references to himself, and linking 
these together, as an architect would first draw the outline 
of a building and subsequently fill out feature after 
feature of its internal arrangements. The outline before 
our Lord's mind from the Scriptures, beyond any peradventure, 
was the Kingdom. He was to be the King, 
the Seed of Abraham, under whose gracious government 
and wise instruction all the families of the earth were 
to be blessed. This, the profile, was already clearly 
delineated in his mind, but other features needed to be 
properly adjusted. How was he to fulfil the type of 
the Law which represented the priest as giving up his 
life for the sins of the people? Where would come in 
the type of the everlasting priesthood? Where would 
come in the class of Israelites represented by Rebecca, 
as he himself was represented by Isaac, and the Father 
by Abraham, in the type? And if Israel would receive 
him, and become the Rebecca, where would come in 

R2566 : page 29 

the sacrifice, and how? And then other prophecies no 
doubt pressed his mind for a place in the plan, viz., the 
declaration that altho Israel were as the sand of the 



sea only a remnant should be acceptable, and how then 
would the predestinated number of the "elect" be found, 
to complete the glorious royal priesthood; and by what 
process would the blessing come to all the families of 
the earth, if himself, as the High Priest, and his true 
followers, as the royal priests, were all to suffer and to 
die for righteousness' sake, as sacrifices? 

We may well suppose that adjustment and readjustment, 
fitting and refitting, with much reflection and 
prayer, occupied many of the forty days, and there 
may have been temptations intermingled with these all; 
as for instance, questionings respecting the necessity of 
those features represented in the types and specified in 
the prophecies of the sufferings of Christ which must 
take precedence to the glories that would follow. There 
may have been temptations, too, to deal dishonestly 
with the records, to "wrest the Scriptures," and thus 
self-deceived, to choose a way not in fullest conformity 
to the divine outline; but we may safely suppose that 
as soon as such suggestions, one after another, presented 
themselves, they were promptly rejected,— our Lord 
being fully determined that he would be absolutely obedient 
to the Father's will and accomplish the work 
which he had sent him to do in exactly the manner 
prescribed. 

So intent had been his study, and so earnest his 
desire for quiet fellowship with the Father and his Law, 
that forty days were spent under such conditions, and 
apparently so deeply absorbed was our Lord that he 
did not even think of food. Nor does this appear so 
strange to us, when we remember that he was perfect, 
while we are imperfect, physically as well as otherwise. 
"He afterward hungered." 

It was at the close of this period of Bible study 
and prayer, when our Lord was weak from fasting, that 
the Adversary assaulted him with three temptations 
particularized in our lesson. 

The word here translated "devil" is diabolos, and 
is used with the definite article— the devil. The arch-deceiver 
is thus Scripturally distinguished from the fallen 
angels, who throughout the Scriptures are spoken of in 
the plural, designated by another word signifying demons. 
Here, then, is one place in the Scriptures where 
the personality of the prince of devils is definitely affirmed, 
and his person and power acknowledged by our 
Lord himself. It is not necessary for us, however, to 
assume that Satan appeared to our Lord in a human 
form; he may or may not thus have been personally 
manifest. If personally manifest, we may rest well assured 
that he presented himself in his very best appearance, 
as an angel of light. Indeed, we may well remember 
that our Lord, in his prehuman condition, had, 
as the Father's agent, been the Creator of Satan, and 
we remember that Satan was an angel of very high 
order, whose sin consisted in an attempt to usurp 
authority and to become the potentate of earth, by 



stealing the sympathy, affection and obedience of humanity, 
and that on this account he fell under divine 
reprobation. We can imagine that a visit from him to 
Jesus would not be at all inappropriate, as he undoubtedly 
knew the facts of our Lord's consecration, and to 
some extent knew of the work which the Father had 
given him to do in the redemption of the fallen race of 
men. We can imagine him even presenting himself in 
a friendly manner, and assuring our Lord Jesus that he 
felt a great interest in him and in his work; that he 
himself had been painfully surprised to note the penalty 
of sin upon mankind, and the dreadful degradation 
which had resulted; and that now he would be glad indeed 
to have something done by which poor humanity 
might be delivered from its groaning, travailing, dying 
conditions. As a friend, thoroughly versed in the situation 
all around, and interested in its success, and thoroughly 
conversant with the mental moods and foibles 
of humanity, he was in a place where he felt qualified 
to offer some suggestions respecting the very work which 
our Lord Jesus wished to perform, the plan for which 
he was now considering. 

R2567 : page 29 

TEMPTATION TO USE SPIRITUAL FAVORS FOR 
PERSONAL PROFIT. 

First, he manifests his personal interest in our 
Savior by suggesting his weakness from lack of food 
and the necessity for taking proper care of his physical 
health if he would do the great and noble work he had 
undertaken. He reminded him also of his present 
power— that he had just been imbued with divine power, 
and that he had now full ability to supply his wants, 
and need only to speak the word and have the stones 
turned into food. Thus also, he suggested, he would 
be demonstrating to himself the verity of the new power 
which he witnessed coming upon him, and had subsequently 
felt. What more cunning temptation could be 
devised than this? Compliance with it evidently meant, 
not only the relief of his hunger and the strengthening 
of his physical frame, but additionally it apparently 
meant the conversion of Satan, who now seemingly was 
in a repentant attitude, and desirous of cooperating with 
him in the undoing of the evil work of the long ago. 
It was a strong temptation. 

Such temptations come also to all the consecrated; 
not in exactly the same form, nor in the same language, 
but somewhat similarly— suggestions that the new relationship 
with God, and the strength which it brings, 
may be used to some extent at least in creature comforts 

R2567 : page 30 

—may be utilized for our temporal advancement; 



may be made to make us shine before men as very honorable 
and favored of God; may be used to command 
large salaries, or at least as a means for seeking them, 
even if never found. We may then all note carefully 
how our Lord resisted his would-be friend and his 
worldly-wise suggestions. He flatly refused the suggestion 
of using his spiritual power to serve his temporal 
wants. The spiritual gift could no more be used to 
procure temporal comforts than it could be sold for 
money to Simon (Acts 8:18-24); but without going into 
details, and without boasting that he was too holy to 
think of such a sacrilegious use of the power entrusted 
to him, Jesus simply answered the Adversary in Scriptural 
language, that a man's life was not wholly dependant 
upon what he should eat, but that obedience 
to the Word of God would be a surer guarantee of life. 
And after this manner each of the Lord's followers 
should answer every question which in any manner proposes 
the acquirement of earthly blessings and comforts 
at the sacrifice of the spiritual. To quite a number of 
the Lord's "brethren" the Adversary has presented this 
same temptation in this form: If you follow too closely 
to the truth, and permit the holy spirit of the truth to 
make you very zealous in its service, you will soon have 
no bread, no food, for the world's people with whom 
you must deal do not appreciate such things. They 
will discharge you from their employ, or they will cease 
to deal at your store, or they will dismiss you from being 
their pastor, or they will withdraw from you their 
fellowship, their society, etc., and you will starve for 
all the good things of this present life. The proper 
answer is that God is able to take care of all those who 
respect his spiritual blessings too much to sell them for 
a mess of pottage, as did Esau in the type; and that 
we are convinced that whoever lives according to the 
Word of God, tho he may lose some of the comforts of 
the present time, will eventually gain the far better, the 
life eternal with exceeding glory. 

Our Lord's positiveness of reply shut off the temptation 
quickly, and discouraged the Adversary from 
further proceeding along that line; and so it is with us, 
his followers: if we are positive in our rejection of temptation 
it increases our strength of character, not only 
for that time, but also for subsequent temptations; and 
it disconcerts to some extent our Adversary, who, noting 
our positiveness, knows well that it is useless to 
discuss the matter with persons of strong convictions 
and positive characters; whereas, if the question were 
parleyed over, the result would surely be the advancing 
of further reasons and arguments on the Adversary's 
part, and a danger on our part that we would be over-matched 
in argument, for, as the Apostle declares, the 
Devil is a wily adversary, and "we are not ignorant of 
his devices." Prompt and positive obedience to the 
word and spirit of the Lord is the only safe course for 
any of the "brethren." 



TEMPTING GOD BY UNAUTHORIZED EFFORTS. 



Disappointed in his first effort, the Adversary quickly 
turned the subject, not even dissenting from our 
Lord's judgment in the matter. The second temptation 
he presented is like all others that came to our Lord and 
that come to his consecrated followers, viz., not a temptation 
to gross wickedness— to steal, to kill, etc.— but a 
temptation to do the Lord's work in another way than 
that which the Lord had planned— the misuse of the 
divine powers given him by endeavoring to accomplish 
good results in an improper manner. 

Satan took our Lord Jesus to Jerusalem and up to 
the flat roof of one of the wings of the Temple— not 
physically, but mentally, just as mentally we can go to 
various places and do certain things without change of 
physical location. The suggestion now made was this: 
I (Satan) can give you a good suggestion respecting a 
way to bring yourself quickly into prominence before 
the people of Israel, and you will be pleased with it, 
because it is a Scriptural way; indeed I have found that 
it is foretold in the prophecy that Messiah at his coming 
will do this: and the people will readily recognize it as 
a fulfilment of the words of the Prophet David, and 
thus they will embrace your cause quickly, you will 
become the leader of the people, and your work will go 
on most grandly: and as I said before, I will rejoice in 
seeing the prosperity of the work, for I am heartily 
sick of the degradation which I have witnessed for now 
four thousand years. My suggestion is that you go to 
the roof of the southern wing of the Temple which on 
its rear part overlooks the Valley of Hinnom, towering 
above it six hundred feet, and which also overlooks the 
court of the Temple, in which there are hundreds of 
devout Jews: then leap from this eminence, and arise 
unhurt by the fall. This will demonstrate more quickly 
than anything else you could do or say that the power 
of the Highest is upon you, and that you are the Messiah. 
This, I say, is referred to in the Scripture which 
says,— "He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: 
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any 
time thou dash thy foot against a stone."— Matt. 4:6. 

Similar are the temptations which Satan presents 
to the consecrated followers of Jesus:— Make a great 
show before the world and the nominal church; attract 
their attention by any means, and not simply by the 
preaching of the cross of Christ; use the spiritual powers 
and blessings that you have received for doing some 
great and striking work, which will appeal to the natural 
man, and thus secure quick and great success; do 
this instead of doing the quiet and less conspicuous 

R2567 : page 31 



work of presenting spiritual things to the spiritual class, 
which work the vast majority can in no wise appreciate, 
but will only shun you, consider you peculiar, and 
which not only will lose you the sympathy of the mass, 
but will bring you specially the hatred of some of the 
principal professors of Christendom. 

Again our Lord answered promptly and correctly: 
"It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God." Satan would like to have us walk by sight, not 
by faith; he would like to have us continually tempting 
God, and demanding some ocular demonstrations of his 
favor and protection, instead of accepting the testimony 
of his Word, and relying thereon implicitly in faith. 
In the light of the unfolding of the Scriptures we see 
that Satan, probably unwittingly, quoted a passage of 
Scripture wholly out of its proper meaning and interpretation, 
a passage which referred, not to the literal 
feet of Jesus, and to literal stones, and to literal angels, 
but to the symbolic feet-members of the body of Christ 
today, and to the stones of stumbling, doctrinal and 
otherwise, which are now permitted in the pathway of 
the faithful, and to the angels or ministers of divine 
truth who in the present harvest-time would be commissioned 
to bear up the feet members with such counsels, 
admonitions and expositions of Scripture as would 
be necessary for them.— Psa. 91:11,12. 

TEMPTATION TO OBTAIN DESIRED GOOD RESULTS 
BY COMPROMISE. 

Satan's third temptation we may presume was presented 
likewise in a friendly and sympathetic manner, 
indicative of a desire for cooperation in our Lord's great 
work. He took him to a high mountain— not literally, 
but mentally. Indeed, there is no literal high mountain 
near Jerusalem, nor anywhere in the world, from which 
all the kingdoms of the world and their glory could be 
seen. Satan took our Lord mentally to a very high 
symbolic mountain (kingdom). He pictured before 
him the immensity of his (Satan's) own power throughout 
the world, his control of all the nations and peoples 
to a large extent, and this our Lord subsequently acknowledged 
when he referred to Satan as "the prince 
[ruler] of this world." This panoramic presentation 
of Satan's power and influence throughout the world 
was designed to impress upon the mind of our Redeemer 
the thought that Satan's friendship and assistance would 
be most valuable— nay, almost of vital importance to 
the success of his mission, and hence that it was very 
fortunate indeed that at this juncture Satan had 
called upon him in so friendly a mood, and that he apparently 
so sincerely welcomed his efforts and was ready 
to cooperate therewith. 

Satan possibly pointed out to our Lord that Messiah 
was specially referred to as the King of Israel, and 



to bless Israel, and he may have admitted that a light 
of influence would extend to all nations through him, 
but the center of his argument would seem to be that he 
proposed to Jesus a still larger kingdom than Israel. 

R2568 : page 31 

He proposed to him a kingdom embracing all the nations 

of the earth, and that he should have the control 

of all these, and be able to bring in the blessed reforms 

which were designed of God, only one condition being 

insisted upon, viz., that whatever kingdom or rule or 

authority might be established must recognize Satan. 

The Adversary thus seemed to see what he thought a 

favorable opportunity for consummating his original 

plans, for we cannot suppose that his original intention 

was to gain control of a dying and depraved race, but 

that he much rather would be the lord or ruler of a highly 

enlightened and well-endowed people. He was willing, 

therefore, to see carried into effect all the gracious 

work which God had designed, and willing to reform 

himself and to become the leader of reform, provided 

only that he should be recognized as having the chief 

place of influence in connection with mankind. It was 

after this manner that he wished our Lord to do worship 

or reverence to him— to recognize his influence and cooperation 

in the work, and not for a moment can we 

suppose that he expected him to kneel before him and 

to worship him as God. 

Our Lord's reply to this last temptation shows that 
it fully awakened him to a realization of the fact that 
there was no real reformation at work in Satan's heart; 
that he was still ambitious, self-seeking, as at the beginning 
of his downward course; and he realized that 
to even discuss the matter further with one who had thus 
avowed his real sentiments would be disloyalty to the 
Father, and hence his words, "Get thee hence, Satan" 
—leave me; you cannot cooperate with me at all; my 
work is in full accord with the absolute standard of the 
divine will; I can be a party to no program contrary to 
this, however alluring some of its features might be in 
promising a speedy conquest of the world, and a speedy 
establishment of a reign of righteousness and blessing 
and an avoidance of personal suffering; I cannot serve 
two masters; I can only recognize the one supreme Jehovah, 
as Lord of heaven and of earth, and therefore could 
not recognize you in any position of authority except as 
the great Jehovah would appoint you to it, which I 
know he would never do, so long as you are of the present 
ambitious spirit. I am operating along the line of 
the declaration, "Thou shalt worship [reverence] the 
Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." 

We may readily discern that this temptation of our 
Lord was but a sample illustration of such as beset his 
followers all along the narrow way, from the same source, 
directly or through agencies. Satan, through his various 



mouthpieces, is continually saying to the saints, 
Here is a more successful way of accomplishing your 
object than that which you are pursuing, a more successful 
way than the Lord's way. Bend a little; make compromise 
with the worldly spirit; do not hew too close to 
the line of the word of God and the example of the Lord 
Jesus and the apostles; you must be more like the 
world, in order to exert an influence— mix a little into 
politics, and a good deal into secret societies; keep in 
touch with the fads and foibles of the day, and above all 
things keep any light of present truth under a bushel, 
—thus alone can you have influence and accomplish 
your good desires toward men. But our dear Master 
assures us that we are to be faithful to the Lord and to 
his plan, and let things work out as best they may along 
that line; and that we may rest assured that in the end 
the Father's plan not only is the best but really the 
only plan for accomplishing his great designs, and that 
if we would be associated therein with him as colaborers, 
it must be by recognizing him as our only Master, and 
with an eye single to his approval. 
Our Lord's utter refusal of every other way of 

R2568 : page 32 

carrying out his mission than the one which the Father 

had marked out, the way of self-sacrifice, the narrow 

way, was indeed a great victory. The Adversary left 

him, finding nothing in him that he could take hold of 

or work upon, so thoroughly loyal was he to the very 

word and the spirit of Jehovah. And then, the trial 

being ended, we read that holy angels came and ministered 

to our Lord— doubtless supplying him with refreshment 

such as he had refused to exercise the divine 

power to obtain for himself. And such we may recognize 

as being the experience of our Lord's followers: 

with victory comes a blessing from the Lord, fellowship 

of spirit, refreshment of heart, a realization of divine 

favor that makes stronger for the next trial. 

Another lesson here is that temptation does not 
imply sin. As our Lord was tempted "without sin" 
so may his brethren be if they follow his example and 
with purity of heart, purity of intention, seek only the 
Father's will. Sin could only come through yielding to 
the temptation. But let us not forget that hesitancy 
after the wrong is seen increases the power of the temptation. 
And we may note here that while Satan is a 
tempter, endeavoring to ensnare us into wrong paths 
and wrong conduct, God is not so; "he tempteth no 
man" (Jas. 1:13), and even tho he permit the Adversary 
and his agents to beset his people, it is not with 
the object of ensnaring them, but with the opposite object, 
that they may by such trials and testings be made 
the stronger, developing character through exercise in 
resisting evil. Let us remember too for our strengthening, 
the Scriptural assurance that God will not suffer us to be 



tempted above that we are able to resist and overcome 
but will with the temptation provide also a way of escape. 

To avail ourselves of this provision requires merely 
faith, and the more we exercise our faith in such matters 
the more of it we will have, becoming stronger in 
the Lord and in the power of his might; and thus by 
divine grace and under the Master's assistance we may 
come off overcomers— conquerors, and more than conquerors, 
through him who loved us and bought us with 
his own precious blood.— 2 Cor. 12:9; 1 Cor. 10:13; 
Eph. 6:10; Rom. 8:37-39. 



page 32 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to thank you 
for Vol. V. of M. DAWN, for it has been a great help 
to me in clearing up many dark points; it has been to 
me indeed "meat in due season," and it is just what 
I wish to place in the hands of my friends and neighbors. 
There are now quite a number here who have 
read M.D. who are more or less interested, but so far 
I could not find any one who has come fully into the 
truth, and I have been thinking that perhaps if you 
could send a "Pilgrim" brother here for a few days some 
time this winter to present the truth orally to such as 
are interested much good could be done. I have the 
Mission hall promised me for this purpose, as I have 
succeeded in interesting the man who keeps this Mission 
at his own expense, and all he wants is two or three 
weeks' notice as to when I want the hall. He is a very 
liberal minded Christian who, I believe, will be open 
to the truth if only he could be brought to investigate 
it, but his time is so completely taken up by Prohibition, 
the "salvation of souls" and social reform movements 
that he finds no time. Now if you find it expedient 
to send a brother I will gladly receive him into 
my home and make all necessary arrangements about 
meetings and invite all interested ones to attend; we 
could hold at least one public evening -meeting a day 
and one in the afternoon for such as are interested. 

I would also like to have some extra copies of the 
TOWER for distribution among such of the friends as 
are interested in the truth, who have read M. DAWN, 
to see if I cannot get some of them to subscribe for it, 
because I know from my own experience how very 
helpful it is. I would not be without it for ten times 
its subscription price. The publication of your discourse, 
"Which is the True Gospel?" has given me 
much pleasure, as it was impossible for me to attend 
either the Indianapolis or St. Louis Conventions, which 
was a great disappointment to me. 

Your discourse is very logical, a clear statement 



of facts, and would, I believe, make an excellent 
tract. I thank the Lord for giving me a small share 
in his harvest work; I would like to devote all my time 
and means to that glorious work, but as my family has 
a prior claim I will do what I can, knowing that the 
Lord sees my intention and willingness and accepts it. 
It is now a year since I gave myself fully to the Lord 
who bought me with his precious blood, and looking 
back over the year I can see his tender mercy in his 
leadings, and how he has kept me and revealed to me 
the hidden depths of my heart. His grace is sufficient 
at all times, and I have full confidence in him that he 
will continue and finish the good work which he has 
so graciously begun in me. I realize more than ever 
my own unworthiness and inability to do anything 
good in my own strength. May he also continue to 
bless and preserve you is my prayer. 
Your brother in Christ, C. L. BAUER,-Indiana. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I have just received enclosed 
card (saying that my subscription is in arrears) 
and deeply regret I am not able to send my subscription 
for the TOWER this month, but I think it is very probable 
I can remit before the end of next month. 

As I read the remark of the card that I "cannot 
afford to miss the TOWER teachings if interested," 
I thought how little do the TOWER friends know of 
what these teachings are to me, or they would never 
have put it so mildly. 

To me they are a part of my very life, inasmuch 
as they have opened up the Scriptures to me in a marvelously 
new light; to me they have revealed God as 
my Father, Jesus as my Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit 
as an ever present Guide in a manner hitherto undreamed 
of; for me they have shined with dazzling 
brightness upon the very darkest moments of my life; 
for me they are meat and drink, an all engrossing 
theme, and will be until the everlasting blessedness is 
mine, "partaker of the Divine Nature." I cannot explain 
it but the very thought of such a transformation 
while it humbles one to the very dust, exalts as if on 
angels' wings. Oh no! I cannot afford to do without 
the TOWER teachings, for through them "I have seen 
his face, and souls that once have looked upon their 
Lord, must die or look again." Just now I am feasting 
on "Our Lord's Return." What can be more convincing, 
more sublime, or more elevating than "The 
Parousia!" May His wealth of glorious goodness, love, 
wisdom and power be showered upon you and yours! 

Yours, ever gratefully, ELEANOR MILLER. 



page 33 
VOL. XXI. FEBRUARY 1, 1900. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: The Volunteer 

Work, etc 34 

The People That Know the Joyful 

Sound 35 

Sounding the Jubilee Trumpets 36 

The New Song of Moses and 

the Lamb 37 

The Walk of the Blessed People 37 

A Text for the Year 38 

We Have Found Him! Eureka! 38 

The Kingdom Attainable Only by 

aNew Birth 41 

Nothing to Draw With and the 

Well is Deep 44 

Interesting Letters 47 

page 34 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



POSTAL MONEY ORDERS AND EXPRESS MONEY 
ORDERS ARE SAFE. 

There is no danger in making remittance by postal money 
orders, express orders and bank drafts, for even if these were 
stolen (and destroyed by the thief, to prevent detection) duplicates 
could be obtained, and thus the money would not be lost. 
Besides, just as soon as the thief finds that no money is being 
sent here he will discontinue his depredations. 

Some have expressed surprise that money sent to us has 
been lost, while money sent elsewhere has not been lost. We 



answer that it is not to be presumed for a moment that all post 
office employees are thieves, nor even any considerable proportion 
of them; and generally the risk of detection is too great, 
even if the man were disposed to steal. Quite a good many of 
our subscribers got into the careless habit of sending money, 
and it evidently became too strong a temptation for some one 
through whose hands the mail passed. With the discontinuance 
of the mailing of money, and thus the removal of the temptation, 
we trust we shall have no further difficulty. 

R2570 : page 33 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 

The open winter has been very favorable to the Volunteer 
work thus far, but we advise that those who have not already 
commenced this work make all their preparations for the 
springtime, when we hope to hear from all, and to have a goodly 
supply of reading matter ready for their use. 

Meantime you will do well to have a meeting, call for enlistments 
in the service, appoint a committee with a central 
head to lay out the work systematically, that all congregations 
in your city may be served without duplicating, appoint your 
scribe to communicate with the WATCH TOWER office respecting 
the number of Volunteers, the number of churches, the average 
attendance of each, and the time at which you will be ready 
to begin the service. 



R2568 : page 35 

THE PEOPLE THAT KNOW THE JOYFUL SOUND. 



"Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound; they shall 
walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance."— Psalm 89:15. 

SALVATION is the joyful sound, as the poet 
has well expressed it,* saying:— 
"Salvation! O the joyful sound, 

What tidings for our race! 
Deliv'rance for the world is found 

Through God's abounding grace." 
This joyful salvation sound is the Gospel, as declared 
by the angelic messengers— "Good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be unto all people." But alas, 
how few have heard this joyful sound! As mentally 
we glance over the sixteen hundred millions of the 
world's population, we find that even the most extravagant 
claims would show that not one-fifth of the 
whole have ever heard these blessed tidings; the four-fifths 
are totally blinded by the god of this world, and 
see nothing and hear nothing of God's grace. And 
the matter has been as bad as this, or worse proportionately 



for six thousand years. How we should rejoice 
that under divine providence we were born in 
lands where the light of truth sends forth at least a 
feeble ray, and where many are not totally deaf to 
"the joyful sound!" 

Yet coming to civilized lands, we are surprised, 
almost appalled, at the gross darkness which beclouds 
the minds of the people of so-called Christendom, and 
by the dimness of vision and dullness of hearing of the 
vast majority in these most favored parts of the earth 
—of the majority of those whose lines have fallen unto 
them in pleasant places comparatively. Mentally we 
see nearly two-thirds of the so-called enlightened fifth 



*POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN, No. 255. 

R2569 : page 35 

of humanity bowing to the Virgin Mary, addressing 
her in prayer, and crossing themselves with reverence 
at the mention of her name, and generally grossly 
ignorant of the divine character and plan— believers in 
an eternity of torment for all except those of their own 
communions, and in long periods of purgatorial agony 
for the great majority of their members. Heart-sick 
with the picture, we exclaim, O that these people 
could hear the joyful sound! for evidently they have 
at very most merely heard an indistinct strain of it 
conglomerated with the jargon of Babel's confusion 
and Satanic discord. 

Looking expectantly to the remaining third of the 
so-called enlightened fifth of humanity, known as 
"Protestants," we enquire, Are these the blessed people 
who know the joyful sound? A hundred discordant 
voices answer, Yes! but we enquire, If you have 
heard it, why such discord, such clashing of doctrines, 
such separation from each other by creed-fences? Are 
not all the people who know the joyful sound one 
people— the one Church of the living God, whose 
names are written in heaven? This at once arouses 
doubt respecting "Protestantism," and we hearken for 
evidences to the contrary, that many at least, if not all, 
know "the joyful sound." We perceive that in many 
respects amongst these are found people who know 
more respecting the divine character than do the outside 
fifteen hundred millions; and yet here also we find 
great blindness, obscure mental vision, great deafness 
to the voice from heaven. Truly amongst these also 
the great Adversary has done a work, so that altho 
in their midst more may be heard of "the joyful sound" 
than amongst other classes of the world, yet Satan 
has here also introduced the discords so as almost to 
drown the heavenly music— "the joyful sound." For 
while to some extent Protestantism discerns God's 



love and justice, the Adversary has beclouded its vision 
and dulled its hearing for the truth, by whispering 
theories that are at variance with divine justice and 
love, and make void and meaningless "the joyful 

R2569 : page 36 

sound." To some he whispers that God never had 
either sympathy or provision for any except "the 
elect;" to others he whispers that God has the sympathy 
for all, but lacks the wisdom and power to give 
practical assistance to any but the few: and thus in the 
minds of nearly all "the joyful sound" is reduced to a 
song of praise and joy and thanksgiving and salvation 
from a little flock, with which will mingle to all eternity 
the anguishing wails of the vast majority of thousands 
of millions. 

There are a few (but alas how few!) who not only 
hear "the joyful sound," but who discern that the discord 
is of the Adversary, and that the joyful sound, 
if separated from Satanic inharmonies, is beautiful, 
harmonious beyond any other sound or song. Full of 
the spirit of the song themselves, they haste to make 
its beauty known to others, and to point out the origin 
of the discord. They feel certain that it will be merely 
necessary to indicate the discord and its source to 
have others like themselves instantly discern and reject 
the discord, and rejoice more fully than ever in 
"the joyful sound"— the true Gospel. But alas! what 
disappointment is theirs: they find that even amongst 
the "Protestant" fifteenth of humanity not only is the 
darkness great, but the depravity of heart and mind 
are so dense that the darkness and discord are preferred, 
and "the joyful sound," the good tidings of great joy 
for all people, is spurned, and considered to be the 
discord that is of the Adversary. Only here and there 
can any be found who "know the joyful sound"— who 
can distinguish the joyful sound of the heavenly message 
from those by which Satan has "deceived all that 
dwell upon the earth. "-Rev. 18:23; 19:20; 20:3. 

SOUNDING THE JUBILEE TRUMPETS. 



The question may arise, Why did God permit 
Satan, through his human agencies, to bring false 
doctrine amongst his people during the dark ages, thus 
to blind and deafen them to the true light, and the 
heavenly harmonies of the divine plan? 

We answer that God's purpose during this age 
has been the selection of merely the "little flock" of 
"overcomers" to be joint-heirs with his Son in the 
coming Millennial Kingdom which is to "bless all the 
families of the earth;" and by permitting darkness to 
come upon this nominal church class he has (1) taught 



a great lesson both to angels and men concerning the 
necessity of not only starting right, but remaining 
loyal to the Lord and his Word, and maintaining a 
teachable attitude of heart. (2) Doubtless the majority 
of the "little flock" has been selected from the two 
ends of this gospel age— its beginning and its closing 
years. (3) There may have been much more knowledge 
of the joyful message amongst God's people during 
"the dark ages" than we now have means of 
knowing, since the history of that time had few recorders, 
and their records then dealt chiefly with the 
error-blinded systems and ignored or misrepresented 
the unpopular instrumentalities used by God in making 
"the joyful sound"— some of whom quite probably 
were denominated heretics, because they knew the 
joyful sound of the true Gospel, and proportionately 
denounced the popular "doctrines of devils." 

At all events, under divine providence the joyful 
sound is now heard above the din of "Babel" by those 
who "have an ear to hear," and it is found to be the 
very same gospel which was preached by the Lord and 
the Apostles and announced by the angels on the plains 
of Bethlehem— a "joyful sound," "good tidings of 
great joy which shall be unto all people." Moreover, 
as we have seen in other studies,* we are now in the 
early dawn of the Millennial Day, which in the Scriptures 
was typically represented to Israel by their Jubilee 
Year— of release from bondage and the return to 
original possessions, etc. And as the priests were to 
announce the Jubilee Year in the Day of Atonement, 
by the blowing of silver jubilee trumpets, so here we 
have the antitype: the royal priests in this, the close 
of the antitypical Day of Atonement (the Gospel age), 
are to blow the trumpets of truth (silver being a symbol 
of truth), announcing to the people that the grace 
of God is come nigh unto them, and that during the 
Millennial Day (of one thousand years) now dawning 
the great High Priest, also Prophet and King, shall 
stand forth as God's representative, and by virtue of 
his own sacrifice shall give the needed blessing of knowledge 
to all mankind, and shall lift up out of degradation 
and sin and death, by his providence and grace, 
all who seek to come back to righteousness and fellowship 
with the Father through him. 

So then, as it was appropriate in the type that this 
announcement should be made at the close of the Day 
of Atonement, so that indicated that it is a part of the 
divine plan that the sounding forth of the joyful 
sound, the message of the Jubilee of divine love and 
favor and blessing should be given at the present time 
—just in the closing days of the Gospel age— the closing 
hours, so to speak, of the great Day of Atonement,+ 
and at the dawning, so to speak, of the Millennial age 
of Jubilee. 

Now another matter, little in itself, and easily 
overlooked in our translation of the Bible, is the fact 



that the very word (turnah) used in our text, rendered 
"a joyful sound," is the same Hebrew word that 
is used in Lev. 25:9, where the sounding of the Jubilee 
trumpet is commanded. How strikingly the Lord has 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 6. 
+See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

R2569 : page 37 

arranged his Word, to make it a basis for faith and 

joy to his people. How clear it is to those who "know 

the joyful sound," and yet how obscure to all others! 

Well does our text say, "Blessed are the people who 

know the joyful sound!" The blessing upon them is 

certainly not because of their own merit, for we are 

all conscious of the fact that in our flesh dwelleth no 

perfection, and that none of us could be commended 

to God by our own righteousness— all of these blessed 

people who know the joyful sound have reason, therefore, 

to give thanks unto him who loved them, and 

who bought them with his own precious blood, in 

whose merit alone they have standing with the Heavenly 

Father. And yet these blessed people have something 

to do with the matter of their blessing— something 

to do with the fact that they have heard, and 

hearing have known or discerned the joyful sound, 

while others hearing have not discerned it. They 

have the hearing of faith: from the little which they 

first heard they must have cultivated a love for righteousness, 

and a hatred of iniquity; they must have 

cultivated honesty with themselves, honesty with the 

Lord, honesty in handling his Word— "not handling 

the Word of God deceitfully." (2 Cor. 4:2.) They 

must have consecrated their hearts fully to the Lord, 

and thus have come fully under the guidance of "the 

spirit of the truth," else they would not be able to 

discern better than others between the joyful sound 

of the truth and the discordant sound of error. Evidently 

in these we see fulfilled the Scripture, "He is 

a rewarder of them that diligently seek him [to know 

him, to know his will]."— Heb. 11:6. 

THE NEW SONG OF MOSES AND THE LAMB. 



Our Lord in symbol pointed out to us the fact that 
the message of his grace in the closing days of this 
Gospel Age would be so different from the commonly 
accepted message, misnamed the Gospel, that it would 
properly be termed a new song, altho it would be the 
old song of Moses— the message of blessing typified 
by the writings of Moses and by all the ceremonies of 



the Law, and the message of the Lamb, the good tidings 
announced in connection with our Lord's birth, 
and throughout his own ministry, when all the people 
"bare him record, and wondered at the gracious words 
that proceeded out of his mouth" (not threats of 
eternal torment to nine-tenths of the human family); 
and the testimony of all the apostles respecting the 
Lamb of God and the great work to be accomplished 
by him in taking "away the sin of the world." It is 

R2570 : page 37 

merely this same song that is now being sung by those 
whom God has blessed with a knowledge of present 
truth— it is "the joyful sound" which only the people 
thus blessed know or can sing. 

It is a worldly proverb that truth is stranger than 
fiction, yet this proverb is illustrated throughout 
"Christendom" today— the vast, vast majority of professed 
followers of Christ are strangers to the truth, 
but thoroughly familiar with the fictions of human invention 
—"traditions of the elders," which "make 
void the Word of God." It is in full accord with this 
that the angel declares to the Revelator that no man 
can learn to sing this song except the elect— the 144,000, 
the "little flock." (Rev. 14:3.) Indeed, nothing 
is more manifest than that it is necessary to be somewhat 
of an "overcomer" of the world and its spirit 
which pervades nominal Christendom, ere any would 
have the courage to sing this song— to declare before 
men the lengths and breadths and heights and depths 
of the goodness and grace of the divine plan, of which 
Jesus and his sacrifice are the center. To all others 
"the fear of man bringeth a snare," and stoppeth their 
mouths from speaking "forth the praise of him who 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
"But the people that do know their God [his character 
and plan] shall be valiant and do exploits," and like 
the apostles of old will feel and say, Whether it be 
right to obey God or men, judge ye; but we cannot 
but speak the things which we have seen and heard. 
-Dan. 11:32; Acts 4:19,20. 

Nor need we suppose that the fact that only the 
144,000 can sing this song implies that those able to 
sing the song could not fall from their steadfastness 
and become castaways, and lose the privilege of singing 
it. On the contrary, the Scriptures most distinctly 
assure us that only by unceasing faithfulness will 
any be permitted to continue to be reckoned as members 
of that elect company, foreknown and prearranged 
of God. Our Lord clearly intimates that he will blot 
out the names of those who are unfaithful, that other 
names may be written in their stead. He clearly 
intimates that unfaithfulness will cause that the crown 
set apart for the faithful will, if he prove unfaithful, 
be given to another.— Rev. 3:5,11. 



THE WALK OF THE BLESSED PEOPLE. 



In harmony with the foregoing is the intimation 
of our text which implies that in order to be of the 
people who will know the joyful sound it will be necessary 
to "walk in the light of God's countenance." 
Or, reversing the statement, the thought is that all 
who walk in the light of God's countenance shall be 
his blessed people, and shall know the joyful sound. 

What a lesson of holiness is here: not a lesson of 
human perfection and self-commendation to God, but 
a lesson of abiding in Christ under the robe of his 
righteousness, and of walking continuously with him 
and in the path of the just, which "shineth more and 

R2570 : page 38 

more unto the perfect day." And whoever would 
walk with Jesus in the light of divine favor, in the 
smile of divine approval, must needs walk the narrow 
way of self-control and self-sacrifice— "even unto 
death." Whoever delights in sin and sinful practices 
cannot walk in the company of Jesus, cannot be recognized 
as a member of his body or under his robe- 
can have neither part nor lot in this matter, whatever 
may be done with him or for him in the future age. 
As the Apostle expresses it, those accepted of Christ, 
and who would maintain affiliation with him, must 
remember that all of the "royal priesthood" are given 
the truth, not to make them vain or boastful, or heady 
and high-minded, but to purify them, and to sanctify 
them. He declares "He that hath this hope in him 
purifieth himself, even as he is pure." 

A TEXT FOR THE YEAR. 



We suggest to the friends of the truth the adoption 
of the precious words of our text as a talisman for 
the year, if not for the remainder of the pilgrim journey. 
We believe that these inspired words will help 
all who understand them to more and more measure 
up to the divine ideal which they present to our minds: 
"Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound: 
they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy 
countenance." 

Another line, in full harmony with this, from the 
succeeding Psalm, might profitably be added: "Let 
the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us." Only 
those who see the beauty of the great King, who discern 
something of his justice, his mercy and love, his 
wisdom, his power, can clothe their new minds with 



these glorious graces which more and more shine before 
our anointed vision as the beauty of the Lord 
our God. And the more clearly they are discerned, 
the more faithfully can we copy them, and the better 
do we love the joyful sound, and the better can we 
sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb. 



R2570 : page 38 

WE HAVE FOUND HIM! EUREKA! 

--FEB. 4.-JOHN 1:35-46.- 

AFTER his wilderness temptation, Jesus returned 
to Bethabara, where John was preaching, 
fully convinced of the character of his mission— that 
it was not to be after the manner of Satan's suggestion 
of worldly methods, leading on to popularity and 
honor of men— that on the contrary it would be his 
part to bear witness to the truth in such a truthful and 
simple manner as would commend it and him to such 
only as were Israelites indeed. No doubt by this time 
he saw that before the glorification could come the 
new Israel must be selected, the "royal priesthood, the 
holy nation, the peculiar people"— antitypical or spiritual 
Israel. He had reason to expect that there was 
at least a remnant of this class in the nation of Israel 
after the flesh, and altho fully realizing that no man 
could come unto him except the Father which sent 
him should draw him, he nevertheless recognized the 
propriety of putting himself in the way of those whom 
the Father would draw, that he might receive them as 
quickly and as favorably as possible. Hence his return 
from the wilderness was to the vicinity of John's 
mission work, where not unreasonably he might expect 
to find some of the Israelites indeed. 

Our lesson shows that the Heavenly Father had 
made use of John the Baptizer's Mission and had exerted 
through it a drawing influence upon the hearts 
of some who by this time were quite ready to learn of 
Jesus as the Way, the Truth and the Life— the channel 
of approach to God. The drawing power which 
the Father exerts during this age is the truth— the 
knowledge of divine compassion toward mankind manifested 
through the sending of Messiah to save the 
people from their sins— to deliver them from the power 
of sin and Satan, as well as from the death penalty. 

It was after our Lord's return from the wilderness 
that the delegation of priests and Levites, sent from 
Jerusalem, came to John asking, "Who art thou?" to 
whom he replied that he was not the Christ but merely 
a forerunner, a herald. To these John pointed out 
Jesus, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world," explaining how he knew 



Jesus to be the Messiah by a previously appointed sign 
which God had given him— the descent of the holy 
spirit in the form of a dove.— Vss. 19-34. 

It was the very next day after this testimony to 
the priests and Levites that John, in the presence of 
two of his disciples, looking intently upon Jesus as 
he passed near (no doubt wondering how our Lord's 
Messiahship would be made known), exclaimed, "Behold 
the Lamb of God!" This was the same testimony 
(only abbreviated) that he had given to the 
priests and Levites, and which had evidently fallen, 
in their case, upon dull ears. But note the difference 
in the case of those who were "Israelites indeed:" the 
two disciples immediately followed Jesus. John's testimony 
became to them the drawing power of God, because 
they were in a condition of heart to be susceptible 
to that influence. Thus we see clearly illustrated how 
some are drawn and others are not drawn by the same 
message, and we see also that the divine drawing does 
not operate arbitrarily, but in accordance with certain 
fixed principles pertinent to the divine plan. It was 
not sufficient that a testimony should be given, it was 
not sufficient that a curiosity should be aroused; it was 
necessary additionally that the interest awakened 
should be so powerful as to lead to action on the part 
of those who were drawn, as the poet expresses it, 
"He drew me, and I followed on." 

R2571 : page 39 

The Lord is seeking not merely the curious, but 
the truth-hungry, those who hunger and thirst for 
righteousness, and for fellowship with himself, and 
here, as in every instance, he that seeketh, in this 
proper attitude of heart, findeth. The two disciples 
had not followed the Lord far until their faith and zeal 
began to be rewarded: the Lord turned to them and 
was the first to speak, and thus he illustrated his own 
words respecting those drawn of the Father to him, 
"He that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out." 
Had our Lord not thus condescended it would have 
been a difficult matter for these humble fishermen to 
have approached one so far above them in dignity and 
in appearance— one whom they had just learned was 
the great Messiah, long promised of God to be the 
Prince of the kings of the earth. Applying this feature 
of the lesson to ourselves, and remembering that 
the Lord is the same yesterday, today and forever, 
helps us to appreciate his condescension manifested 
toward all who would come unto the Father through 
him— we who now come to him because of the hearing 
of faith and the sight of faith, as well as those who 
then approached him because of the sight of the natural 
eye and the hearing of the natural ear. 

Our Lord's salutation, "What seek ye?" not only 
overcame the diffidence of those who sought him, but 



the more they would consider his words subsequently, 

the more meaningful they would find them, as we do 

today. And this seems to be the question which the 

Lord puts to all those who approach him, and essay to 

become his followers, "What seek ye?" Are you 

seeking loaves and fishes of earthly advantage? Are 

you seeking earthly honor and social and political influence 

and preferment? The answer soon or later 

will be manifested by the conduct of the seekers, tho 

evidently all do not realize, at the time, what are their 

real motives in seeking the Lord. It were better, however, 

that each should remember our Lord's own expression 

on this subject, and sit down and count the 

cost at the very beginning— that each one should 

learn that to seek the Lord truly is to seek after righteousness, 

fellowship with the Father and with the Son; 

and that this means the forsaking of sin, so far as the 

heart is concerned, and so far as possible the purifying 

of the flesh by the "washing of water through the 

Word."-Eph. 5:26. 

All should learn also that seeking to be disciples 
of Christ implies not only a fellowship with him in the 
glory that is soon to be revealed, but also a fellowship 
with him in the sufferings of this present time— a 
"filling up of that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ." If, as our Lord suggested, each one would 
sit down and count the cost beforehand, there would 
be less subsequent disappointment, and altho the number 
of his followers would be much smaller there 
would be many less "tares" amongst the "wheat," 
and this would mean the better spiritual prosperity 
of the "wheat." 

The would-be disciples of Jesus heard the question 
without discerning, of course, its depth; nevertheless, 
being in the right condition of heart their answer was 
along proper lines— Rabbi (master), where are you 
stopping? They seem to have understood that like 
themselves he was a Galilean, and that like themselves 
and others he was merely visiting in that vicinity on 
account of John's mission work, which drew great 
multitudes. Their question implied in a pleasant way 
a desire to become more intimately acquainted with 
Jesus. And he accepted it in this manner, and invited 
them to his stopping place; as it was about four 
o'clock in the afternoon they remained with him the 
remainder of the day, and we may well imagine what 
the Evangelist has not recorded respecting the pleasure 
and profit which came to them during these hours of 
intercourse. As a result they were convinced of Jesus' 
Messiahship— their own intercourse with him tending 
to corroborate John's testimony. And thus it is with 
all who of a true heart seek to know of God's appointed 
way; not only are they kindly received by the Lord, 
but the very opportunities for knowledge, fellowship 
and communion which they desire are granted to them. 

Andrew was one of these two disciples of John, 



and altho the other is not definitely mentioned it is the 
general supposition that it was the Apostle John himself, 
who seems to have been of a very modest disposition, 
quite unwilling to make his own name very 
prominent in his writings. Thus on other occasions 
he mentions himself not by name but as "that disciple 
whom Jesus loved."— John 13:23; 19:26. 

Andrew and John both had brothers, and the implication 
of the Greek text seems to be that both at 
once sought their brothers, to bring them to the Lord, 
but that "Andrew first findeth his own brother Simon," 
and it may be surmised that John through modesty 
neglected here to mention that he also found his brother 
James, and brought him to the Lord. This is a 
good illustration of the proper course for those who 
have found the Lord— they should at once begin to 
think of their brethren, friends, neighbors, and should 
carry the good tidings to them as quickly as possible. 
It was quite proper that these disciples did not follow 
the course that some are inclined to follow today, viz., 
to seek to learn of the Master all that he would communicate, 
and then go forth and pose as wise ones 
amongst their friends, giving them the information 
they had received in driblets, and avoiding the mention 
of Jesus as the Father's channel of communication 
of the truth to them. Properly, they investigated 

R2571 : page 40 

privately to an extent sufficient to justify their confidence, 

and then immediately began to tell the good 

tidings to their friends. So each one who has found 

the Lord should seek to make him known to others; 

and more than this, like Andrew we should not only 

seek to acquaint our friends with the fact, but should 

seek to bring them to the Lord for personal contact 

with him— such spiritual contact that they may see 

him with the eye of faith, and hear him with the ear 

of faith, that they may know him, whom to know is 

life eternal. Too many take a different course, and 

are satisfied merely to tell the good news to their 

friends without bringing them through faith and consecration 

into contact with the Lord. Let us more 

and more learn the right way to serve our friends. 

Let us learn that knowledge is valueless except as it 

succeeds in bringing the hearer into faith contact with 

the Savior. 

When Peter was brought to the Lord, "Jesus 
looked upon him," or as we might express it, "read 
him through and through," and then said, Your present 
name is Simon, and you are the son of John, but 
you shall be called Cephas,— Hebrew for Peter (Greek, 
petros, a stone). This may be understood as a kind 
of prophecy on our Lord's part respecting a great 
change in Peter's character. Peter was naturally very 
impulsive— not sufficiently solid, too easily carried 



about; and yet our Lord evidently saw in him sterling 
qualities of heart, honesty, sincerity of purpose: and 
knowing the influence which his teachings and the 
holy spirit would exercise upon such a character, he 
foretold a change which would make of Peter one of 
the staunchest and most substantial of his corps of 
disciples. This prophecy of change was implied in 
the new name given him, signifying solidity— a stone 
—whereas his previous name, Simon, signified a listener. 

Altho Peter was the only one of the twelve whose 
name was thus changed we may readily suppose that 
the characters of all were considerably changed, under 
the influence of the great Teacher and of the holy 
spirit, which came upon them at Pentecost. And so 
it is with all who become the Lord's disciples: to enter 
the school of Christ and to remain there means, as the 
Apostle expresses it, that we will be "transformed by 
the renewing of our minds." And the Lord promises 
all such that they shall have "a new name," expressive 
of the new character, but which no man can appreciate 
except those who receive it— the name of Christ. 
-Rev. 2:17. 

In the case of Philip, the order of procedure was 
reversed, and instead of his coming to the Lord, as 
did the first two, and instead of his being brought to 
the Lord, as in the case of Peter and probably James, 
the Lord, on the contrary, "found him" or approached 
him on the subject, inviting him to become one of his 
disciples. This shows us the diversity of divine operation 
in respect to those who are ready for the truth. 
It may reach them in one way or in another, but all 
who are ready for it we may be sure will be brought 
in contact with Messiah— drawn of the Father. We 
are not to question that Philip had been previously 
under divine preparation and drawn into a condition 
of heart ready to receive Jesus, else he would not have 
become his follower when invited. 

Philip was doubtless acquainted with Andrew and 
Peter, since they were of the same city, and like 
Andrew he seems to have thought at once of telling 
the good tidings to another, and he remembered his 
friend Nathaniel, whom he knew to be God-fearing, 
and living in expectation of the fulfilment of the divine 
promise of the Messiah. We note with pleasure 
the directness of his presentation of the subject, "We 
have found him of whom Moses in the Law [in the 
Pentateuch, the first five books of the Old Testament] 
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth." He 
did not attempt to interest Nathaniel merely with the 
prospect of joint-heirship in the Kingdom, tho that of 
course would be implied indirectly; but he drew attention 
to our Lord's person. And his language shows 
that he was not a mere enthusiast, but that he had 
been making a study of the fact that Messiah had been 
described by Moses and the prophets, and that he had 
evidently been endeavoring, to the best of his ability, 



to test our Lord's title by those predictions and had 
found satisfactory evidence that Jesus was indeed the 
Christ, the Sent of God. So it should be with all of 
us when we attempt to present the message of Christ 
to the attention of others. We should have the promises 
of God and their fulfilment in mind; and these 
should be our argument. It is not calling attention 
to Christ, nor at all following the example of Philip, 
to assail men with threats of eternal torment, and to 

R2572 : page 40 

urge them to join some human society called a church; 

nor is it following Philip's example to present as inducements 

the prospect of financial and social prosperity 

through church affiliations. On the contrary, the 

message to be delivered is respecting our Lord, and 

that he is the Deliverer whom the Father has sent, 

and that whoever would have the Father's fellowship 

and blessing must come to Messiah and in him find the 

wisdom of God and the mercy of God unto salvation. 

Nathaniel is commonly understood to be another 
name for Bartholemew, and he probably, like the 
others, had been in attendance at John's mission. We 
may readily suppose that John's work not only attracted 
to him the social outcasts of Israel, seeking a life 
of reformation, but that it drew to him also certain 
colaborers in the work, who were known as his "disciples," 

R2572:page41 

and who assisted him in administering baptism 

to those who came as repentant sinners. (John 4:1,2.) 

This offers another suggestion respecting these Israelites 

indeed who were of John's company, and were 

thus introduced earliest to Jesus, and were ready to 

become his disciples: their fidelity to righteousness, 

and their endeavor to serve the Lord according to the 

best of their ability, led directly to their more intimate 

association with Jesus and his service. So doubtless 

we will find it today, that some who are engaged in 

works of reform from proper motives are specially prepared 

for deeper truths, and grander privileges in connection 

with the present harvest work, and we should 

be willing to put ourselves in the way of such, after 

the example of our Lord with these his first disciples. 

Nathaniel seems to have been rather of the incredulous 
type of mind; he was fearful that his friend 
Philip was being deceived by an impostor, and he 
began to offer objections. Nazareth itself was noted 
as being rather a fanatical city; besides, no doubt Nathaniel 
had in mind the declaration of the prophet 
respecting Bethlehem as the city that would be honored 
as Messiah's birth place, and so he inquired, Is it 
reasonable for us to expect that any great good would 
come from Nazareth? Is there any Scripture to that 



effect? He was of course ignorant of the fact that our 
Lord was born in Bethlehem, and taken as an infant 
to the home of Joseph in Nazareth. His question, and 
the reasoning which it implies, were evidently very 
proper. But as we note Philip's reply, we are full of 
admiration for its simplicity and wisdom. He did not 
attempt to explain matters which are difficult to be 
understood, and which had not yet been explained to 
him; nor did he waver in his faith because of this 
suggestion of doubt. On the contrary he said, "Come 
and see:" when you have seen the man, and have heard 
him as I have, no doubt will remain in your mind that 
he is no ordinary man, and that he is all he claims to be. 

It would be well if all of the Lord's dear followers 
would learn well a proper, simple directness of approach 
on religious subjects, exemplified by Philip's 
words to Nathaniel; and also they should learn not to 
attempt to take the Master's place, but to bring all 
true Israelites direct to him, as the Teacher, the explainer 
of the obscure features connected with himself 
and his work. Matters often look differently on the 
outside from what they appear on the inside, as faith 
and greater privilege display them. God has purposely 
arranged it so that those who look from the 
outside only see many inconsistencies, inharmonies, 
and undesirable features, while those who get to view 
matters from the inside standpoint of faith can see 
riches of grace, beauty, harmony, divine workmanship. 
And this exterior view is the one that naturally comes 
to all of us first, as it came to Nathaniel, and the 
proper course to be pursued is that suggested by Philip, 
—come on the inside and see how it looks; take the 
standpoint of faith in the divine revelation, and from 
that standpoint note the grandeur of the divine plan. 

This same lesson is pointedly illustrated by an 
anecdote told by Pastor Spurgeon, deceased, of a man 
who was invited into an orchard to eat some of the 
fruit; he refused, for he said that he had picked up 
some of the apples by the roadside that fell from the 
trees, and they were poor and bitter. The owner replied 
those trees were placed there on purpose, so that 
bad boys would not be attracted into the orchard to 
steal. "But" said he, "come inside, and there the 
apples are delicious." Thus it is with those who see 
Christianity only from the exterior. They see many 
misrepresentations of true religion and true faith in 
prominent places, and even if they be able to distinguish 
as between the true Christianity and its misrepresentation 
in churchianity, they are apt to see only 

the self-denials, the crosses, the persecution for righteousness' 
sake, etc., and know nothing comparatively 
of the heavenly peace and blessing enjoyed by those 
who have entered into newness of life with Christ, who 
are supported well by the gracious promises of the divine 
Word and by the fellowship of spirit granted to 
them, which permits them to rejoice even in tribulation 



and count their disadvantages as but light afflictions 
enduring but for a moment, when compared with their 
higher joys, and their hopes that these shall be eternal. 
Let us leave this lesson with two thoughts specially 
clear before our minds: (1) The importance of 
finding the Lord, and not merely of gaining information 
about him. (2) The propriety and importance 
of seeking out the "brethren," and of bringing them 
not merely to a knowledge of abstract truth, but especially 
to the Lord, and to intimate communion and 
fellowship with him. 



R2572:page41 

THE KINGDOM ATTAINABLE ONLY BY A NEW BIRTH. 

--FEB. 1 1. -JOHN 3:1-18.- 

NICODEMUS was evidently a good man, and 

"not far from the Kingdom"— not far from 

the attitude of heart necessary to the attainment of 

the Kingdom. He was a man of learning and influence, 

a prominent member of the chief sect of the 

Jews, and one of the judges of their chief or supreme 

Court, the Sanhedrim. His wealth, learning, etc., 

gave him advantages over many of the poor and unlearned, 

and yet they also brought disadvantages, as 

our Lord on another occasion expressed it: "How 

hardly [with what difficulty] shall they that have 

riches [of any kind] enter into the Kingdom of God." 

It would naturally be more difficult for a man of large 

influence and social standing to receive instructions 

from Jesus, and to become his follower, than for humble 

fishermen to do so; pride, social caste, thought of 

what people would think and say, etc., would all tend 

to hinder him. For these reasons, as well as possibly 

with a hope to have a more quiet conversation, Nicodemus 

visited Jesus by night— semi-secretly. 

Evidently he had been impressed by the teachings 
and the miracles of our Lord, for we find him ready 
to acknowledge Jesus as a great Teacher sent of God, 
altho not ready to confess him the Messiah. Our 

R2572 : page 42 

Lord's ministry, while commending him to Nicodemus, 
was evidently a very different one from what he had 
expected of Messiah. As a Jew he of course had the 
usual Jewish thought respecting the Kingdom of God, 
viz., that Israel was that Kingdom, merely shorn of 
its power by the Gentiles until Messiah should appear 
for its deliverance and to subjugate all nations before 
Israel, that the Jewish Law might become the law of 
the world, going forth with power from Jerusalem. 



Nicodemus discerned the wide difference between such 
hopes and the kind of a kingdom proclaimed by Jesus 
and his disciples. We may reasonably infer, therefore, 
that his queries, tho not stated, were along this 
line, and our Lord's replies, quoted with greater detail, 
so intimate. 

It was with astonishment that Nicodemus heard 
from the great Teacher that himself and others of the 
Jewish nation could not possibly enter the Kingdom 
without being born anew; and naturally his mind ran 
to the natural birth and he inquired how it was possible 
that a full-grown man could be born over again. 
Such a question was desired by our Lord, and gave 
opportunity for the explanation that the first birth 
which all experience, viz., the birth of the flesh, by 
which mankind is born to human nature, and with a 
flesh body, is a type, a figure, an illustration of a higher 
spiritual birth, to a spiritual nature with a spirit 
body. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh, that 
which is born of the spirit is spirit." As a man cannot 
see trees, houses, flowers, etc., nor enter into the 
enjoyment of these, until after he has been born of the 
flesh, so likewise no one can either see or enter into, 
the heavenly Kingdom, except he be born of the spirit. 
In other words, a human being can see earthly things, 
but only a heavenly or spirit-born one can see and 
share in the heavenly things: and the long promised 
Kingdom of God, the Millennial age, for which Israel 
was waiting, is to be a spiritual Kingdom and not an 
earthly one, composed of spirit beings and not flesh 
beings; and only those born of water and of the spirit 
would ever see or enter into that Kingdom. 

The reference to water was probably suggested 
by some question from Nicodemus, respecting John 
and his baptism unto repentance— whether or not this 
had anything to do with the new birth. Our Lord's 
answer associates John's baptism of water unto repentance 
with the spirit begetting which began at 
Pentecost. Repentance from sin was essential to the 
right condition of heart which would prepare a Jew 
for transfer from the earthly typical kingdom, and 
make him ready for the begetting of the holy spirit 

R2573 : page 42 

through which, if obedient, he would finally be born 

into the heavenly Kingdom in "the first resurrection." 

This use of the word "born" as representing resurrection 

is a Scriptural one, for do we not read that our 

Lord Jesus in his resurrection was "the first-born from 

the dead"— "the first-born amongst many brethren" 

—and was it not in respect to these "brethren" who 

would with him be sharers in the Kingdom that he addressed 

Nicodemus?-Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:15,18. 

While we hold that this Scripture in its full, ultimate 
meaning, relates to the first resurrection of the 



Kingdom class into Kingdom power, glory, honor and 
immortality, we nevertheless concede that the word 
genao is sometimes rendered begotten. We concede 
also that everyone who is to be born of the spirit in 
the first resurrection must first be begotten of the spirit 
in the present life. We concede also that the new life 
now begun is frequently spoken of as tho the new 
creature were already born by a figurative resurrection 
to newness of life. "You hath he quickened [made 
alive, by a figurative resurrection] who were dead in 
trespasses and sins." But these partial and figurative 
uses of the words "alive" and "resurrection" and 
"born" should not be permitted to discount our thought 
respecting the realities and powers and glories which 
can be attained only by a share in the actual first resurrection 
—"born from the dead." 

While Jesus was talking with Nicodemus quite 
probably the wind whistled through the apartment in 
which they were sitting, rattling the doors, etc., and 
Jesus seized upon this as a good illustration by which 
to convey to the mind of Nicodemus the difference 
between human beings and spirit beings, and to give 
him a clearer conception of the nature and powers of 
the class who would compose the spiritual Kingdom 
when set up in power and great glory. He said, The 
wind blows where it pleases; you hear its sound, but 
cannot know whence it comes nor whither it goes; 
and so it will be with those born of the spirit— all inheritors 
of the heavenly Kingdom: they will be as 
invisible and can go and come as the wind, and men 
in the flesh will be unable to see them, as they are 
unable to see the wind, tho they will be everywhere 
present and influential, as is the wind. 

Nicodemus was astounded at the thought that the 
Kingdom of God would be so different from what himself 
and others had expected. All this should not 
have been so strange to Nicodemus: he should have 
remembered that the powers which our Lord described 
as those which would belong to the spirit-born class 
were the very powers which in the past from time to 
time had been manifested through holy angels, who 
being sent on special missions appeared suddenly, and 
when their mission was accomplished vanished just as 
suddenly, coming and going like the wind,— none 
knew whence or whither. Nicodemus, as a teacher 
of the Law, should have had these things in mind, and 

R2573 : page 43 

our Lord rather reproves him for not grasping the 

subject quickly: Are you, a teacher in Israel, ignorant 

of these things? Is it difficult for you, who are acquainted 

with the Law, to realize these teachings? I 

have been telling you only such things as are known 

and to a considerable extent have been demonstrated 

amongst men through the ministry of angels, yet you 



are unwilling to receive the testimony. How could 

you expect to believe, if I should proceed to explain 

to you heavenly and spiritual things pertaining to that 

Kingdom? You surely would be unprepared for such 

information. Nor would Nicodemus have been to 

blame for not understanding spiritual things if our 

Lord had told of them; for only the spirit-begotten can 

clearly grasp and appreciate those things. Our Lord 

was explaining to him that he must not expect a comprehension 

of such things at that time, but should merely 

expect a partial understanding, sufficient, however, 

as a basis of faith; clearer comprehension would come 

with the spirit baptism at Pentecost. "The natural man 

receiveth not the things of the spirit of God, neither 

can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.... 

God hath revealed them unto us [spirit-begotten 

ones] by his spirit" (1 Cor. 2:14,10), and 

we may enter into the realities when born from the 

dead in his likeness. 

Continuing, our Lord reminded Nicodemus that 
no man had ever ascended into heaven [none had ever 
been there, or seen heavenly things] except he himself, 
who had come down from the heavenly condition 
to the earthly condition— even the Son of Man.* Altho 
aside from the main line of this lesson, it is not amiss 
that we here note the harmony of our Lord's words 
with the words of the Apostle Peter in his discourse 
on the day of Pentecost, "David is not ascended into 
the heavens." (Acts 2:34.) All the testimonies of 
the Scriptures are in harmony on this subject, altho 
opposed by nearly all uninspired writers, heathen as 
well as Christian, who follow the traditions of men 
instead of giving heed to the sure Word of God. 

Having thus answered Nicodemus' questions to 
the very limit of possibility at the time, our Lord 
turned the subject, and by way of showing the grand 
basis for this spiritual Kingdom of God, and that he 
himself could not enter into that Kingdom while still 
in the flesh, (1 Cor. 15:50) but that he must also be 
"changed" to spirit conditions by resurrection, he 
points out his coming ignominious death, and how it 
was illustrated and typified by Moses and the brazen 
serpent in the wilderness. The whole world is bitten 
by the fiery serpent of sin. The whole world is dying, 
and it was needful that our Lord Jesus should be lifted 
up as a sin-offering on behalf of the world, that he 
might subsequently be lifted up in glory, and in order 
that having thus paid the penalty for all, eternal life 
might be offered to all— "that whosoever believeth in 
him should not perish, but have everlasting life." 

In passing the point, let us notice that our Lord 
said not a word respecting any danger of the world 
going into eternal torment, nor did he utter a word 
respecting the salvation of any in ignorance. His 
declaration was that the world was perishing, and that 
the only way in which they could obtain eternal life 



at all would be through believing in him. So then to 
all who are willing to take the simple statement of 
God's Word, it is clear enough that the wicked who 
reject the Lord cannot have eternal life, and hence 
could not spend an eternity in misery, because without 
life there can be no feeling— without life they are 
perished. It is clear enough also that whoever shall 
be saved in this age or in the age to come must be 
saved by believing in Jesus, and cannot be saved through 
ignorance, according to this Gospel, which is the only 
authorized one. 

Then our Lord gave Nicodemus a brief statement 
of why the Heavenly Father has provided the blessing 
which he had been describing— the Kingdom, and the 
lifting up or sacrifice of the Son of Man as a prerequisite. 
The reason is God's sympathetic love for humanity. 
He beheld that altho mankind were sharers 
in father Adam's sentence of death, yet many amongst 
them would, if granted an opportunity, gladly accept 
the divine arrangement, and come back into at-one-ment 
with their God, and rejoice to abide in his favor 
and to do his will. On this account God had sympathy 
for mankind, and prepared a great plan of salvation, 
of which the first coming of Jesus in the flesh as 
a sacrifice for sins was the first step or manifestation. 
"God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten 
Son [to humiliation and sacrifice in death], that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish, but have 
[obtain] everlasting life." It has been said by some 
one that this 16th verse is the golden verse of the 
Bible, containing more than any other one a condensed 
statement of the Gospel. Luther called this verse 
"the little Gospel," or "the little Bible." 

Perhaps in answer to another question, or perhaps 
merely as a part of the further discourse to Nicodemus, 
our Lord next explained to him that God's object in 
sending his Son into the world was not to have the 
world condemned, for the world was already condemned, 
sharing with Adam the original condemnation or 
sentence of death. On the contrary, God sent his Son 
to save the world— to recover mankind from that sentence 
or condemnation. This is in harmony with another 
statement of Scripture which declares of believers, that 
"There is now. ..no condemnation to them that are 



*01dest Greek MSS. omit the words, "which is in heaven. 

R2573 : page 44 

in Christ Jesus" (Rom. 8:1), yet only believers have 
thus escaped; all the remainder of the world are still 
under wrath, "children of wrath," and there is no 
other way of escape except through Christ, for "There 
is no other name given under heaven or among men 



whereby we must be saved." 

The 18th verse is in harmony with this thought, 
that believers escape the condemnation that is on the 
world, but that those who do not accept of Christ 
remain under the condemnation already upon them at 
birth, as Adam's heirs. Nevertheless, as is declared 
in the 19th verse, the condemnation already upon men 
is justified by their course, if after seeing the light 
they do not love it, but reject it, and fight against it. 
However, we are to remember in this connection the 
Apostle's declaration that many in the present time 
see only in part, the god of this world blinding them 
more or less completely. (2 Cor. 4:4.) And we rejoice 
in the assurance of the same Apostle (John 1:9) 
that Jesus is the true Light, which ultimately, in the 
Kingdom, shall be a great Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in his beams, which shall shed forth light and 
knowledge to every member of the human family 
during his Millennial reign; so that all shall have the 
fullest opportunity of ceasing to be "children of wrath," 
and of escaping the condemnation that is on them 
through Adam's disobedience, and of coming back 
through the Mediator, during the times of restitution, 

R2574 : page 44 

to all the good things lost through sin.— Acts 3:19-21. 

While our Lord in his discourse to Nicodemus 
dealt only with the new birth of "the Church which 
is his body," and which with him, born of the spirit, 
shall constitute the Heavenly Kingdom that shall bless 
the world, he nevertheless elsewhere intimates that 
the restitution blessings which shall come to mankind 
will be also after the nature of a new birth, tho not a 
birth to spiritual conditions. Speaking to his disciples 
of the Millennial Kingdom, when they should sit 
with him in his throne— the times of restitution— he 
calls that Millennial age and work regeneration— Greek, 
palingenesia. (Matt. 19:28.) This is not the same 
word rendered "born again," but signifies more nearly 
restitution, restoration or renovation. 



R2574 : page 44 

NOTHING TO DRAW WITH AND THE WELL IS DEEP. 

-FEB. 18.-JOHN 4:5-26.- 

"God is a Spirit, and they that worship him 
must worship him in spirit and in truth." 

SAMARIA was the name of a stretch of country 
lying between Judea and Galilee; we might 
call it a county, and say that its chief city, of the 



same name, was its county-seat. Its inhabitants were 

known as Samaritans, and the Jews, while dealing 

with them commercially, would have no intercourse 

with them socially and religiously, but treated them 

in every respect as they treated Gentiles in general, 

as being outside of divine favor, "aliens and strangers 

to the commonwealth of Israel, without God, and having 

no hope in the world." (Eph. 2:12) The ancestors 

of these Samaritans were Gentiles, and were transported 

to Samaria centuries before, as the Israelites 

were transported to Babylon, by Nebuchadnezzar. (2 Kings 17:24-41.) 

These Gentiles, through contact 

with the Jews, and through intermarriage with certain 

renegade Jews, obtained a smattering of knowledge of 

the Jewish hopes and worship, combining these to 

some extent with false ideas of their own. As a people 

they are described by the Apostle's words as feeling 

after God, if haply they might find him. (Acts 17:27.) 

But the time had not yet come for God to 

reveal himself to the world, or in any sense of the 

word to accept Gentiles: thus far all divine favor had 

been concentrated upon Israel, the seed of Abraham, 

and upon only such of those as maintained their covenant 

relationship by circumcision; hence the Jews 

were right in not acknowledging the Samaritans, and 

in having no dealings with them religiously, nor intermarrying 

with them socially. This was not a matter 

of bigotry, but of divine regulation and prohibition. 

-Deut. 7:1-6. 

It will be remembered that our Lord distinctly 
set the seal of his approval to this course, when sending 
forth his disciples to declare the Kingdom of God 
at hand. He said to them, "Go not into the way of 
the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter 
ye not; for I am not sent save to the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel." We remember, too, the city of the 
Samaritans concerning which the Apostles James and 
John said, "Lord, wilt thou that we command fire 
from heaven, to consume them?" To whom Jesus 
answered, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of. The 
Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to 
save them." Nevertheless, we remember that Jesus 
would not perform his miracles in healing the Samaritan 
sick, and that it was for this reason that the Samaritans 
resented and would not receive him, or permit 
him to pass through their city on his journey.— 
Luke 9:51-56. 

It was during one of these numerous journeys 
from Judah through Samaria, en route to Galilee, that 
our Lord, wearied from the exhaustion of preaching 
and from the further exhaustion of his vitality in healing 
the sick, and from journeying, rested at Jacob's 
well, while his disciples turned aside to a village to 
purchase provisions. 

Jacob's well had a great reputation throughout 
that region, because of the purity of its waters; that 



being a limestone country most of the water found was 
brackish, but Jacob's well, sunk to a depth of over a 
hundred feet, and about eight feet in diameter, struck 
a crevice in the rock, which yielded a large supply of 

R2574 : page 45 

desirable water. We are to remember, too, the scarcity 
of water in that part of the country, especially at 
some seasons of the year, which accounts for the fact 
that the Samaritan woman of our lesson had quite a 
distance to come to obtain her supply at this good and 
never failing well-spring. When she arrived, Jesus, 
who was sitting on the curb of the well, resting, was 
at once recognized by her as a Jew, and she was at 
once recognized by him as a Samaritan, not merely 
by facial lineaments, but also by distinctive features 
of dress— the Jews having a white fringe on their garments, 
while the Samaritans used blue. 

For a Jew to make a request, to ask a courtesy, 
of a Samaritan, was unusual; and consequently when 
Jesus asked for a drink of the water the woman was 
drawing she was astonished enough to inquire how it 
came that he, a Jew, would make such a request of 
her, a Samaritan, and her question has in it the element 
of boldness, which is explained later on by her 
acknowledgment that she was not a virtuous woman. 
All this, however, makes it the more remarkable that 
our Lord would condescend to have any intercourse 
with her. There is a lesson in this, however, along 
the line of the Apostle's words, "Condescend to men 
of low estate." We cannot avoid supposing that the 
reason why many Christian people would utterly disdain 
to speak to such a woman is that they have almost 
unconsciously to themselves imbibed the spirit of their 
religious teachings, which would declare that God 
would so abominate such a person that he would deliver 
her over to the devil, to be eternally tormented, 
as soon as she came into his hands at death. They 
reason, almost unconsciously, that one so despised of 
the Lord should be shunned and spurned by humanity. 
They need a clearer knowledge of the divine Word 
respecting God's attitude toward sinners, his unwillingness 
that any should perish, and his provision that 
the wilfully wicked, who reject all his mercies, shall not 
be tormented, but be blotted out of existence. (2 Pet. 3:9; 
Acts 3:23.) True views of the divine character 
and plan are very helpful to God's people in shaping 
their course properly. 

Had there been a company of Jews to whom the 
Lord could have talked at this time, we are bound to 
suppose that his energies would have been expended 
on their behalf, to the neglect of the disreputable Samaritan; 
but there being none of the "children" to 
be "fed" at the time, he let some of the crumbs of 
knowledge and blessing fall to the Samaritans, who, 



like the Gentiles, were not "children," but in comparison 

were "dogs." (See Matt. 15:27.) Our Lord's 

course here is an instruction for his followers, an illustration 

of the Apostle's words that we should "do 

good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially to 

the household of faith." Further, it illustrates our 

Lord's own declaration, that it was his meat and drink 

to do the Father's will, to be engaged in the Father's 

business. Altho he was weary, and knew that further 

talking would interfere with his rest and refreshment, 

he was ready to sacrifice his own convenience that he 

might be helpful to another, even to a social outcast. 

So the Apostle exhorts all of the Lord's people to be 

"instant in season and out of season," in preaching to 

willing ears. 

There was wisdom in our Lord's method of introducing 
himself to the woman. He made a request 
that would not be difficult for her to comply with, and 
at the same time he laid himself under obligation to 
her; and experience shows that this is one of the best 
methods of approaching all— condescension and an 
expression of confidence in their generosity, with the 
implication which it gives of willingness to return the 
favor in some manner. 

Not heeding the rudeness of the woman's reply 
to his request, our Lord proceeded to teach a lesson 
respecting the grace of God, using the good water of 
Jacob's deep well as an illustration, telling the woman 
that if she understood the privilege she enjoyed she 
in turn would be asking him for "living water"— flowing 
water, not stagnant, always fresh. She perceived 
that there was some deep meaning to our Lord's words. 
He could not refer to Jacob's well, for he had no leather 
bucket and cord with which to draw from it; hence 
her inquiry, Whence hast thou living water? Father 
Jacob provided this well, and knew of no better water 
for himself and family. Are you able to provide better 
water than this? Are you greater than he? Our 
Lord then led another step in the exposition of spiritual 
things, assuring her that the water which he had 
to give was of a different kind; that it would not only 
satisfy thirst for the time being, but would be a continual 
well-spring within, ever giving satisfaction. 

Water, living water, pure water, is a wonderful 
symbol, very expressive to everyone: and thirst is 
another. Thirst is desire, craving, longing. Physical 
thirst is said to be much more painful than physical 
hunger. The latter loses its powers gradually in weakness, 
but thirst continues and intensifies hourly until 
the very last breath. Water is that which quenches, 
which satisfies this demand of nature: and so there is 
also a soul-thirst, and a water of life which alone can 
satisfy it. 

Every ambition and desire is a thirst. A man's 
greatness, his individuality, is measured (1) by the 
number of his thirsts or desires; (2) by the character 



or quality of those thirsts or desires; (3) by the capacity 
and intensity of those thirsts or desires. And true 
education is the instructor of men as respects proper 

R2575 : page 46 

and improper desires, or thirsts: and respecting which 
should be gratified, and how to do so most wisely. 
He who has no desires has nothing to satisfy, and is 
practically a nonentity. The lesson of life is not that 
we should be without desires and plenty of them, but 
that these desires should be transformed from sinful 
desires to righteous desires, from sinful cravings to 
holy cravings. Thus the followers of the Lord are to 
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and are to be 
filled— satisfied— not by losing their desires, but by 
realizing them— by appropriating the Lord's provision, 
which is abundant and continuous, satisfying all proper 
longings. Improper longings are to be resisted, 
controlled, rooted out, while proper longings are to be 
built up, cultivated, to be supplied and to be enjoyed 
forever. 

This satisfying water of life can be obtained from 
no other source than our Redeemer, and all who have 
received it well know it and can never be sufficiently 
thankful for it; for in it they have the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding ruling in their hearts. 
Instead of thirst for honor amongst men, they have 
the thirst for fellowship and honor with the Heavenly 
Father and the Redeemer. Instead of a thirst for 
earthly wealth, their transformed desires now thirst 
for heavenly treasures. Instead of thirst for sensual 
pleasures, their desires are transformed so that their 
chiefest joys and desires are for spiritual pleasures. 
And all these thirsts are abundantly and continually 
satisfied through the refreshment of the Word of Truth, 
and the holy spirit of the Truth— the water of life 
which is communicated to us by our Redeemer, and is 
in each one a perennial living fountain. 

Of course the Samaritan woman did not grasp the 
meaning of our Lord's words, nor could we, under the 
same circumstances, for we are to remember that the 
well from which our Lord gives us to drink is deep, 
and that neither the Samaritan woman nor we have 
anything to draw with. We however, living under the 
new dispensation of the holy spirit, have been abundantly 
supplied, for, as the Apostle declares, "The 
spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of 
God. ...That we might know [appreciate, be satisfied 
with] the things that are freely given unto us of 
God."-l Cor. 2:10,12. 

Our Lord did not answer the woman's request for 
the true water of life, (1) because the time for bestowing 
the holy spirit of the Truth had not yet come, and 
did not come until after the great sacrifice at Calvary 
—until Pentecost. (2) Because she was a Samaritan, 



and as such could not receive divine favor and the holy 
spirit until the appointed time which was not until the 
door of favor would be open to all Gentiles,— not until 
three and a half years after Pentecost: nevertheless 
the woman's interest and faith and the faith of her 
townsmen seem to indicate an honesty of heart pleasing 
to the Lord, on account of which he let fall to them 
some "crumbs" of comforting truth which may have 
prepared them for the Gospel when later it was fully 
opened to them and to all Gentiles. (3) Because the 
woman was not yet in the condition of heart to receive 
the water of life. It was unnecessary to explain to 
the woman the first two reasons, since the last was a 
barrier which she could more readily understand, and 
hence our Lord called her attention to the fact that 
she was living in sin. She perceived that he was gifted 
with a prophetic insight which permitted him a stranger 
to know of her sinful course of life, without asking. 

It may be queried, why our Lord would thus confer 
with a woman unprepared to receive the blessings 
he had to give, and one to whom he could not have 
given the blessing then, even if she had been prepared. 
The answer is (1) that he was making use of an opportunity 
to its fullest possible advantage; (2) that 
despite her sinful course of life the Lord saw traits of 
honesty in the woman's character, evidenced from the 
narrative; (3) he might reasonably hope that the 
influence of this discourse might tend toward righteousness 
and toward a true thirst for the water of life, 
which six years later, under the general preaching of 
the Gospel (without restriction to the Jews) might 
bring some of these Samaritans to a realization of the 
fact that the well of the water of life is deep, that they 
had nothing wherewith to draw, and that if they would 
have this satisfying portion they must receive it as a 
gift from him who laid down his life that he might 
have the privilege of supplying the water of life to 
whosoever wills. And should the poor Samaritan 
woman never have come under the influence of the 
Gospel, with an opportunity to drink of the water of 
life, we have the assurance of the divine Word that 
such an opportunity will be granted to her in the 
future, together with all who do not now have an 
opportunity. 

We praise the Lord for the information afforded 
us in his Word, that altho the water of life is now given 
individually, and enjoyed only by the "elect," "even 
as many as the Lord our God shall call," yet the time 
is coming that it shall no longer be thus a well of 
water springing up within the Lord's people, but during 
the Millennial age will be a river of water of life, 
broad and full and clear as crystal, flowing out from 
the throne of God and of the Lamb, and of the Bride 
the Lamb's Wife and joint-heir, to all the families of 
the earth: and that then there will not only be trees 
of life, whose leaves will be for the healing, restitution, 



of the nations, but that the Spirit and the Bride (then 
glorified) shall say, Come, and he that heareth may 
say, Come, and whosoever will may come and have 
the water of life freely.— Rev. 22:17. 

The Samaritan woman seemed anxious to avoid 
any discussion of her own character and life, and 
skillfully turned the question to a theological one— 
whether the Jews or the Samaritans were right in their 
different views respecting divine worship and its proper 
place. And in this we see that human nature is much 
the same today. Men and women of today would 
rather discuss theological problems and denominational 

R2575 : page 47 

controversies, than turn their glance inward, and note 
the inconsistencies of their own lives, with a desire to 
reform them. Nor did our Lord too closely press the 
moral question he had so promptly touched and to 
some extent made sensitive, and his course in this 
should be a lesson to his followers. It is sufficient 
that attention be called to a wrong, and often this is 
more efficacious than if they be teased and angered, 
and put on the defensive, by disrespectful "nagging." 

Our Lord summed up in few words a great lesson 
respecting the proper worship of God. He told the 
woman most pointedly that the Samaritans had neither 
part nor lot in the matter, and worshiped they knew 
not what, while the Jews, on the contrary, were following 
the divine instruction. Nevertheless, he pointed 
to the fact that a great dispensational change was 
imminent, in which all distinctions and barriers of 
place and manner would pass away, and that under the 
new dispensation of this Gospel age, any and all having 
ears to hear and eyes to see God's grace would be 
permitted to worship God anywhere, but only in spirit 
(with the heart, sincerely), and in truth, in harmony 
with the divine arrangement, in the true way— through 
Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and 
by whom alone there is access to the Father— the 
Messiah, the procurer and dispenser of the water of life. 

An Oriental fable tells of a fountain whose waters 
were infused with a peculiar power, so that wherever 
a drop of this water fell on a barren plain it caused a 
new fountain to gush forth, so that provided with this 
water the traveller might pass through any desert, 
however wide or dry, and be always refreshed. 

"Wild and fanciful the legend; yet may not meanings high, 
Visions of better things to come, within its shadow lie? 
Type of a better fountain, to mortals now unsealed, 
The full, free salvation of Christ our Lord revealed! 

"Beneath the cross those waters lie, and he who finds them 

there, 
All through the wilderness of life the living stream may bear; 



And blessings follow in his steps, until where'er he goes 
The moral wastes begin to bud, and blossom as the rose!" 



R2576 : page 47 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A few days since dear 
Brother Norcott was in to call on me, and in the course 
of our conversation he mentioned you, and that he had 
often had a desire to meet you in the flesh, but that it 
was quite improbable now. He is getting very feeble, 
and it is a great effort for him to get about much, but 
he is anxious to do all he possibly can. Some time 
ago he felt a little better and took his horse and cart 
and went out and sold nine DAWNS. He returned 
beaming with joy that the Lord had so blessed his 
work. It is hard for him to write, and he wished me, 
some time when I would be writing to you, to tell you 
of his great love for you as a brother in Christ, and his 
gratefulness to you for all the interest you had taken 
in him while he was in the colporteur work. He said 
that doubtless you knew of his love and prayers already, 
but that sometimes it was strengthening to us if 
some of the brethren came to us with a message of 
love, and he was sure you would appreciate the motive 
with which it was sent. Also that he was remembering 
you before the throne of favor, that our dear Master 
would grant you the needed grace to finish the 
work before you. So I write this to you. 

And, my dear brother, I can also add that that is 
my own prayer on your behalf. I sometimes think we 
are too apt to hide our love and not express it as we 
should, and thus others may come to feel that we do 
not love them. May the dear Lord bless you abundantly, 
more than you are able to think. We wish to 
thank you for the strong nourishing food you have 
been spreading before us in the TOWERS lately. 

Your brother, by the favor of the Lord, 

W. E. VANAMBURGH.-South Dakota. 

[We cannot express in words our deep appreciation 
of the love of the brethren so often expressed in 
their letters as above. We assure these dear brethren 
and all that their love is most heartily reciprocated. 
We love the brethren and take pleasure in laying down 
our life in their service. We are glad to know that 
you remember us and the Lord's "harvest" work, which 
he has been pleased to center here in Allegheny, in 
your prayers. If we may judge from the letters received, 
thousands of prayers ascend daily on our behalf. 
We cannot tell you how deeply we appreciate 
this: it keeps us humble as we remember our needs, 
and it strengthens us as we remember the Lord's sufficiency 



and his willingness to pour out his blessings 
in answer to your prayers and ours. These prayers 
and the divine power to which they are attached are 
to our hearts a bulwark against the many Satan-blinded 
foes who beset you and us continually because of 
our loyalty to the Lord and his Word. 
"Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: 
They shall prosper that love thee."— Psa. 122:6. 

These words are as true of the Jerusalem the 
higher and her children of peace as of the earthly Jerusalem. 
Those who are praying the Lord's blessing 
upon his cause are seeking to serve it and are proportionately 
blessed. Those who are indifferent to the 
welfare of Zion and the Lord's cause now, are standing 
in a slippery place and are in great danger of falling. 

Continue, dear brethren and sisters, to pray for 
us (1 Thes. 5:25; Heb. 13:18), and be assured that, as 
the Apostle Paul said, we have a care for all the 
churches and for the scattered sheep, and continually 
bear you upon our heart before the throne of the heavenly 
grace, and watch as well as pray for your interests 
and welfare-See Heb. 13:17; 2 Cor. 11:28; 
2 Thes. 1:11; Phil. 1:9. -EDITOR.! 



DEAR BROTHER:-Spiritual feasts, comforting, 
encouraging, instructive and edifying, did all the 
meetings, conducted by our dear Pilgrim Brother, 
Frank Draper, prove to be, and our only regret is that 
his stay with us was of necessity so limited, altho 
even longer than we had hoped for. The public meetings, 
of which we had two, in a non-sectarian chapel 
were well attended considering the inclemency of the 
weather, fully fifty being present at each. As an immediate 
result of one of these, it is with pleasure that 
we announce at least one party was apparently thoroughly 
aroused and keenly interested, who formerly 
opposed present truth. 

We desire to gratefully thank you and those contributing 

R2576 : page 48 

to the support of these Pilgrim brethren, for 
the blessed season we have enjoyed, and can heartily 
commend to any of the household of faith Brother 
Draper as an able and loving expounder of the Word 
of God, doing indeed a noble work for the cause of 
Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus our Redeemer, Exemplar 
and Lord, in thus visiting and exhorting to deeper 
consecration the little scattered groups. 

Hearing of the beneficial nature of the recent conventions, 
it has been mentioned that perhaps much 
good would result in a similar gathering at this place 
during the State Fair and Exposition next fall, and 
we were glad to learn through Bro. D. that hopes of 



such a meeting were also entertained and mentioned 
by interested ones he had thus far met in Texas, Arkansas 
and Indian and Oklahoma Territories, and we 
therefore take the liberty of mentioning the matter to 
you for advisement. If so, a cordial, brotherly welcome 
awaits you and other friends who would be entertained 
to the extent of our ability. 

The Musical Towers ordered were promptly received 
and used to advantage at meetings. 

Our prayers are with you and we crave yours, to 
the effect that we may be faithful overcomers, even 
unto death. Yours in Christ, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN,-Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel inclined to give 
you a brief account of our Volunteer work even tho 
you may hear from others concerning the same. 

We put out about 450 of the booklets last Sunday 
evening. I felt impelled to go out with the others as 
I had been thinking of the letters in last TOWER and 
of the blessed privilege thus offered us of sharing in 
the blessing that surely comes to those who do thus 
serve Him. I would urge all, in every place to take 
up this good work of serving God's household of faith 
(of whom there may be many yet in Babylon) with 
this "meat in due season." 

By a singular coincidence, I went first to the M. 
E. Church where I was converted 25 years ago. The 
second booklet I gave out was to a young man who 
offered to pay for it. Upon being assured that it was 
freely given to all Bible students, he still urged that I 
accept a dime and send it to the Tract Society, which 
I will do quite soon. 

A little boy came running down asking me if I 
would give him another one of those "little Bibles" 
for an old lady who wanted it. 

How true that "Obedience is better than sacrifice," 
as it is first, or preeminent, and surely involves the 
true and acceptable sacrifice. How many we see, especially 
among the sisters of the Roman Catholic 
system, and also foreign missionaries who are making 
great sacrifices, yet not according to a knowledge of 
his plan, and consequently misdirected. 

Jesus said, "My sheep hear (obey) my voice." 
"We ought to obey God rather than men." I firmly 
believe that all are doing this, who engage in the 
Harvest work which is evidently under the guidance 
of the Chief Reaper. 

The Church here has been greatly benefited by 
the publication of the Washington and Boston letters 
in last TOWER. This is clearly discernable in the increased 
zeal of all for the work. May we not reasonably 
hope that the increase of zeal here and in other 
places may be prophetic of a larger work during the 
coming year? 

May our Heavenly Father bless the work to the 



glory of his name, and preserve us all with you unto 
the establishment of his Kingdom! 
Yours in the hope of the high calling. 

MRS. C. A. OWEN,-Indiana. 

[Two letters have been received from sisters in 
Christ who are mothers, who are surprised at our advice 
to Hugo Kuehn in the January 1st WATCH TOWER. 
One is surprised that we would approve of anything 
that would bring the boy into touch with sectarianism; 
the other wonders whether or not all boys' clubs under 
church auspices are of the kind known to her, and if 
so she wonders very much that we could advise boys 
who are seeking to walk in the footsteps of Jesus to 
have anything to do with them. She says that in addition 
to the gymnasium for physical culture, they 
have cigars, cigarettes, billiards, boxing gloves, etc., 
all calculated to lead a boy far from the narrow way 
of true discipleship. 

We certainly did not suppose that the basements 
of churches were used in such a manner, nor can we 
yet think that this is the usual custom; it would seem 
too extreme to be general. We hope that those known 
to this sister are rare exceptions. We assuredly would 
advise all boys who seek to walk in the footsteps of 
our Lord to shun all such places, and rather to do 
without the gymnastic exercises, if they could only 
be obtained under such conditions. 

Our thought, in answering Hugo's question, was 
that the boys' clubs were merely lecture and recreation 
guilds, entirely harmless and at the same time profitable, 
and that the only question was whether or not its 
association with a nominal church system should properly 
separate from it those who sought to please the 
Lord. Our answer was along these lines, and we still 
think that a wide distinction should be observed as 
between joining a church, being bound with a misrepresenting 
creed, etc., and joining a boys' club without 
creed or other bondage except as respects good morals, 
and not for religious purposes, but merely for cooperation 
in obtaining the privileges of the lecture course 
and the use of the gymnasium at a moderate expense. 
To mingle with moral boys in this way is, in our 
judgment, merely a business transaction, and the same 
rules which would hinder a boy from thus associating 
with other boys in a moral and creedless club would 
similarly hinder the Christian father of the boy from 
dealing in any kind of worldly business with sectarian 

R2577 : page 48 

Christians and others. The Apostle seems to imply 
this point in 1 Cor. 5:10. 

But we would sincerely regret to be understood 
as advising countenancing or having any sympathy 
with the kind of boys' clubs described by our sister's 



letter. Far better that the Christian boy should have 
no use of gymnastic appliances, or that he should 
construct some for his own use; far better that he 
should never mingle with other boys at all, than that 
he should run the least risk of having his heart polluted: 
for we remember how broadly applicable are the Apostle's 
words, "Evil communications corrupt good 
manners." —EDITOR.! 



page 49 
VOL. XXI. FEBRUARY 15, 1900. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 51 

Pulpit Views on the Millennium 51 

Methodist Figures for 1899 52 

A Congress of Religious History 53 

"This Charge I Commit unto Thee, Son 

Timothy" 53 

The Good Tidings Discredited 54 

We Walk by Faith and not by Sight 57 

"And He Healed Many that Were 

Sick 57 

"The Son of Man hath Power on 

Earth to Forgive Sins" 60 

The Miracle Viewed as a Parable 62 

Poem: These Many Years 62 

Interesting Letters 63 

Items: "Withdrawal Letters"— The Memorial 

Supper— Tower Address Tags 50 

Our Supply of "Bible vs. Evolution," etc 50 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



R2578 : page 50 

"WITHDRAWAL LETTERS." 

These are not samples to be copied by pen, but regular letters 
all ready to date and sign and can be posted unsealed for 
one cent each. It is a kind but plain statement of our view of 
the true invisible Church and its head Christ Jesus and its 
bondage of love as contrasted with human institutions under 
Synods, Conferences and Presbyteries and held together with 
creed-bondage. All who get free from "Babylon" should send 
one of these letters to each church member with whom he associated 
in "Babylon." It will do them good and it will insure 
that you will not be misunderstood and misrepresented unintentionally. 
Otherwise your withdrawal is almost certain to be 
misrepresented as "Infidelity"— as leaving the true Church and 
not merely leaving a human organization never recognized by 
the Lord nor instituted by him, but by fallible men. 

Order all you need with tracts and envelopes accompanying 
free— after getting a sample and deciding that you wish to use them. 

R2575 : page 50 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

The anniversary of our Lord's death reckoned according to 
Jewish calendar will this year be April 13 at 3 P.M.— consequently 
the celebration of the Memorial Supper will be on the 
previous evening, April 12, after six o'clock P.M. We make this 
early announcement for the sake of friends afar off. Further 
statements and local announcements later. 

page 50 

LOOK AT YOUR TOWER ADDRESS LABEL. 

If your name is not properly spelled or if improper street 
number is given, please write us a postal card at once correcting 
same. 

OUR SUPPLY OF "BIBLE VS. EVOLUTION" PAMPHLETS FOR 
"VOLUNTEERS" IS EXHAUSTED. 

It will require considerable time to obtain a sufficient supply. 
As soon as ready another CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS will appear 
in this column. Our printers are much rushed and we 
are keeping them on the DAWNS. 



R2577 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



PULPIT VIEWS ON THE MILLENNIUM. 



THE PHILADELPHIA PRESS recently interviewed 

the ministers of Pennsylvania and New 

Jersey on the subject of the Millennium, asking:— 

Do you believe that the Biblical Millennium is at hand? 

The majority of the responses denied faith in a Millennium, 

some expressed an expectation that the 

churches would bring it about by missionary effort 

and a few declared faith in a reign of Christ near at 

hand, as follows:— 

Rev. William McNally, Harrisburg, Pa., has 
made a careful study of the "Millennium" question. 
He says:— 

"I believe that the millennium period is near— that 
we are living in the 'last days,' foretold in the Bible. 
The prophecies are all being fulfilled and the signs of 
the time all indicate it. There are 'wars and rumors 
of wars' now; there is moral laxity everywhere; the 
average church attendance is startlingly small, only 36 
people out of every 100 attend any church in this 
country. There is moral and political corruption. 

"All of these things indicate the approach of the 
millennium, as anyone may see by looking up the 
references in the Bible on this subject. 

"The millennium will not be brought about by 
any human agency. We are not growing better." 

Rev. Clarence E. Eberman, Lancaster, Pa., pastor 
of the Moravian Church and president of the 
Pennsylvania Christian Endeavor Union said:— 

"Sentiment or speculation can decide very little 
on this great question. The Bible alone offers the 
authoritative teaching. I believe confidently that 
Christ is coming again and that his second advent will 
usher in his kingly reign of a thousand years upon 
this earth." 

Rev. George Fulton, Lebanon, Pa., pastor of the 
Fourth Street Presbyterian Church, said:— 

"I believe that the evidence of the nearness of the 
millennium is stronger than ever before. Signs have 
been found in every generation since Christ's ascent 
that pointed to his coming. The principal proofs are 
wars and earthquakes, distress of nations, sea and 
waves roaring, lawlessness and iniquity prevailing to 
an alarming degree. The Bible says 'When the Gospel 
of the Kingdom shall have been preached to all 
the world as a witness unto all nations, then cometh 
the end.' This is a sign. It belongs only to our own 
age and the evidence here is strong. Another sign is 
the prophetic movement,— the restoration of Israel 
which has begun." 



Rev. Sydney N. Ussher, West Chester, Pa., rector 
of the Church of the Sure Foundation, said:— 

"The Millennium is a divine conception, with 
Scripture the only source of light and authority. No 
definite time is stated therein. I believe, however, 
the world is fast preparing for it." 

Rev. William J. Houck, Carlisle, Pa., pastor of 
Grace United Brethren Church, says:— 

"I believe that the Biblical millennium is at 
hand." 

Rev. M. E. McLinn, Bloomsburg, Pa., pastor of 
St. Matthew's Lutheran Church, says:— 

"I am certain that a great change is imminent. 
Everything points clearly to a mighty social and religious 
upheaval and reconstruction. The very fact 
that this subject occupies men's thoughts so largely 
and that the 'secular press' asks the question is proof 
of it to me." 

Pastor F. Jonte Stanley, of the First Presbyterian 
Church, Atlantic City, N.J., believes "that the signs 
of the times, as I read them, point to the millennium 
as not being far off. One of the indications is the 
gathering of the Jews at Palestine; another that the 
Gentiles hear the Gospel the world over, and still 
another is that the nations are coming together commercially, 
intellectually and religiously." 

Rev. W.W. Moffett, D.D., Lambertville, N.J., 
pastor of the Centenary M.E. Church, says:— 

"The trend of revelation on the subject of the 
millennium seems to teach that a time will come in 

R2577 : page 52 

the history of the world when the Gospel shall dominate 
all nations and Jesus shall reign in the majority 
of human hearts. To the close student of the world 
to-day there seem to be many indications that this 
happy period may be enjoyed in the near future." 

Rev. Dr. James Lisk, Bordentown, N.J., pastor 
of the Baptist Church, said:— 

"As to your first question, I certainly do so believe. 
However students of the Word may interpret 
your phrase 'Biblical millennium,' there can be little 
doubt that some great change is soon to take place. 
The divine programme is being rapidly completed, 
so far as the present order of things is concerned. 
Prophecy is rapidly being fulfilled." 



The majority of those who saw no evidence of a 
Millennium meant that they saw no evidence of the 
speedy conversion of the world to such a condition 
that God's will would be done on earth even as in 
heaven. And in this we must commend their judgment 
as sound. But alas! that so many should be so 



deluded by human theory as to so misunderstand the 
plain statements of God's Word— that Christ's Millennial 
reign is for the very purpose of subduing all things. 
(1 Cor. 15:25,26,28.) False ideas of the "Kingdom" 
and of the "Judgment Day," and imperfect views of 
the character and scope of the Atonement, are at the 
bottom of this blindness to the signs of our times. 

METHODIST FIGURES FOR 1899. 



Rev. A. B. Sanford, D.D., editor of the "Methodist 
Year Book," says in "The Philadelphia Methodist,"— 

"Your readers may be interested to hear concerning 
the total membership of the church for 1899, as the 
statistics have been prepared for the new "Methodist 
Year Book," now passing through the press. In some 
measure, the result is preliminary, since the receipt of 
the figures from a few recent fall conferences will 
slightly change the additions that later appear in the 
General Minutes. The "Year Book" totals will not, 
however, be greatly affected, and show a decrease in 
members and probationers during the past year amounting 
to 21,934. In the analysis of this result, several 
interesting facts appear. 

" 1 . The increase in full members through the 
whole church has been but 6,661. It is a serious fact 
that such strong bodies as the New England, the New 
York, the Philadelphia, the Central Pennsylvania, the 
New Jersey and the Wilmington Conferences suffered 
considerable losses, the decrease in these instances 
varying from the minimum of 1,368, to the maximum 
of 2,436. 

"2. The decrease of probationers in the year 1899 
has been 28,595. 

"3. This decrease in members and probationers is 
accompanied by a decline in Sunday School scholars 
during 1899 of 16,716. It is a noticeable fact that the 
decline in Sunday School scholars thus occurs in the 
spring conferences, which as a body contribute a total 
loss in probationers of 22,572. 

"It may be said in conclusion, that the net decline 
in members and probationers of 21,934 is the first positive 
decline that has occurred since 1881, and, with 
that exception, since the year 1863. The above facts 
are serious, but are such as it may be wholesome for 
the church to know. 



We do not rejoice in such evidences of a decline 
in denominationalism: nor do we expect it to continue. 
If the losses of denominationalism meant that God's 
children were getting out into the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free indeed, then we would rejoice. But 



only a small proportion of the present decline can be 
credited to the spread of present truth. It means, 
therefore, indifference, worldliness. 

It will not surprise us if in the near future a 
Trust Churchianity will have a season of great prosperity, 
lasting until the grand collapse which the 
Scriptures declare will be sudden. 

PROPOSED FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT CHURCHES 
IN GERMANY. 



Prof. Beyschlag has issued an appeal to German 
Protestants which is being regarded favorably by 
many of them. It tends in the direction of the general 
religious federation we have long been expecting— 
which will revive religious tyranny and suppress religious 
liberty and stifle present truth; but not until it 

R2578 : page 52 

has borne its witness and gathered the "wheat" of the 
Gospel "harvest." The Literary Digest gives a summary 
of the proposed plan as follows:— 

"There is to be no formal union of the various 
state churches, nor are these to lose their historical 
identity in the proposed new arrangement. Not a 
union is proposed, but a federation of the state churches, 
with the Prussian Church, which represents the Emperor, 
the summus episcopus of the Protestant Church 
of that kingdom, as the head. The confessional status 
of each church shall remain undisturbed. 

"The object of the federation is to unite the churches 
of the empire for practical purposes. Chief among 
these purposes is cooperation in providing for the religious 
needs of the Germans in the Diaspora, i.e., 
those who are scattered in the various foreign lands 
and need religious care. Then, too, the Protestant 
Church of the empire must have some means by which 
it can, as a body, be represented, just as the Catholic 
Church has a representative in the Pope. A further 
but later purpose is to secure unity in church government 
and polity. In other words, it is to be, with the 
necessary changes, a federation for the good of the 
church such as the organization of the empire has been 
for the state. 

"This federation is to find its expression in an imperial 
Protestant synod, which shall consist of representatives 
of the various state church governments, 
as also of the congregations, in such proportions as shall 
be agreed upon. The officials of this synod shall 
be the representatives and the executive board." 

R2578 : page 53 



A CONGRESS OF RELIGIOUS HISTORY. 



This, at the coming Paris Exposition, is proposed 
as instead of a Parliament of Religions such as was held 
at the Chicago World's Fair. It is proposed to avoid 
doctrines and merely to show works— missions, charities, 
etc., and in all these matters Catholicism hopes 
to make the chief showing, and reap the greatest 
advantage. 

Disapproving of the proposed Congress The Midland, 
a United Presbyterian journal, refers to the Chicago 
Parliament of Religions as follows:— 

"Missionaries tell us that their work has been 
made more difficult, in India at least, by the boasts of 
devotees of the false systems of religion there that in 
Chicago they had met and triumphed over Christianity. 
Tho not intolerant, the Christian religion is absolutely 
exclusive. It can have no fellowship with 
systems which insult the true God and know nothing 
of that blessed Name by which alone salvation comes 
to any human soul. Its mission is to expose and uproot 
all other systems and rescue men from their delusion 
and destructive influence. We are convinced 
that these parliaments tend to obscure the distinction 
between the only true religion and the systems of error 
it must seek to destroy. One such experiment was 
one too many. If a second is to be attempted we hope 
the good sense of Christian people will keep them from 
participation." 

We are pleased to note an expression of so much 
loyalty to the Gospel, and the only Name in which is 
salvation. It is as rare as it is refreshing in these 
days of evolutionary unbelief and Higher Criticism 
infidelity. Would that this editor and his readers might 
see that the blessed day of Christ's Millennial Kingdom 
is near, in the which all the deaf ears shall be 
opened to hear the joyful sound of salvation and to 
know of that only name and of the eternal life offered 
to all who will obey him. 



R2578 : page 53 

"THIS CHARGE I COMMIT UNTO THEE, SON TIMOTHY. 

-1 TIMOTHY 1:18.— 

MORE than a year ago we intimated a desire 

to do something more than has been hitherto 

attempted to assist God's dear "sheep" 

in Great Britain and Ireland to hear the great Shepherd's 

voice and thus to be led into the green pastures 

of present truth. Our thought was to send 



over one of the "Pilgrim" brethren, but the Lord's 
providence did not seem to open the way for it, and 
instead Brother Hemmery, already there, was started 
as a "Pilgrim," and we believe with beneficial results, 
for which the Lord be praised. 

Still we are not satisfied that all is being done 
there that could be done, and since our last annual 
report we have been seeking to know the mind of 
the Lord respecting the great increase of his work in 
the spread of the "harvest" message, which we believe 
we may reasonably expect in the next few years. 
While we expect that most of the increase will as 
usual be in this land, specially prepared and specially 
favored and favorable, it seems to us that the thirty-five 
millions of Britain for several reasons deserve special 
consideration and special effort. (1) Because of 
our unity of language and religious ideals. (2) Because 
of the prevalence of a religious sentiment among 
the masses. (3) Because we have reason to hope that 
the present lamentable war is not only awakening the 
people, as wars always seem to do, but additionally 
because some of the reverses met with may prove to 
be blessings by bringing to the people a larger degree 
of humility and specially causing the religious to 
ponder over the evidences we present respecting the 
completion of the "elect" church and the speedy inauguration 
of the Millennial reign of righteousness. 
(4) Because so large a population of one tongue being 
within comparatively so small a space should make 
efforts there doubly effective of results, all other considerations 
being equal. 

Accordingly we have planned, and from the first 
of the year have been arranging to send to Great 
Britain a representative to look the field over, with 
a view to the establishment of a branch office in London 
from whence that whitening field could be more 
thoroughly harvested. The proposition is, that the 
"Colporteur" work, the "Volunteer" work and the 
"Pilgrim" work could be much better carried on there 
from such a home office and by one thoroughly familiar 
with the methods the Chief Reaper has been 
pleased to bless here. True all these branches have 
already been started in Great Britain, but none of 
them work as smoothly and efficiently as we believe 
they will operate under the proposed plan. Many, 
we believe, hesitate to order tracts, papers, and books 
because of the distance, difference in money, etc. 

The next question naturally was, to whom shall 
so important a mission be entrusted? And the question, 
under the requested guidance of our Lord, seems 
to be satisfactorily answered. With his hearty consent 
we have chosen our dear Brother Henninges, in 
whose efficiency for this service we have fullest confidence 
and who has given many proofs of his loyalty 
to the Lord and his cause, and of whose full consecration 
of heart to the Lord we have no doubt. He 



has had personal experience in all departments of the 
work for the past eight years— the last seven of which 
he has spent in the Watch Tower office and as a member 
of the Watch Tower family, whose "table talks" 
are in the nature of Bible schools. 

We could not send you, dear British brethren, 
anyone in our judgment better qualified to assist you 
in carrying on the work we all so dearly love to 
serve. We trust that you will welcome him heartily 
and co-operate with him to the extent of your judgments 
and opportunities. We shall greatly miss him 
here, but will feel a pleasure in sacrificing our own 
conveniences for your sakes— that the grace of our 
Lord may abound toward many who have not yet 

R2579 : page 54 

"tasted that the Lord is gracious." May he always 
abound as at present in the knowledge of the truth and 
in its spirit of love for the Lord. 

We have been in correspondence with the British 
Postmaster General and find that the postal rates and 
terms are less favorable there than we had expected 
—less favorable than ours; but having gone thus far 
we are not yet discouraged— hoping for some good 
results from a personal inspection of the field anyway. 
Brother Henninges will go direct to London, view the 
situation and write us,— meantime awaiting our reply, 
he will make a "Pilgrim" visit to various cities and 
towns where already there are little gatherings of 
Watch Tower readers; and this alone we believe will 
justify, should the London "branch" proposition prove 
to be infeasible. 

Of course, Sister Henninges will accompany her 
husband, not only as his natural help-mate, but as his 
helper in the Lord's work. We commend our dear 
sister very highly to you all as a very earnest and 
faithful child of God and servant of his cause; full of 
the spirit of self-sacrifice, and firm for every principle 
of righteousness as she discerns it. Sister Henninges 
has been a member of the Watch Tower family for 
twelve years, joining in the office work with her brother 
when quite young. May God's blessing continue 
with both these dear members of our family, 
making them blessings in various ways to the household 
of faith across the great deep. 



R2579 : page 54 

THE GOOD TIDINGS DISCREDITED. 
-FEB. 25. -LUKE 14:16-20.- 
"He came unto his own, and his own 



received him not."— John 1:11. 

REMEMBERING the proverb, "A prophet has 

no honor in his own country," our Lord did 

not begin his ministry in Nazareth, where almost 

twenty-eight years of his life had been spent 

and where consequently he was well known to the 

people. His ministry began in Judea, and the people 

of Nazareth undoubtedly heard considerable respecting 

the marvelous works and words of their suddenly 

notable fellow-citizen, before he came thither. 

All this would be in their favor, and tend to prepare 

them to receive Messiah and his message, offsetting 

the familiarity which so frequently begets contempt. 

Our lesson shows that our Lord had been in the 
habit of attending the religious services of the synagogue 
every Sabbath day, and intimates that it had 
been his custom to do the reading of the Law— which 
implied an education far beyond that of the majority 
of his day. As synagogue-attendance was not strictly 
a part of the Law, our Lord's example in thus seeking 
to associate as far as possible with the most religious 
people of his day, and his willingness to take 
part in the public services, are a lesson to his people 
everywhere, in harmony with the words of the Apostle 
that we should not forget the assembling of ourselves 
together, as the manner of some is, for the Lord's worship. 
-Hebrew 10:25. 

The passage of Scripture read by our Lord from 
the prophecy of Isaiah was quite probably the stated 
Scripture lesson for that day, for it would appear that 
it was a custom of the Jews to have Scripture readings 
each Sabbath day, taking up various parts of the 
Old Testament Scriptures alternately. At all events, 
the lesson read by our Lord is easily identified as a 
Greek translation from Isaiah 61. He read the first 
verse of the chapter, and stopped reading in the middle 
of the second verse, closed the roll, and returned 
it to the servant having charge of the closet in which 
the rolls were kept, and then, according to the custom 
of the time, as an indication that he was ready to 
make remarks, Jesus sat down. How much of an 
explanation of the Scriptures he gave his hearers we 
are not definitely told, but doubtless he commented 
liberally upon the various features of the prophecy, 
summing up his remarks with that which is recorded, 
viz., that the prophecy was in process of fulfillment 
at that very moment. 

The audience, composed chiefly of his acquaintances, 
had a mixed sentiment as respects him; with the 
natural feeling of irreverance for those with whom 
we are intimately acquainted was blended another 
feeling of pride in a fellow-citizen, who had attained 
such renown; and as they listened to his exposition of 
the prophecy they were filled with admiration, "and 
all bear him witness, and wondered at the gracious 



words which proceeded out of his mouth." They 
said within themselves and to each other, We have 
never heard such wonderfully good tidings before in 
our lives, and this from our neighbor, the carpenter. 
Little did they realize, when thus admiring his gracious 
message, that something would occur in a few 
moments which would completely frenzy them, and 
lead them to desire to murder the one who now declared 
himself to be the fulfiller of this prophecy, the 
Anointed of the Lord, the Messiah, ready to give in 
due time the blessings mentioned by the prophet. 

The people of Nazareth were more interested, 
however, in the miracles of Jesus than in his claim to 
be the Messiah. The miracles were practical, and 
they could appreciate them, but his teaching that he 
was the Messiah seemed farfetched, when they had 
known him for so long as the son of Joseph, the carpenter. 
They therefore began to wonder, and possibly 
to question, how soon he would do in Nazareth 
some of the wonderful miracles done by him at Capernaum 
and elsewhere, of which they had heard. Knowing 
this to be the attitude of their mind, our Lord 
anticipated their request for miracles, and explained that 
they must not expect miracles from him— though they 
evidently expected more miracles amongst his friends 
than they had heard of his doing amongst strangers. 
This made necessary a little explanation, which was 
not at all flattering to them. 

Our Lord does not say that he was not permitted 
of the Father to do miracles at Nazareth, although 
this is implied in the fact that he did none, and implied 
also in the explanations and illustrations which 
he gave. Doubtless he was guided in the matter by 
certain principles governing his use of the power from 

R2579 : page 55 

on high. As we have already seen he might not use 
this power selfishly in his own interest; we may likewise 
suppose that he would not be at liberty to use 
it simply as a gratification to curiosity, but that it 
could be used only in response to proper faith. The 
people of Nazareth evidently were not in the attitude 
of faith, not therefore in the proper attitude of heart, 
to receive God's blessing— the wrong condition of their 
hearts was manifested by their actions, when our Lord 
refused to gratify their curiosity. We note the difference 
between this curious and unbelieving desire 
for miracles, and the course of action following it, in 
contrast with the faith of the Syro-Phoenician woman, 
her humility of heart, and the manner in which she 
received our Lord's first refusal to grant her request. 
(Matthew 15:22-28.) We can but suppose that had 
the people of Nazareth been in a proper attitude of 
heart they would have accepted our Lord's refusal to 
work miracles in a different manner, and would have 



said, "Well, we enjoy the gracious words from his 
mouth anyway, for they have brought a healing and 
blessing to our hearts." And if such had been their 
attitude no doubt later our Lord would have performed 
miracles of healing in their city also. 

By way of explaining to them why he might not 
perform his miracles in their midst, as well as toward 
others, our Lord cited two illustrations from the prophets 
of the past— Elijah sent to the poor Gentile 
widow, to be a blessing to her home, while widows of 
Israel were passed by; and Elisha healing Naaman 
of leprosy, while many lepers in Israel were passed 
by. These apt illustrations were unkindly received 
by his hearers, because, drawing the parallel, it likened 
them to starving poor and diseased lepers and implied 
our Lord's comparative greatness and superiority to 
them as a dispenser of divine bounty. After the same 
manner our Lord elsewhere told the Pharisees that 
he, as the Good Physician, had come to heal the sick 
and that the well needed not a physician. That this 
was their attitude of heart, and feeling no need of 
him, and the blessings he dispensed, they did not realize 
their sin-sickness, and their deadness in trespasses 
and sins, and hence did not realize their need of redemption 
and deliverance from the power of sin and 
death. 

The effect of our Lord's illustrations was almost 
electrical upon the proud hearts before him, whose 
only interest in him from the first had been that of 
pride in him as a fellow-citizen and hope for miracle-proofs 
of his power. Now, however, this pride was 
turned to bitterness, and they would murder the one 
who had spoken so disrespectfully of them as to compare 
them to hungry widows and lepers, needing his 
aid. The congregation immediately became a mob, 
filled with angry passion; and surging forth with him 
the crowd led in the direction of a precipice with a 
view to casting him headlong from it. But by the 
exercise of some power, possibly a power natural to a 
perfect human being, our Lord mastered them with 
his mind, and passed from their midst, none daring 
to stay him, and went on his way. 

Let us note carefully the message which our Lord 
declared was in process of fulfillment that day. He 
declared himself to be the Anointed One mentioned 
by the prophet— his anointing of the holy spirit dating 
from the time of his baptism, when John bore witness 
that the holy spirit descended upon him and abode 
with him. The anointing was for a purpose, as the 
prophet declared, and our Lord confirmed the same, 
saying that he was anointed to preach the gospel. 

THE GOOD TIDINGS BORNE BY THE MESSENGER OF THE 
COVENANT. 



We are to distinguish between the preaching of 
the gospel or "good tidings" and the good things 
promised, which are to come to pass in due time. The 
preaching was begun by our Lord and has been continued 
throughout the Gospel age, by all those who 
by the grace of God became "members in particular 
of his body," the church over which he is the head 

R2580 : page 55 

forever. (1 Cor. 12:27; Eph. 1:22-23.) After this 
preaching of the gospel shall have been given, and 
shall have accomplished its purpose and intention, 
then will follow the glorious actualities referred to in 
it. And if the mere description of the coming blessings 
is called the Gospel, good news, good tidings for 
all people, what may we not hope respecting the blessings 
themselves, of which only the message is now 
given to the hearing and sight of faith? 

The gospel was to be preached by the Anointed 
Head and by the anointed members of his body, to 
all who have ears to hear it, in the special interest of 
one particular class, viz., the poor, the broken-hearted 
—not the literally poor any more than the literally 
broken-hearted, but the "poor in spirit," the humble-minded, 
who are also the sympathetic, the tender, the 
heart-broken, as in contrast with the hard-hearted. 
We make this distinction as between the poor in purse 
and the poor in spirit because it is a very necessary 
one, which some failing to discern have been misled 
into grievous errors. True, not many rich, either in 
purse or intellect, will attain the Kingdom, the majority, 
being chiefly the poor of this world in purse 
and intellect, but rich in faith. (1 Cor. 1:26-29; James 2:5.) 
However, it is not because of their poverty of 
intellect and of purse that there will be more of this 
class chosen, but merely because poverty of purse and 
intellect are much more favorable to the development 
of humility than are riches of any kind; and humility 
is a prime essential to an inheritance with the saints 
in light. 

While all of the anointed gospellers may during 
this age bear their message without restriction as to 
nationality or color or sex, to whomsoever has an 
ear to hear, Jew or Gentile, bond or free, and while 
they may not be able to discern in advance which will 
prosper, this or that— nevertheless they will not waste 
time and effort upon those whom they find to be 
mentally "rich and increased in goods, and feeling 
that they have need of nothing." (Rev. 3:17.) No; 
they are rather to take note of those who, when they 
hear the good tidings, give evidence of proper "ears 
to hear," the meek, the poor in spirit, realizing that it 
is this class that the Lord is specially seeking during 
this age. 



Similarly, the anointed ones are not to spend their 
time endeavoring to break the hard hearts of the 
worldly, for this is not a part of its commission. God 
himself, through various providences, is attending to 
the work of breaking the hard hearts; some are 

R2580 : page 56 

broken and softened by the trials, difficulties, perplexities 
and adversities of the present life; some are torn 
and bleeding through severe trials of life and earthly 
disappointments; and the time of trouble fast approaching 
is specially designed of the Lord as the 
time for breaking and melting many hard hearts, in 
preparation for the Millennial Kingdom and its blessings 
of restitution, etc. Now, however, the message 
is to "bind up the broken-hearted." 

How much there is of this very kind of work that 
needs doing! The poor in spirit, contrite and mellowed 
of heart, disappointed with the world, vexed 
with the flesh and the adversary, are to be found in 
nearly every quarter of the world; and whosoever has 
received the anointing of the holy spirit should realize 
that this power upon him is given to be exercised upon 
this needy class— pouring in the oil and the wine of 
the divine promise, to cheer and comfort and bless, 
and prepare for join t-heirship in the Kingdom, some 
of the very class whom the Lord will be pleased to 
accept. To these the gospel may be preached freely; 
they will not turn again and rend the messengers, but 
will hear it, and it will comfort and bind up their 
wounded hearts. 

If then we have found the class to whom the 
anointed ones are to specially address themselves, what 
is the special message of peace and blessing which 
they are to bear, and which the Prophet and our Lord 
denominate the "gospel"— the good tidings? Is it 
the announcement of the election of a handful to glory, 
and the reprobation of all the remainder to an eternity 
of torment? No; this is not the gospel which the 
Prophet and Jesus declared. Is it the message of 
God's goodness of intention, but incapacity of execution, 
which will result in a very few being saved 
and the great mass of humanity being eternally tormented? 
No, not so. Evidently our Lord was 
not sent to preach this gospel (?) of damnation, so 
common to-day— for it is no part of the message here 
declared, nor would such a reprobation to eternal misery 
be called "gospel" truthfully. 

Let us see what is implied in this "gospel" message 
set forth in the Scriptures. Let us know how 
widely it differs from the various messages of heathendom, 
and from the commonly accepted messages of 
"Christendom." Let us note the true gospel message 
that should be proclaimed by all who have been 
anointed with the holy spirit. It is divided by the 



Prophet into five parts: (1) Deliverance to the captives; 

(2) recovering of sight to the blind; (3) setting 

at liberty them that are bruised; (4) the announcement 

of the acceptable year of the Lord, as preceding these 

blessings; and (5) the announcement of a day of vengeance 

in the close or end of the acceptable year of 

the Lord,— a "time of trouble such as was not since 

there was a nation." This last part, tho proper to 

be proclaimed by the anointed "body," was not due to 

be proclaimed by the anointed "Head" at the time of 

our Lord's discourse. All mankind are captives, all 

are blind, all are bruised; hence it is a universal blessing 

that is announced in this Scriptural "gospel" 

message. 

(1) The captives are the slaves of sin; Adam and 
all his race, "sold under sin." (Rom. 7:14.) Through 
disobedience in Eden the race was born in this slavery, 
"born in sin, shapen in iniquity." Some of the sin-enslaved 
race have already been remanded to the great 
prison-house of death, while all others are on their 

way thither. The "good tidings" which Jesus preached 
and which all his followers under the same anointing 
of the spirit must preach, is the resurrection of the 
dead, or as the Apostle expressed his teaching, it is 
"Jesus and the resurrection." (Acts 17:18.) Jesus, 
the Redeemer, Jesus the anointed Head of the spiritual 
Seed which, as God's Kingdom, is shortly to bring 
to mankind full opportunity of release, not only from 
the prison-house, but from all the other incidents of 
their slavery through the first Adam,— he having 
redeemed the first Adam and his posterity with his own 
precious life. 

None but the anointed body of Christ are commissioned 
to preach this good tidings, and every member 
of that body is so commissioned irrespective of 
human distinctions of "clergy" and "laity"; and whoever 
does not fulfil this mission is unfaithful to his 
commission. And alas! as we look around us, 
throughout the length and breadth of Churchianity, 
falsely called Christianity, we find that evidently very 
few indeed have been anointed, because very few indeed 
know this message of the resurrection,— indeed 
that the majority of ministers in all denominations are 
heartily opposed to the doctrine of the resurrection, 
because it is in direct conflict with their unscriptural 
theories. 

(2) The promised recovering of sight to the blind 

has a far deeper signification than mere natural eyesight. 
It refers to the blindness which sin has brought 
upon the hearts of men, perverting their mental vision, 
hindering them from seeing the divine being and his 
divine attributes in their true light,— as loving, gracious 
and true, just and wise. The blindness that is 
upon mankind, and "the gross darkness that covers 
the people" in general, is described by the Apostle as 
being the work of the great Adversary Satan, who by 



false doctrines not only amongst the heathen but also 

amongst Christians, has misrepresented the divine 

character, the divine Word, the divine plan, "putting 

light for darkness, and darkness for light," and has 

thus deceived the whole world, all nations, with the 

very small exception of the few whose eyes of understanding 

have been enlightened with the true light. 

We have no hope for this general opening of the 

blind eyes in the present age— only the few now get 

the eyesalve. In some respects indeed it is better that 

the majority should be permitted to remain blinded until 

by the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom the 

conditions shall be much more favorable than at present, 

that when then the eyes of their understanding 

have been opened, and their responsibilities proportionately 

increased, it may be under circumstances 

more favorable to them. 

(3) "To set at liberty them that are bruised" gives 
the thought of sin's captives sore and distressed from 
the manacles with which they are bound. This figure 
fitly represents the bondage of corruption, infirmity, 
etc., which are concommitants to the death penalty. 
The promise for such a deliverance means "restitution" 
in active operation (Acts 3:19-21), in the assistance 
and uplifting of the world of mankind during 

the Millennial age— to all the glorious perfections lost 

R2580 : page 57 

for all through father Adam's disobedience, and its 
sentence of death. What a glorious hope is here! 
No wonder this also was included as a part of the 
good tidings. How comparatively valueless would all 
the other features of blessing be, if sickness and pain 
and imperfection continued. It is when we see not 
only Sin, the taskmaster, itself removed, but also all 
of its results counteracted, and all the sinner-race 
privileged to return to the full liberty of sons of God, 
and that all this is provided for through the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus, and through the Kingdom 
which is to be established in his hands for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth— then we discern 
why it is called "good tidings of great joy, which shall 
be unto all people," and hear the echo of John's prophecy 
from the standpoint of the future perfection, 
saying, "There shall be no more death, neither sorrow 
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for 

R2581 : page 57 

the former things are passed away."— Rev. 21:4. 

(4) "The acceptable year (or acceptable time or 
epoch) of the Lord" is this Gospel age, which began 
with our Lord's consecration at his baptism, and his 
anointing with the holy spirit, and which will continue 
until the last member of the body of Christ has "filled 



up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ"— 
until all the sufferings of Christ (head and body) are 
complete, when the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together.— Isa. 40:5. 

This Gospel age is called the acceptable epoch, because 
during this time God is willing to accept sacrifices 
for sins. First he accepted the sacrifice of his 
only begotten Son our Lord, and secondly he has been 
accepting throughout the age all those who come unto 
the Father through Jesus, and who, justified by his 
merit, present their bodies living sacrifices to God as 
a reasonable service, and thus become joint-sacrificers 
with Jesus, and joint-heirs with him in the coming 
Kingdom, as it is written, "Heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, 
that we may be also glorified together."*— Rom. 8:17. 

WE WALK BY FAITH AND NOT BY SIGHT. 



However, it is well to notice that while the 
"gospel" includes all the foregoing blessings for mankind 
in general, it brings a sooner and still greater 
blessing to the "little flock" whose ears are blessed 
that they hear, and whose eyes are blessed that they 
see, in advance of the world. To these all of the 
coming blessings are anticipated,— not literally, but 
by faith, for "We walk by faith, not by sight." Already 
the true Church ("whose names are written in 
heaven" Heb. 12:23) is not only justified by faith, and 
thus reckonedly released from captivity to Sin and 
death, but also reckonedly is risen with Christ, reckonedly 
has become "new creatures" in Christ, reckonedly, 
under the New Covenant, are no longer in the 
flesh but in the spirit, and so accounted of God, and 
so accounted also of each other, who henceforth know 
each other, not after the flesh, but after the spirit— as 
new creatures.— 2 Cor. 5:16. 

These have a new sight, seeing with the eye of 
faith things that are not visible to the natural sight. 
They are guided into all truth, as it becomes due; yes, 
they discern "the deep things of God," because they 
possess the spirit of God (1 Cor. 2:9,10), seeing with 
the eye of faith things which the natural eye hath not 
seen, hearing with the ear of faith things which the 
natural ear has never heard, neither has entered into 
the heart of the natural man to conceive of or imagine 
—the things which God hath in reservation for them 
that love him,— and who manifest their love by their 
devotion to him and his. The eyes of their understanding 
being opened, they are enabled to "comprehend 
with all saints the length and breadth, the height 
and depth, and to know the love of Christ, which 
passeth (human) knowledge."— Eph. 3:18. 

Altho this special class is not set at liberty from 



the bruises and imperfections of the mortal body during 
the present life, but require in this as in other 
things to walk by faith and not by sight, nevertheless, 
in one sense of the word they are set at liberty from 
these imperfections, because under the terms of the 
New Covenant they have the assurance of the Lord 
that none of the natural blemishes and imperfections 
and physical weaknesses are henceforth counted 
against them, their standing being reckonedly that of 
new creatures, and their judgment in the Lord's sight 
being according to their intentions of heart, and not 
according to the weaknesses of their flesh, which is 
reckoned dead. 

We exhort all of the redeemed who have made 
a covenant with the Lord, "a covenant of sacrifice," to 
remember why they are reckoned as members baptized 
into the body of the anointed one (the Christ)— here 
plainly set forth by the Head of our body, viz., that 
each one is to be a preacher of this Gospel and not of 
another Gospel. Let us be faithful for yet a little 
longer, until the great High Priest shall fully qualify us 
as the "Royal Priesthood" in the glory of the Kingdom, 
that then it may be our privilege with him to 
bring to mankind all the wonderful blessings forestated 
in his gospel, for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth, with a full opportunity of attaining the light of 
truth and the liberty of the sons of God. 



*See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 



R2581 : page 57 

"AND HE HEALED MANY THAT WERE SICK. 

-MARCH 4.-MARK 1:21-34.- 

JESUS made Capernaum his home and the center 
of his work in Galilee for a considerable time. 
It will be remembered that it was here that 
the Roman centurion, whose servant Jesus healed, 
lived, of whom the Jews testified that he was a friend 
of their nation, and had built them a synagogue or 
house of worship and Bible study. (Luke 7:5.) Some 
ruins in that vicinity have recently been exhumed, 
which are supposed by scholars to be the remains of 
this synagogue, because they seem to be on the site 
of Capernaum, and represent the most substantial 
synagogue structure in all that region, the walls being 
ten feet thick, seventy-four feet nine inches long, and 

R2581 : page 58 



fifty-six feet nine inches wide, with a roof supported 
by four rows of columns. 

As indicating our Lord's strict attention to the 
Father's business, we have the statement that "straightway," 
at once, on arriving at Capernaum from Nazareth, 
our Lord went into the synagogue (probably the 
one built by the centurion), and began his teaching. 
This reads peculiarly at the present day, when custom 
has completely barricaded every opportunity for free 
expression of opinion in almost all places devoted to 
worship. The Jewish arrangement was certainly a 
liberal one, and every way favorable to the truth, because 
whatever errors might creep in, the truth always 
had an opportunity for challenging them and exposing 
their weaknesses and referring to the divinely inspired 
oracles. Who can doubt that if we had just 
such simplicity or arrangements to-day, by which 
truth could challenge the various errors which have 
crept into all sectarian teaching, the result would be 
favorable— not favorable to sectarian systems, it is 
true, but favorable to the establishment of each individual 
in the truth, as presented in the divine oracles. 

The people who heard our Lord's discourse were 
astonished. (1) At the things which he taught, and 
(2) at the manner in which he presented them. He 
taught with authority, that is to say, our Lord had 
a clear understanding of the subjects he handled, and 
his presentations were not vague suppositions and 
imaginations, and foundationless hopes and speculations; 
but were clear-cut and distinct, and well proven 
by the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets, so 
that they were conclusive in the minds of his hearers, 
who hitherto had been used to hearing the scribes 
guess, wonder, suppose, etc. Since the Lord has 
not seen fit to provide us with even a condensed statement 
of his discourse, it implies that a full knowledge 
of it would not be specially advantageous to us. 
However, a hint or inference respecting a portion of 
the sermon is furnished in the statement that during 
its progress a man present, possessed by an unclean 
spirit, cried out— evidently opposing something Jesus 
had said, saying, "Let us alone; what have we to do 
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come 
to destroy us?" 

The clear inference is that Jesus had been speaking 
against sin, and the power which it exercised over 
humanity, involving all in the death penalty, with its 
sickness and pain and trouble; and incidentally no 
doubt he had mentioned demoniacal possession, so 
common at that time— and more common to-day than 
most people suppose. It is our guess that the gospel 
preached at Capernaum must have followed somewhat 
similar lines to the gospel preached at Nazareth, declaring 
the time at hand in which God would be 
pleased to receive back into harmony with himself 
those who had been alienated through sin, and who 



had thus been brought under the bondage of corruption. 

He no doubt declared himself to be the great 

Life-giver, the Good Physician, sent to heal earth's 

woes and to reveal to mankind the Heavenly Father, 

and to become to as many as would avail themselves 

of it, "the Way, the Truth and the Life," by which 

they might return to divine favor in fullest measure. 

The language of the evil spirit, speaking through the 

man as its mouthpiece,* clearly implies that these fallen 

spirits had at least a general understanding of the time 

when their evil course would be run, and that they 

knew that the just wages of their sinful course is destruction 

—not eternal torment. They recognized 

Jesus and his mission and his holiness, and that he 

was the representative of the Heavenly Father, but 

they had no hope for themselves— no expectation 

other than that when the time should come they would 

be utterly destroyed, annihilated. From various Scriptures, 

however, we learn that these fallen angels, demons, 

wicked spirits, will not be destroyed without first 

being given an opportunity for repentance and reconciliation 

with God.* 

Our Lord did not deign to hold conversation with 
these spirit beings, who had fallen under the ban of 
divine condemnation, and with whom the Heavenly 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?— Price 10 
cents, this office. 

R2582 : page 58 

Father could no longer have intercourse. He did 
not, therefore, explain to them that his first advent 
was merely to pay the ransom price, and to start the 
gospel message which would select the "little flock" 
to be members of his "body" and joint-heirs with him 
in the Kingdom, that when complete and glorified 
should bless and judge the world and judge the fallen 
angels also. (1 Corinthians 6:3.) And our Lord's 
course in having nothing whatever to do with these 
fallen spirits, but on the contrary commanding them to 
hold their peace, should be a lesson to every one of 
his followers, who should seek in this and in every 
other matter to walk in his steps. We have known 
some to get themselves into serious difficulties through 
curiosity— which led them either to spiritualistic 
seances or to privately have communication with these 
fallen ones. Their cunning and deceitfulness is far 
too deep for humanity, and he who seeks communion 
with them in any manner or degree does so in violation, 
not only of the Scriptural command (Lev. 20:6; 
Isa. 8:19), but in violation also of Jesus' example; 
and such run great risk of thus being entrapped and 
falling from their own steadfastness. The Apostle 



gives us to understand that even unwillingly and unwittingly 
we frequently wrestle, not with flesh and 
blood, but with these evil spirits, who inspire and use 
fallen fellow-creatures.— Eph. 6:12. 

The unclean spirit "tore" the man in coming out, 
that is, caused violent convulsions, and used the man's 
mouth in uttering a loud cry. Our Lord, of course, 
could have forbidden such manifestations of the demon 
spirit, but preferred to allow it to be so, that thus 
might be manifested the malignant disposition of the 
evil spirits, as well as the power of his command which, 
with all their malignity, they could not disobey. The 
effect of the miracle upon the audience of course was 
wonderful. They saw "the man Christ Jesus" exercising 
in their very presence a superhuman power 
—controlling spirit beings. No wonder they were 
amazed, and no wonder his fame spread throughout 
all Galilee. 

Leaving the synagogue, our Lord, accompanied 
by James and John, went with Simon Peter and Andrew, 
his brother, to their home, where Peter's mother-in-law 
lay sick of a fever. Jesus visited her, and 
"rebuked the fever," took her by the hand and helped 
her up (Luke 4:39), and immediately the fever was 

R2582 : page 59 

gone, and even the usually accompanying prostration 
of strength did not remain, but on the contrary, she 
was able to entertain and serve her company. 

The fame of Jesus spread rapidly, and at sundown, 
in the cool of the day, many sick were brought 
to him to be healed, and many possessed of devils, to 
have the evil spirits cast out. The concourse was a 
great one, from all parts of the city, and again our 
Lord manifested his mercy in healing ailments, and 
casting out demons; again, however, refusing to converse 
with the demons and even refusing and forbidding 
their giving testimony respecting him. Praise 
and commendation from an evil source are never to 
be desired. 

The question naturally arises, Why did the Lord 
perform such miracles? If they were merely from 
benevolence and with a desire to help the afflicted, why 
did he not do more of them?— for instance, in the city 
of Nazareth, regardless of the condition of the hearts 
of those who were afflicted. Why did he not at one 
word rebuke all the fevers and all the other diseases 
which afflicted humanity, throughout the whole of 
Galilee, the whole of Palestine, the whole of Asia, the 
whole of Africa, the whole of Europe, and the whole 
of America? Quite evidently the performance of 
these miracles was not merely from benevolence toward 
mankind. 

Indeed, we have reason to question whether or 
not it would be a benevolent act to cure all the ills of 



humanity in the present time. The aches and pains, 
the troubles and sorrows, of humanity are in many 
senses of the word blessings in disguise, just as was 
the part of the original sentence of Adam, which declares: 
"In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." 
He who succeeds in avoiding the earning of his daily 
food by some kind of toil has succeeded in placing 
himself in an unfavorable condition, for idleness is not 
only the mother of vice, but the father of discontent. 
Similarly, there is a ministry of instruction in sickness 
and trouble which should not be overlooked. The 
Prophet refers to this blessing that inheres in tribulation, 
saying, "Before I was afflicted I went astray;" 
and many of the Lord's people can if they will trace 
some of their greatest blessings and greatest helps 
in the development of true character to their experiences 
in various kinds of troubles and disease. Note 
where we will throughout the world the finest and 
the noblest and the best balanced characters, and trace 
these characters in their development, and we find 
that much of the chiseling and polishing which has 
made them what they are was done by affliction of one 
kind or another— guided, if they were consecrated 
Christians— by the unseen hand of Providence. 

The miracles which our Lord performed in the 
little country of Palestine, by which a small proportion 
of their sick were relieved temporarily, was merely 
a prophecy of the great healing blessing, freeing 
from the power of Satan and sin, which he preached, 
and which is to be fulfilled in due time— during his 
Millennial Kingdom. 

His object in performing these miracles was not, 
however, merely to thus prophesy the future and 
greater universal blessings of his reign, but more particularly 
as signs, as evidences, as witnesses respecting 
his teachings. It was his doctrines or teachings 
that were to move men; so that as the power of God 
these might drawn to him that certain class which the 
Father has given him during this age. If he would 
utter things respecting a heavenly condition, a birth 
of the spirit to a spirit nature, a spirit kingdom, etc., 
it would be eminently proper for any hearer to enquire 
respecting his authority for making such statements 
and promises, unknown to others and unproven from 
any earthly standpoint. It was therefore proper that 
our Lord should anticipate such enquiries respecting 
his authority for his teachings by giving miraculous 
demonstrations of his superhuman power, which he 
explained to be of the Father and witnessing to his 
integrity. 

But someone may say, If such miraculous manifestations 
were proper and reasonable to the generation 
in personal contact with our Lord, why would 
not similar miracles be proper and reasonable for us 
of the present time, and for others all down through 
the Gospel age? We reply that some evidences, 



proofs or miracles would be proper now, and that 

greater miracles are before us to-day, as witnesses to 

the truth of Christianity. These are not of the same 

order as those which introduced the Gospel age in 

the "harvest" or end of the Jewish age; they are, indeed, 

of a far higher order, and more in harmony 

with the age in which we live. They are none the 

less real than the miracles of Jesus' day, though they 

may be less obtrusive and less likely to be noticed, 

except as attention shall be called to them. Our 

Lord seems to refer to these present-day miracles when 

he said to his disciples, "Greater works than these 

shall he do, because I go unto my Father." 

-Jno. 14:12. 

Which is the greater work— the opening of the 
eyes of the naturally blind, or the opening of the eyes 
of the understanding? Which is the more valuable? 
In the end of the Jewish age our Lord healed eyes 
that were blinded either by accident or poison or a 
sting or what not, and that was a miracle, but to-day 
the Lord's disciples, under the guidance of the holy 
spirit, and through it, are able in many instances to 
open the eyes of the understanding, that those who 
are blind to spiritual things might see them— and this 
blindness, the Apostle tells us, is not a mere trifling 
thing of accident or sting, but is the skillful and intentional 
injury of the mental eye by the god of this 
world, Satan. (2 Cor. 4:4.) Do we not, therefore, 
see many more miracles of this kind— the opening of 
the eyes of the understanding with the eye-salve of the 
truth in this harvest-time of the Gospel age— than are 
recorded of the natural sight restoration amongst the 
Israelites in the harvest of the Jewish age? And 
which is the more serious of the two blindnesses? 
Whether would we prefer to be blind naturally or to 
be blind to the spiritual things? Whether, therefore, 
is it the greater miracle to be relieved of natural blindness 
or to be relieved of spiritual darkness? Undoubtedly 
the latter. 

Similarly with all the diseases, we might draw 
parallels and find these the greater miracles. Peter's 
mother-in-law was being consumed with a fever which 
the word of the Lord rebuked. But how many men 
and how many women throughout Christendom to-day 
are being consumed of a fever of ambition or 

R2582 : page 60 

pride or discontent, to whom the word of the Lord 
comes, through some of the household of faith, 
speaking peace, release from burdensome anxiety and 
cares of this life, lust for riches, and consuming ambitions 
and pride of life? How many have been restored 
to normal conditions and granted to have the 
peace of God ruling in their hearts, with thankfulness, 
and how many such have found their strength 



renewed, so that being released from these fevers they 
arose to do vigorously the Lord's business, to minister, 
to serve, the Lord and his "brethren." Similarly 
also we might trace the lamenesses and impotencies 
of the past, and find analogies in the present- 
dead hands, worse than dead, used actively in 
the service of evil, have been recovered for activity 
in the service of the Lord; men and women dead in 
trespasses and sins, awakened to newness of life in 
the service of the Lord and of the truth. Such miracles 
as these, far greater than the ones of Jesus' day 
in the flesh. He is now performing through his willing 
servants and handmaidens, and these are the greatest 
witnesses imaginable to the reality of the Lord's 
gracious message that he is the Sent of God, to bring 

R2583 : page 60 

blessing and salvation to our race. 

The transformations of life and character, hopes 
and aims, by which some in the present time are 
blessed, like the physical healings in the harvest time 
of the Jewish age, are prophecies of what the grace 
of God can and will do for humanity when God's due 
time shall come, when his Kingdom shall come, and 
through its administration of love and justice his will 
shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven. He 
who can see now the earthly blessings and healings, 
accomplished by our Lord, were but foretastes of the 
coming general blessings to be accomplished during 
the Millennium, should be able also to see that the 
regenerations of heart and transformations of character 
now in progress in the "elect" church are merely 
foretastes or a first-fruits, illustrative of the blessings 
of transformed character which the Kingdom 
will accomplish for all who will come into subjection 
to its righteous arrangements. 



R2583 : page 60 

"THE SON OF MAN HATH POWER ON EARTH TO FORGIVE SINS. 

-MARCH 11. -MARK 2:1-12.- 

FOLLOWING the miracle of our last lesson 

and probably other miracles not recorded in 

this connection, our Lord apparently made 

another preaching tour; after returning to his home 

city of Capernaum the incidents of this lesson transpired. 

Evidently our Lord, with his mother and brethren, 

had been making Capernaum his home for some 

time, and it is entirely probable that the house mentioned 

in this lesson was our Lord's own home. Dr. 

Schoff suggests that according to the Greek text this 



might read "at home," instead of "in the house." As 
we saw in our last lesson, however, Capernaum was 
the home also of Peter and Andrew, and the incident 
of this lesson might possibly have occurred there, 
though this is less probable. 

The return of the young and wonderful Teacher 
to His own city and home was soon widely known— 
"noised;" the result was a considerable concourse of 
people, not only filling the house and the courtyard, 
but even the door or gateway. Amongst these callers 
were Pharisees and Doctors of the Law (rabbis, 
scribes), who came out of the various towns of Galilee 
and Judea to hear Jesus, and to note his miracles.— 
See Luke 5:17-18. 

Our Lord's mission was the preaching of the Gospel, 
and, as already pointed out, the healings, miracles, 
etc., were incidentals, and not by any means his chief 
work or object— the "times of restitution" (Acts 3:21) 
not having come, the miracles of our Lord were merely 
attestations to and corroborative of his teachings respecting 
the Kingdom and the Kingdom class which 
he had come to call and gather— out of Israel and 
from amongst the Gentiles. Undoubtedly he preached 
the same message delivered in Nazareth respecting the 
Lord's spirit being upon him, anointing him to preach 
the good tidings to the poor, to heal the broken-hearted 
and to declare a coming deliverance to the 
captives of sin and death, and the restoration of sight 
to those blinded by Satan, and the setting at liberty 
of all the captives subject to the bondage of corruption, 
but probably this one message was presented 
from various standpoints at various times, and various 
texts used, as also various parables introduced 
in illustration of it. This, however, was the "Word," 
the message, which our Lord was commissioned to deliver, 
and we may be sure he did it faithfully. 

While our Lord was in the midst of his discourse 
a paralytic, evidently full of faith, borne on a stretcher 
of some kind by four friends, sought opportunity to 
reach him, with full faith in his power and willingness 
to heal. Finding no opportunity of making their 
way through the crowd, the bearers took their burden 
onto the roof by the outside stairway, customary 
in that country— the buildings being usually but one 
story in height. It is not at all probable that the 
building and roof were of the ordinary kind that would 
have obliged that lifting of stones and cement and 
dirt, and the breaking of the plaster beneath, for this 
would involve an absurdity, and the falling of the 
stones and debris and dust upon our Lord and the 
congregation would have been insufferable as well as 
dangerous. The more reasonable supposition is that 
the house was one of the less common kind, enclosing 
a courtyard capable of accommodating quite a 
large audience, the living rooms being built around 
the wall of the courtyard at one end, and a veranda 



or porch-roof over a part of the open court, covered 

with tiles, which could be removed without much difficulty. 

The thought would be that our Lord stood 

under this veranda, preaching; that some of his audience 

were likewise under it and others standing out, 

exposed to the sunshine in the court. Dr. Thompson 

makes the following comment: 

"The whole affair was the extemporaneous device 
of plain peasants accustomed to opening their roofs 
and letting down grain, straw and other articles, as 
they still do in this (Eastern) country. I have often 
seen it done, and have done it myself, to houses in 

R2583 : page 61 

Lebanon. I have the impression, however, that the 
covering, at least of the lewan (court) was not made 
of earth, but of coarse matting, or boards, or stone 
slabs, that could be quickly removed."— Compare 
Luke 5: 19. 

Our Lord was not offended by this intrusion; He 
doubtless remembered that all things work together 
for good to the Lord's people, who will accept them 
thus. So far from feeling offended at the intrusion 
and persistency, he entirely overlooked these when 
balancing them with the quality which he so much 
admires— faith. All of the Lord's people can well 
take note of this lesson, and learn more and more to 
accept the affairs of life as they come as being all 
subject to divine providence and all guaranteed in 
advance to be profitable, to work out some good result, 
if we will but so permit, by receiving them in 
faith. Let us learn also to overlook and forget rudeness, 
especially where they give evidence of sincerity 
of heart, faith, good intentions. 

In various ways we learn that under the head of 
"paralysis" in olden times, in Oriental countries, various 
diseases were included, which are now specified 
under different names. For instance, titanus (lockjaw) 
would at that time and in that country be described 
as paralysis— indeed, any disease which would 
render the individual helpless, powerless— whether 
merely a deadness or accompanied by violent cramps. 
The incidents connected with this miracle would seem 
to indicate that it was a serious case, and had in it 
something of the element of urgency— necessity for 
seeing the Lord quickly and obtaining his help 
promptly. Otherwise propriety would have dictated 
a different course. 

It might be questioned whether the faith was 
that of the palsied man or that of his friends, but 
we think the circumstances warrant the belief that 
the sick man himself exercised the faith and prompted 
his friends to take the steps they did in obedience 
to his request. This is implied in the fact that our 
Lord does not speak of the faith of the bearers, but 



does speak directly to the paralytic respecting his personal 

faith. Our Lord must have seen a very proper 

condition in the young man's heart, else he never 

would have said to him, unsolicited, "Son, thy sins 

are forgiven thee." Nor was this expression unpremeditated; 

our Lord evidently wished that the miracle 

he was about to perform should not detract from the 

preaching which it interrupted, but, on the contrary, 

should impress it as well as illustrate it. He foreknew 

also that such an unusual statement would awaken 

in his hearers questionings respecting his authority, 

and thus the miracle subsequently performed would 

emphasize the fact that he was the Messiah, and that 

the redemption of sinners and the forgiveness of sins 

had been committed to Him by the Father. 

The question of the scribes (that is, the Rabbis, 
the Doctors of the Law), Is not such a statement 
blasphemy? was a very proper one, and they are not 
to be blamed for making the enquiry. Our Lord did 
not deny its propriety, but answered it by saying, It 
would, of course, be easy for anybody to make the 
claim of forgiving sins, and it might be impossible to 
dispute his claim, but in my case I will substantiate 
my claim to be able to forgive sins by my power to 
heal this man physically; when, therefore, you shall 
perceive his miraculous cure of a physical ailment, it 
will be a lesson respecting the truthfulness of my statement 
in regard to his sins— that you may know that 
as the Son of Man I have power, authority, to forgive 
sins. (Compare Luke 5:24.) Then came the 
healing of the paralytic, which, put in this form, became 
a proof, not only of our Lord's healing power, 
but also of his power to forgive sins. And when 
the sick man, in obedience to our Lord's command, 
took up his couch or stretcher and went forth in 
the presence of all, no wonder they were amazed and 
praised God. 

Apparently all were fully satisfied with the demonstration, 
Luke saying that they were all filled with 
fear— reverence— in view of so mighty a demonstration 
of divine power in their midst. It was not a 
lesson of fear toward God in the sense of a dread of 
an unthinkable everlasting future torment, but a fear, 
in the sense of respect for the God whose love and 
sympathy and compassion had been so wonderfully 
manifested— a God who not only was willing to forgive 
sins, but also willing to help and to relieve his 
creatures from the difficulties which sin had brought 

R2584:page61 

upon them. Say what we will about the depravity 
and crookedness of human reasoning, there is, after 
all, a power of common sense in humanity which, if 
properly actuated, is the strongest possible lever in 
moving them in the right direction— far more influential 



with reasoning people than all the false and unreasonable 
theories which could be concocted. 

One lesson for us, found in this incident, is that 
we, like our Lord, should seek to turn every earthly 
matter to some good account as respects our real mission 
in the world— the declaration of the good tidings, 
and the selection of the Kingdom class to be joint-heirs 
with our Lord in his Millennial glory. Another 
thought is that in every instance the healing of the 
soul from the sickness and condemnation of sin should 
be placed first, as the highest and most important 
thing, far outranking physical conditions and 
blessings. 

Although our Lord proved to his hearers that 
his pronouncement of forgiveness was evidently 
backed by power and authority, as evidenced by the 
miracle, nevertheless he did not explain to them the 
how and the why of his conduct, and hence, while 
giving them proof, he left the questions of their minds 
unanswered. His hearers belonged to the house of 
servants, and not to the house of sons— the holy spirit 
of begetting and adoption not having yet been given 
because Jesus was not yet glorified. (John 7:39.) To 
the house of sons, however, this matter is explained 
in the Scriptures, in the light of the holy spirit, so 
that we may understand the how and the why as well 
as the fact, thus: 

There was a provision under the Jewish law for 
the forgiveness or covering of the sins of the people, 
through the offering of special sin-offerings by the 
priests, but our Lord Jesus was not a priest of the 
Aaronic order, and the palsied man before him had 
not brought a sin-offering, under the terms of the 
Jewish law. However, we see the situation in a new 
light when we realize that the paralytic evidently 
brought to the Lord the sacrifice appropriate to the 

R2584 : page 62 

new dispensation, "a broken and a contrite heart," 
full of faith, and remember also that our Lord at his 
baptism assumed the office of the antitypical high 
priest the moment he was anointed with the holy 
spirit, and that his sacrifice of himself was counted 
as given by him and as accepted by the Father, from 
the moment of his consecration to death, symbolized 
in his water baptism. Hence we see that our Lord's 
authority to pronounce the forgiveness of sins was 
in virtue of his having sacrificed his humanity (which 
was in process of consummation upon the altar) while 
he, as a new creature, was a priest of the new order, 
the "royal priesthood," fully empowered to forgive 
sins. 

Furthermore, this willingness of our Lord to forgive 
and to heal gives us a suggestion of his willingness 
and ability to do these same things (forgive the 



sins and heal the body) when the times of general 
refreshment shall come from the presence of Jehovah 
—"the times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

THE MIRACLE VIEWED AS A PARABLE. 



The various difficulties under which humanity labors, 
called diseases, illustrate sin in various respects; 
for instance, palsy or paralysis represents a condition 
of sin in which the individual loses his power— sometimes 
merely becoming impotent, in the sense of helpless: 
at other times, in combination with this may 
come an insensibility of conscience, a deadness to all 
principles of righteousness, such as the Apostle describes 
as "past feeling." In this condition are quite 
a good many at the present time; they are not only 
helpless as respects all ability to go to the great Physician, 
but additionally they are devoid of any desire, 
any appreciation of their need; they have no feeling 
on the subject. These must be left for the present, 
but we may rejoice that the time is coming, according 
to the promise of the Lord's Word, when all shall 
come to a realization, a sensibility of sin, and to a 
knowledge of the way of escape from its condemnation 
and its penalties. In the present time, however, 
some, like this paralytic, are not past feeling, and 
yet are so helpless as to need the assistance of friends 
in bringing them to the Lord. 

Every true Christian should be such a friend to 
every fellow-creature who has a desire for the Lord's 
blessing, and healing from sin-sickness; and such 
should be not only sympathetic but helpful in bringing 
their friends to the good Physician of the soul. 
Nor should they be readily stopped by impediments, 
obstacles, but like those in the illustration, they should 
be ready and willing to take advantage of every proper 
circumstance and condition to place their friend near 
to the Lord and his power, that the blessing might 
result. And will not the Lord be pleased with our 
faith as well as theirs, if we persistently do all in our 
power in their aid? 

"True faith, like truest love, invents; 
Denied the door, it circumvents." 

Another thought here is that the first and most 
important thing for all is the forgiveness of sins. It 
is in vain that any would endeavor to avoid this first 
essential step toward acceptable Christianity. Some 
are inclined to put doctrine instead of faith and repentance, 
but this will not do. There is no use whatever 
in endeavoring to grow a crop of wheat on soil 
whose sod has not been broken. The fallow ground 
must first be broken up ere the seed can find proper 



root and bring forth fruit. So only those whose hearts 
have been plowed and brought into the condition of 
meekness and contriteness, and a desire for fellowship 
with the Lord— these alone are proper subjects 
to be brought to the Lord. True, it is not within 
our power to break the stony hearts, nor to plow the 
fallow ground; all that we can do is to note those in 
whose lives experiences have produced such results, 
and to sow the good seed of the Kingdom in such 
hearts. This being the case, we must not be surprised 
that not many are ready for present truth; but 
toward those who give such evidence we are not to 
make the mistake of leading them to suppose that 
repentance and forgiveness are nonessential, but rather 
we are to point them to these as primary conditions 
upon which alone they can properly make progress, 
both in knowledge and in grace, so as to attain ultimately 
to the gracious things which God has promised 
to them that love him. 

R2584 : page 62 

THESE MANY YEARS. 

-DEUTERONOMY 8:2.- 

"These many years! What lessons they unfold 
Of grace and guidance through the wilderness, 

From the same God that Israel of old 
In the Shekinah glory did possess. 

How faithful He, through all my griefs and fears 

And constant murmurings these many years! 

"God of the Covenant! From first to last, 

From when I stood within that sprinkled door 

And o'er my guilt the avenging angel passed, 
Thy better angel has gone on before; 

And nought but goodness all the way appears, 

Unmerited and free, these many years! 

"Thy presence wrought a pathway through the sea; 

Thy presence made the bitter waters sweet; 
And daily have Thy hands prepared for me 

Sweet, precious morsels— lying at my feet. 
Twas but to stoop and taste the grace that cheers, 
And start refreshed, through all these many years! 

"What time I thirsted and earth's streams were dry, 
What time I wandered and my hope was gone, 

Thy hand has brought a pure and full supply, 
And, by a loving pressure, lured me on. 

How oft that hand hath wiped away my tears 

And written 'Pardoned!' all these many years! 

"And what of discipline Thy love ordained 
Fell ever gently on this heart of mine; 



Around its briers was my spirit trained 

To bring forth fruits of righteousness divine; 
Wisdom in every check, and love appears 
In every stroke throughout these many years! 

R2584 : page 63 

"Lord, what I might have been my spirit knows— 
Rebellious, petulant, and apt to stray: 

Lord, what I am, in spite of flesh and foes, 
I owe to grace that kept me in the way. 

Thine be the glory! Merit disappears 

As back I look upon these many years. 

"Thine be the glory! Thou shalt have the praise 
For all Thy dealings to my latest breath; 

A daily Ebenezer will I raise, 

And sing Salvation through the vale of death— 

To where the palm, the golden harp appears, 

There to rehearse Thy love through endless years. 



page 63 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your letter announcing 
the visit of "Pilgrim" Bro. Hay just received and I 
write to assure you I will attend to arrangements to 
make his visit as profitable as possible and will write 
again as soon as arrangements are made, notifying Bro. 
Hay of same. 

I am happy to be able to report that the Church at 
Muskegon is in better condition than ever before. We 
have succeeded in holding all interested ones since meetings 
were recommenced, two and one-half years ago, and 
occasionally add one to our number. Just lately a brother 
has joined himself to us— Bro. Stanfield, who bids fair 
to be a great acquisition. One or two others, very lovable 
brethren, are just beginning to come within the 
range of our influence. We have one great advantage 
over other meetings in ability to attract those who love 
the truth. We never make any attempt to catch any 
one; when strangers come into our meetings we go right 
on as tho they were not there and are merely cordial, 
trusting that the truth will attract those who love the 
truth supremely, and I tell you that is all the bait 
necessary to catch those whom it is desirable to retain. 
And it is gratifying to see how members of that class 
are attracted by the simple truth. At first while enjoying 
our meeting and being interested they are not usually 
prepared to assent to many of our propositions, but they 
come again. Somehow or other, they do not understand 
why, as they become familiar with present truth other 
meetings fail to interest them as formerly,— they associate 



themselves more and more with us and if they 

be fully consecrated to the Lord, finally accept present 

truth in to to. 

The brethren honored me with a reelection to the 
position of leader for the ensuing year. I feel entirely 
incompetent but as the brethren insist and are so kind 
as to say that they have benefited by my leading in the 
past I do not feel able to decline. I can truly say my 
greatest ambition next to a desire for personal righteousness 
is to serve the brethren, and though I frequently 
feel overcome with a sense of my unworthiness and 
incapacity to stand up before the brethren as an expounder 
of the blessed gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
still it seems to be his will as nearly as I can discern it, 
and I dare not shirk. I prepare myself as well as I 
can and then when the meeting hour comes I endeavor 
to throw the responsibility all onto the Lord, just turn 
myself, the meeting and all right into his hands, strive 
to forget myself entirely and to think of the truth and 
that only. And the Lord seems signally to own and 
bless our meetings. I can surely say, because I can 
see it in the brethren and in myself, that we have made 
great gains in the past two years. Of course by God's 
blessing one of the greatest, I believe I should say the 
greatest, factor in our progress is the truth brought to 
us through the DAWNS and TOWERS. I do not believe 
they are more keenly appreciated anywhere than here; 
nothing so excites our interest as the TOWER. We read 
it together; we exchange impressions drawn from it; 
we refer to it in argument as the authority next to 
Sacred Writ, with which it seems to be invariably in 
harmony; we prove its editorials by references given 
and by others which occur to our minds. Do not think 
us unappreciative if we are not as frequent correspondents 
as others. 

We have pretty thoroughly canvassed Muskegon 
and adjacent country with evolution tracts but are 
planning to carry the work into nearby cities and to 
follow up with the new tract in the Spring. You will 
hear from us later. Meanwhile, with love, Yours, 
ELWIN C. SMITH,--Michigan. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I received the fifth volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN and have finished the first 
reading. I thank you for it very much, and cannot 
tell you how much good it has done me. The subject 
is one of very great importance, and the more it is studied 
and thought upon, the more every true Christian is 
desirous of becoming a copy of God's dear Son. I cannot 
tell what part interested me most. Some questions came 
to mind when I commenced it, but I found them all 
answered before I finished the book. The way is opening 
up wonderfully before me, and new truths are continually 
being unfolded. Surely the Lord's doings are 



wonderful in our eyes, but as we grow in grace and 
knowledge we find ourselves more and more separated 
from the world, and more and more running against its 
practices and opinions, like one pushing his way through 
a crowd, going in the opposite direction. How joyful 
is the thought that we are so near the time when restitution 
privileges are due to begin, when the vail will 
be taken away and the world come to understand the 
things that are now spiritually discerned! 

I have waited before writing this letter of thanks, 
to be able to send something more tangible than sentiment, 
but the needs here are so pressing and numerous 
that I cannot get beyond them, so thought I would 
wait no longer. Yours in Christ, 

MARTHA E. SHERMAN.-Illinois. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The truth grows more 
precious to me as the days go by. God only knows how 
I love it; words would fail to tell. At the last Memorial 
Supper my prayer was that I might grow in grace, 
knowledge and love from that time on, and the dear 
Lord has surely answered my prayer, but I want to 
keep on growing. I have been tried and tested more 
than ever in the last year, but with the dear Lord's 
help, not in my own strength, I am still in the "narrow 
way." And how I have enjoyed the fifth volume 
of DAWN! It has made so many things clearer to me, 

page 64 

especially the witness of the spirit. And as I study and 
learn more of God's truth I love him the more. Thank 
God for the Truth! May he still bless and keep you 
faithful to the end! 
Your sister in our dear Redeemer, 

MRS. MARY KITCHEN.-California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thought I would drop 
you a line to thank you for the welcome semi-monthly 
visits of the TOWER. The assistance and light they shed 
on our pathway are beyond price, and if the matter is 
sometimes familiar it serves to refresh our memories 
and deepen the impressions on our minds. My last 
trip to New York was a pleasant one. There was a 
good attendance, a strong interest and a most beautiful 
spirit manifested by all present. The questions were 
continued as late as would allow me to catch my train 
and were clearly those prompted by a desire to be instructed 
and helped along the lines of truth in the spirit 
of meekness. Your own visit left a deep and good impression. 
They referred to it again and again with a 
warmth of look and voice that evinced their appreciation 



of the sacrifice you had made. I feel that the movement 
for a New York meeting is a good one and likely 
to produce permanent results. 

The spiritual health of the Church here is good, so 
far as imperfect beings may be able to judge, and I 
trust that such is the case with those of the body in 
Allegheny. Sister Walker and the children unite with 
me in love to you and all those associated with you in 
the TOWER work. 

Yours in Christ, SMITH WALKER,-Philadelphia. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am thankful to be 
able to fully endorse Sr. Owen's report of increased 
interest and zeal of the church here. The letters from 
the Washington and Boston Churches "stirred them 
up," as nothing else has stirred them for a good long 
time. So when you have any other good news to 
publish concerning what others are doing please send 
it along. It is very helpful. 

You cannot realize how the "scattered members," 
relish the bits of news that appear in the TOWER from 
time to time. We had so many out to meeting Sunday 
morning that our large sitting room would hardly 
hold them. We are thinking of renting a hall. 

Bro. Hall has been advocating the matter for 
some time, and is quite anxious that we make a more 
aggressive move "all along the line." My throat has 
regained its usual strength, and I am able again to 
conduct the Sunday services. We are having the best 
prayer meetings we have had for a good long time. 
At last meeting there were 16 present,— a very good 
turn out for our little company, some of whom for 
business and other reasons cannot get out after night. 

As ever, yours in our dear Redeemer and King, 
C. A. OWEN,-Indiana. 



R2584 : page 64 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Enclosed find order for 
L. 5— being L.2 10s. expenses incurred by bringing Bro. 
Houston to our October conference, which he handed 
back to us as a donation to the Tract Fund, to help defray 
the cost of "Bible vs. Evolution." The remainder 
is from the Church in Glasgow. 

Sister Ferrie will tell you about our method of 
carrying out the Volunteer movement. Up to date we 
have given the books at 73 churches, and have distributed 
10,093 copies, being an average of about 138. 
We have been greatly surprised at the smallness of the 
congregations. We distribute only at the forenoon service, 
which in most cases has the smallest attendance, 
but it invariably includes the more earnest portion of 



the congregation, and we are of the opinion that by this 

method the ripe wheat will be reached. There have 

been a few inquiries for further literature, from whom 

we hope to hear again. We have suffered no other annoyance 

than an occasional refusal to accept the booklet. 

All the brothers and sisters who are able take part 
in the work, and some occasionally travel a considerable 
distance in order to enjoy this privilege. A few of us 
meet in the morning for a season of prayer before going 
out, and have found it most refreshing and helpful. 

We note with pleasure your promise of another 
pamphlet for distribution at the churches which have 
received the one on Evolution. The Church here feel 
very grateful for what you have given us, and deplore 
their inability to take a larger share in the financial responsibility. 
We are deeply interested in the work and 
are willing to do anything in our power to lessen your 
burdens. 

Assuring you of the continued affection of all the 
members of our little company, and their high appreciation 
of your noble work, I am 

Yours in the one hope, ALEX. TAIT,— Scotland. 

[The "Volunteer" work in Great Britain naturally 
commenced later than here, but we are glad to note 
that it progresses splendidly. Ours is a campaign of 
blood— "the blood of the cross," and is far more worthy 
of time, energy, treasure and our life-blood than any 
other known in the world. Courage! dear fellowsoldiers. 
Steady! the eye of our Captain is for victory only by 
"laying down our lives for the brethren" as he set us 
an example. We regret that we are out of our error-destroying 
and new-hope and new-life-infusing ammunition. 
"Good Hopes" for this year justify us in beginning 
the work for this year liberally and paper mill 
already has our order for forty-six tons of paper for 
"Volunteer" work for immediate delivery. We hope to 
be able to begin filling orders about April 1.— EDITOR.] 



R2585 : page 64 
TEXAS AGRICULTURAL FRIENDS TAKE NOTICE. 



A Brother in the Truth in the Nursery business at Post Oak, 
Texas, finds himself financially embarrassed and asks our aid in 
disposing of his large stock of fruit trees which he describes as 
of excellent quality one and two years old and 4 to 6 feet high. 
He has a descriptive catalogue which we will forward to all interested. 
He says the prices are right. He offers the Tract Fund 
one half the receipts from this forced sale: but as we do no 
advertising we turn this advantage over to the friends, who can 
thus secure good trees for Texas climate at HALF PRICE: packed 



free and delivered at Express Office. No orders received for 
less than $2. Drop postal card for free catalogue to us. 

The catalogue at hand besides the fruit trees includes grape 
and other vines and shade and ornamental trees. The prices 
seem reasonable and the goods at half price should be a bargain. 

This notice is quite a digression from our rule. 



page 65 
VOL. XXI. MARCH 1, 1900. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



"Mark the Perfect Man!" 67 

The Qualifications Necessary for 
Attaining the Kingdom 67 

"Without Holiness No Man 

Shall See the Lord" 70 

The Royal Law— The Golden Rule 73 

Tying Grape Clusters to Thorns 74 

The Memorial Supper 76 

"Jesus Said unto Him, Follow Me" 77 

The Consecrated Home Honored 77 

Fasting Typical and Antitypical 79 

Interesting Letters 80 

Items: Watch Tower Address Tags 68 

Re-enlisted Volunteers! To Arms! 68 

Watch Tower Index from 1895-1899 68 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



WATCH TOWER ADDRESS TAGS. 



We are adopting a new method of addressing TOWER wrappers, 
omitting the date of expiration of subscription which few 
seem to notice. Hereafter all subscriptions will be acknowledged 
by card or letter and a notice of expiration will be printed plainly 
on the wrapper. 

R2585 : page 66 



RE -ENLISTED VOLUNTEERS! TO ARMS! 



The new lot of "Bible vs. Evolution" ammunition is not yet 
ready, but by March 15 to April 1 we will have plenty of the new 
ammunition for use where the Bible vs. Evolution has already 
been distributed. You will like it, we assure you this in advance. 
It will consist of "Which is the True Gospel?" and 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" in the shape of a double 
number of the WATCH TOWER. Get your several squads together 
and let us have your orders stating (1) the number of white 
Protestant churches in the district; (2) the average attendance 
at service which the church members chiefly attend; (3) the 
number of Volunteers in your squad; (4) to what address would 
you prefer to have the ammunition sent. 

page 66 

WATCH TOWER INDEX FROM 1895 TO 1899. 



Inset in this issue is an index to Bible references which will 
be found very helpful in study. It can be touched with paste 
and set into your Bible among the Helps. It is the preparation 
of two dear sisters at Los Angeles who do not care to have their 
names mentioned. They have had pleasure in thus serving the 
Lord and his "brethren." 



R2585 : page 67 

"MARK THE PERFECT MAN! BEHOLD THE UPRIGHT!" 

--MATT. 4:25-5: 12.-APRIL l.~ 

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." 

WHAT characteristics are essential to our 
attainment of the most blessed conditions 
God has to bestow? What must we be 
in order to inherit the Kingdom, be filled with 
righteousness, obtain divine mercy and everlasting 
comfort, be called the sons of God, and be permitted 
to see his face, obtaining a great reward in heaven? 
What question, what topic, what Bible lesson, could 
be more interesting to us or a more profitable study 
than this one? The great Teacher made it the topic, 
the text, of one of his principal discourses at his first 
advent, and caused the gist of his argument to be 
recorded for the admonition of his true followers 
throughout this Gospel age. 
While the character of our Lord, which we as 



his followers are to copy, is one; and the attainment 

of that one character or disposition means the attainment 

of all the blessings God has to bestow; nevertheless, 

in order to present the matter the more distinctly 

to our minds the Lord divides this one character 

or disposition into different sections, giving us 

a view of each particular part; just as a photographer 

would take a front view, right-side view, left-side view, 

rear view and angling views, of any interesting subject, 

so that all the details of construction might be 

clearly discernible. 

THE FIRST ESSENTIAL. 



The first character-picture which our Lord presents 
we may reasonably assume was in some respects 
at least most important: It is Humility. "Blessed 
are the humble-minded (poor in spirit) for theirs is 
the Kingdom of heaven." We do not understand 
this to signify that humility is the only essential grace, 
and that whoever is humble will therefore attain the 
Kingdom; but rather that to the attainment of the 
Kingdom humility is a prerequisite of first importance. 
In other words, while all humble people will not attain 
the Kingdom, the Kingdom cannot be attained by 
anyone who is not humble: the Kingdom is theirs, 
in the sense that it is possible for this class to accept 
the terms and to attain to the honors and blessings, 
while all of a different attitude of mind— the proud, 
the haughty, the self-conceited, are absolutely debarred 
from any possibility of attaining the Kingdom so long 
as these contrary conditions lie at the foundation of 
their characters. 

O that all of the Lord's people might see this 
point clearly and distinctly, and realize once and forever 
that "The Lord resisteth the proud and showeth 
his favors to the humble" exclusively! How this 
thought should put a guard upon every one of the 
Lord's little ones who is seeking to be conformed 
to the image of God's dear Son. How jealously 
they would watch and foster the development of this 
spirit of humility in their own hearts, and how it 
would be more and more discernible to others in 
their daily course of life, and what a blessing and 
what an influence for good, especially upon the "brethren," 
would result! 

Growing out of this first essential quality or characteristic, 
as a tree of many branches out of the root, 
come the other graces of the spirit, which the Lord 
has declared blessed— divinely approved. How different 
our Lord's teachings in this respect from all 
human teachings! Earthly wisdom would say, on 
the contrary: Hold up your head; think well of yourself, 
if you would have other people think well of you; 



be high-spirited, instead of poor in spirit, a little 
haughty, rather than of humble demeanor; it will have 
a greater influence in many respects, for no one will 
think more highly of you than you think of yourself, 
nor give you credit for more than you claim; hence, 
think highly of yourself, and claim much, carrying a 
high head, and having a lofty and self-important look. 

No doubt there is worldly wisdom in the worldly 
counsel; no doubt there is some truth in the worldly 
suggestion, so far as success in earthly matters in the 
present time is concerned. But here as in other instances, 
the Lord shows us that his ways are not as 
man's ways, but higher, as the heavens are higher 

R2585 : page 68 

than the earth. He assures us that he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted in due time, while he who exalts 
himself shall be brought low, in due time. (Matt. 23:12.) 
In the Scriptures he points us to our dear 
Redeemer as the illustration of the humble and obedient 
one, whom he has now exalted to the right hand 
of divine power; and our attention is also called to 
the great Adversary, who, taking a reverse course, 
sought to exalt himself, and has been abased, and is 
ultimately to be destroyed.-Phil. 2:9; Heb. 2:14. 

A sharp distinction should be noted between being 
poor in spirit and being poor in pocket, or in intellectual 
gifts and attainments. We have all seen 
people who were poor in these earthly senses, yet 
proud in spirit. The point to be noticed is that 
whatever our financial or intellectual gifts and conditions, 
the thing acceptable in the divine sight is humility 
of spirit. Such a disposition is essential to 
those who would receive the wisdom which cometh 
from above— they must have a humble appreciation 
of their own deficiencies and lack of wisdom, else they 
cannot receive freely, heartily, the wisdom which God 
is pleased to grant in the present time, only to those 
who are in the attitude of heart to receive it. And 
it will be seen also that this humility of mind is essential 
as a basis for the spirit of a sound mind— for 
who is in a proper condition to think justly, reasonably, 
impartially, except first of all he have a humble 
disposition? Hence we must agree that humility is 
a primary element in the disposition or mind of Christ. 

CONSOLATIONS THE REWARD OF SYMPATHY. 



The second beatitude or blessed condition mentioned 
by our Lord stands closely related to the first 
—"Blessed are they that mourn." Mourning of itself 
is not a grace, but it betokens an attitude of mind 
which is acceptable in the Lord's sight. Nor should 



we think of a mournful spirit, without consolation 
or joys, as being a Christian spirit. We cannot suppose 
that our Heavenly Father and the holy angels 
are continual mourners, as they would certainly be 
if mourning possessed any merit of itself. The 
thought rather is, Blessed are ye that mourn now— 
to whom present earthly conditions are not entirely 
satisfactory and happifying— who are not blind to the 
difficulties and trials through which the human family 
as a whole is passing— sin and sickness, pain and 
trouble, dying and crying: blessed are those who have 
sympathy of heart under present conditions, and to 
whom they are not satisfactory; for the time is coming 
when, under God's providence, a better order of 
things shall be instituted, and their dissatisfaction with 
present conditions will but bring them into closer 
sympathy and fellowship with those better things for 
which the divine plan is preparing. When God's 
Kingdom shall come and his will be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven, all cause for mourning and 
for sorrow and for tears will be done away: that will 
be a time for consolation, for satisfaction, to this class. 

Indeed, a good measure of comfort comes to the 
Lord's people even in the present age— through faith 
built upon the exceeding great and precious promises 

R2586 : page 68 

of the divine Word. The fact that they are able to 

discern the wrongs, the inequities, the distresses of 

the present time, creates in this class that very condition 

of heart to which divine promises appeal, whereas 

others not so touched at heart with sympathy for 

the groaning creation, are unable to so thoroughly appreciate 

the hopes set before us in the gospel. Hence 

it is by a natural law that such are drawn to the Lord's 

Word, and are enabled to draw therefrom consolation 

which speaks peace to their hearts, and gives them 

an inner joy which the less sympathetic cannot know 

under present conditions. Blessed are the 

sympathetic! 

As we can cultivate the first of these graces, 
humility of mind, and by cultivation develop more 
and more of this first and essential characteristic, so 
we can cultivate also the second grace, the sympathetic 
spirit. To do this we should frequently think of 
others— their interests, their trials, their difficulties, 
and should seek to enter into these as tho they were 
all our own, and should seek to lend a helping hand 
and to "do good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith."— Gal. 6:10. 

HOW THE GENTLE INHERIT. 



The third of these graces which the Lord declares 
blessed is Meekness, or, as we should say, Gentleness. 
Webster's Dictionary defines meekness to be, "Submission 
to the divine will; patience and gentleness 
from moral and religious motives." It will be perceived 
that there is quite a difference between this 
patient, gentle submission to the divine will, and the 
ordinary gentleness and patience which may frequently 
be exercised simply for the gratification of selfish 
desires. Patient submission to the divine will is impossible 
to those who have not the first grace in the 
list, a humble mind: the proud and self-willed find 
it impossible to be submissive to divine conditions; 
self rises up, perverts their judgments, and misleads 
their consciences to such an extent that they cannot 
have full confidence in divine providence, but feel that 
they must put forth their hand and steady the ark. 

Moreover, patient submission can be developed 
only in those who mourn, in the sense of having 
large sympathies, and who have been comforted by 
the blessed promises of God, through which the holy 
spirit comforteth his people. Realizing the evils 
of our time, and that they are permitted of God for 
the present for a wise purpose, these not only sympathize 
with the groaning creation, but this sympathy 
and the comfort received as its reward tend to make 
them patient, submissive to the divine will. Remembering 
that all things are working together for 
good to them that love God, they are prepared to 
recognize divine providence in whatever may befall 
them, and prepared also to look for the lessons of 
those providences, as blessings which will be helpful 
to them and to others, in preparing for the future and 
eternal joys. 

This third grace— patient submission to the divine 
will— which can be noted by those with whom we 
come in contact, might be said to be the outer manifestation 
of the second grace, which is inward, of the 
heart, and which might not be outwardly discerned 

R2586 : page 69 

by our fellow-creatures. The grace of sympathy 

manifests itself in our patient submissiveness in all 

the affairs of life, realizing that to those who are in 

Christ all matters are under divine supervision, and 

this patience in respect to God's providences in our 

own circumstances and affairs leads also naturally and 

properly to patience with others in their weaknesses 

and failures and ignorance, and leads properly to helpfulness 

toward them as we have opportunity. 

These "meek," patiently submissive to the divine 
will, shall inherit the earth. The Lord did not mean, 
nor is it true, that the patient and submissive to the 
divine will inherit the earth at the present time: quite 
to the contrary, the arrogant, the impatient, the aggressive, 



the selfish, succeed in grasping the chief 
things of power, of influence and of wealth now; and 
the patiently submissive have comparatively a poor 
chance. The reward of this grace, therefore, like the 
others, is future: following on under the divine leading, 
these shall be heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ; and the earth is a part of that great inheritance, 
which in turn, by divine arrangement, they shall bestow 
at the close of the Millennial age, upon the 
world of mankind who then survive— those proved 
worthy of eternal life by the Millennial tests. 

Nevertheless, as there is a sense in which the 
Lord's people are comforted now, so there is also a 
sense in which they now inherit the earth— a figurative 
sense, by faith. The Apostle speaks of this when he 
says, "All things are yours— things present or things 
to come." (1 Cor. 3:21-23.) Those who have the 
proper humble attitude of mind and are patiently submissive 
to the divine will, get more of blessing out of 
the things of the present time than do their actual 
owners, because their hearts are in the attitude in 
which it is possible to receive blessing. The world, 
full of selfish craving, is never satisfied, never contented; 
the child of God, patiently submissive to the 
divine will, is always satisfied— 

"Content whatever lot I see, 

Since 'tis God's hand that leadeth me." 

FILLED WITH RIGHTEOUSNESS. 



The fourth blessing is that of Hunger and Thirst 
after Righteousness. No one can have this hunger 
and thirst unless he previously have to a considerable 
extent the previous characteristics. If he have not 
humility of mind he will be satisfied with his attainments 
of righteousness, being unable to see beyond 
his own low plane, unable to discern the heights and 
grandeurs of the divine perfection. He cannot 
hunger and thirst after that which he does not in some 
measure comprehend. Unless he have the spirit of 
sympathy, which discerns the wrongs, the inequities 
of our present time (which in great measure mankind 
is unable to counteract and overcome— by which 
some of the human family, very deficient in the virtues, 
have an overplus of wealth and influence and authority, 
while some possessing superior virtues have 
scarcely the necessities of life) he cannot yearn for 
the better condition of things which the Scriptures 
declare can only be introduced by the establishment 
of Messiah's Millennial Kingdom. It is a blessed 
indication then, if we find in our hearts a hungering 
and a thirsting for justice, for righteousness, for truth 
—an antipathy to untruth in every form, and to all 
injustice, in-equity— an antipathy, nevertheless, modified, 



influenced, controlled, by the third grace of this 
list, viz., by patient submission to the divine will. The 
control of this last quality is what the Apostle refers 
to when he says, "Let your moderation be known 
unto all men." It is this quality which stepping in 
hinders our hunger and thirst after righteousness, and 
our zeal for it, (both as respects truth and practice) 
from making us anarchistic or extremists in any sense 
of the word. This quality of hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, uncontrolled by the other of these 
graces of the spirit, has led many worldly people, as 
reformers, into wild excesses: whereas the child of God 
altho having this same hunger and thirst in a larger 
degree than others, yet, under the control of the spirit 
of a sound mind, instructed from the Lord's Word, 
rests in his promises and waits for their fulfillment, 
patiently submissive, and assured of the victory of 
righteousness in God's due time, which he adopts as 
his time also. 

Those who have and cultivate this blessed hunger 
and thirst shall be satisfied, abundantly satisfied, by 
and by, when God's Kingdom shall be established, and 
when as a result of its reign all evil and all sin, all 
in-equities (iniquities) shall be suppressed, and God's 
holy will shall "be done on earth even as it is done 
in heaven." Our hunger and thirst after righteousness 
is not to be destroyed, but, as our Lord promised, 
it is to be satisfied. The appetite for truth and righteousness 
will still be there, but the prevalence of truth 
and righteousness shall be its satisfaction. 

In this grace, as in the others, there is a sense 
in which by faith we already attain some measure of 
the fulfillment to come— altho it is but a foretaste. 
Those who have the hunger and thirst for righteousness, 
in line with the other graces of the spirit, find 
in the gracious promises of the Lord that comfort and 
consolation which already, even in this present life, 
can be assimilated by faith, and which proves to be 
"meat in due season for the household of faith," sustaining, 
strengthening, resting, and at least partially 
satisfying the hunger and the thirst, as they realize 
the divine provision for everlasting righteousness is 
exceeding and abundant, more than all that they 
could have thought or have requested. 

HOW TO OBTAIN MERCY. 



The fifth blessed condition is that of Mercifulness. 
Mercy is the outward expression that man can discern, 
resulting from an appreciation of righteousness 
and a hunger and thirst for it in the renewed heart. 
After we have taken the preceding steps, and have 
learned to appreciate the inequities of the present time, 
and our own imperfections (unrighteousness) and 



those of other men; and after we have learned that 
God alone is able to right these matters in the full 
and complete sense, and that he has made provision 
for the righting of every wrong, and for the restoration 
to his favor of all who will accept his grace in 
Christ, to be made known to all in due time— it is 
then we begin to feel merciful, benevolent, kind, toward 

R2587 : page 70 

others, to an extent and degree that we could 
not feel these sentiments previously. Worldly people, 
who have not traveled on the pathway marked by these 
blessings of character and growths in grace, cannot 
to the same degree sympathize with nor feel merciful 
toward others. 

The Lord lays great stress upon this quality of 
mercy, declaring that whatever else may be our attainments 
of knowledge or of grace, if we have not 
this one we can never be acceptable to him— if we do 
not have mercy upon others neither will our Heavenly 
Father have mercy upon us. And to insure that we 
do not consider this mercy to be merely an outward 
form, an expression of forgiveness and benevolence, 
our Lord expounds the matter, saying, "If ye do not 
from the heart forgive one another, neither will your 
Heavenly Father forgive you." It must be a genuine 
mercy, and not a feigned one; it must cover from 
sight, and so far as possible blot from memory, the 
failings and weaknesses of others, else it cannot hope 
for forgiveness and blotting out of its own shortcomings 
which its hunger and thirst for righteousness 
has clearly revealed to it. Only the merciful shall obtain 
mercy: and if we have not mercy at the hands 
of the Lord all is lost; for by nature we were children 
of wrath, even as others, and under just 
condemnation. 

The exercise of mercy, benevolence, forgiveness, 
is a blessing, not merely because it is essential 
to our own forgiveness, and hence to our salvation, 
but also because this condition of heart which 
sympathizes with others in their failures and imperfections 
helps to rid our hearts of certain of the works of 
the flesh and of the devil, which incline to cling to 
the Lord's people long after they have been justified 
by faith, and even after they have made full consecration 
of themselves to the Lord and are seeking to 
"walk, not after the flesh, but after the spirit." 

The Apostle includes amongst the works of the 
flesh which require putting away, after we are fully 
the Lord's, the following— anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife. All of these qualities of selfishness are antagonized 
by mercy, and by it largely they are driven 
from their secret hidings and entrenched positions in 
our hearts. The blessed character of Mercy is closely 
related to Love, for it is in proportion as we obtain 



the Lord's spirit of love that we manifest toward others 
mercy, even as he has manifested his love toward us 
in the mercy extended to us in Christ. Love and 
mercy, consideration for others, has much to do with 
driving out envy. How can we envy those whom 
we love sincerely? How can we have malice toward 
those who are our enemies, if we love them and have 
mercy, compassion, upon them, and forgive them from 
our hearts? How can we have hatred toward them, 
if we have mercy upon them, and feel toward them 
only a forgiving spirit? And how can we be strifeful, 
if we have a merciful, a forgiving spirit ready to 
forgive trespasses against us, as we hope for forgiveness 
of our trespasses against the divine law? 

"Mercy rejoiceth against justice," the Apostle explains. 
(Jas. 2:13.) Divine Mercy satisfied divine Justice, 
and thus prepared the way for the rescue of our 
race from the sentence of Justice: and so those who 
have become partakers of the divine spirit, and in 
whom it has reached a reasonable development, will 
permit their mercy to triumph over their conceptions 
of justice (for they have no law of justice over their 
fellows which needs to be satisfied). 

While justice may not be blind in the Lord's people, 
while they may discern the faults of others most 
clearly, and while they may seek to let justice rule in 
respect to all of their own words, and thoughts, and 
actions, nevertheless they are to let mercy triumph 
in their hearts over justice as respects those who trespass 
against them, and they are not to hold resentments 
against those who have done them injury, nor 
to seek to avenge themselves and to inflict justice upon 
their opponents. Rather, they are to say, It is for 
God to be just; it is for me, who am a transgressor 
also against perfect justice, through the weaknesses 
which I have inherited, to have compassion upon my 
fellow-creature, who has inherited similar yet different 
weaknesses: it is for me to exercise accordingly the 
divine command, the blessed characteristic of mercy, 
compassion, forgiveness. And those who do so not 
only get rid of the evil works and sentiments of the 
world, the flesh and the devil, but increasingly become 
filled more and more with the spirit of love 
and gentleness and patient submission to the divine 
will, and thus the merciful are blessed even in the 
present time. 

"WITHOUT HOLINESS NO MAN SHALL SEE THE LORD. 



The sixth step of blessedness is Purity of Heart 
—purity of motive, purity of intention, purity of effort, 
purity of will: purity, in the sense of sincerity, of 
transparency, of truthfulness. In other words, Blessed 
are the honest-hearted, those who have absolutely 



right intentions. True, there are worldly people who 
to some extent might claim honesty of heart, purpose, 
intention, but until they have come along the 
way of divine appointment in Christ, until they have 
become his followers through faith and consecration 
to him, and until they have taken the preceding steps 
of blessedness, we could not recognize them as being 
of the class here specified. 

Many have misunderstood this statement, "pure 
in heart," and have thought of it as signifying absolute 
perfection— not only outward but inward; not only 
of words and of deeds, but also of thoughts. This 
view of the matter has tended to discourage some who 
honestly said to themselves, I am not perfect in deed 
nor in word nor in thought; how then can I claim to 
be blessed under this provision as one of the pure in 
heart? We answer that this is a misconception. The 
Lord knows as well and better than we do, that in our 
flesh dwells no perfection; that by reason of the fall 
all of Adam's children have their teeth set on edge by 
the sour grape of sin, so that sometimes we cannot 
do the things that we would do, and through ignorance 
we no doubt frequently leave undone the things which 
we ought to do.-Jer. 31:29,30; Rom. 7:16-18. 

The Lord taught a great lesson during the Jewish 
age by the giving of the Law to that people, with 
a promise of life attached to it, but the Apostle assures 
us that God foreknew, even when he gave that 

R2587 : page 71 

Law to the Israelites, that "by the deeds of the Law 

should no flesh be justified in his sight"— that on the 

contrary the clearer the Law would be discerned the 

more clear would be the knowledge of sin— of imperfection. 

God's provision in Christ is that he will 

forgive those imperfections which are due, not to personal 

wilfulness, but to the original sin, and the weaknesses 

and imperfections which have resulted from it 

—he will extend his mercy toward us as respects those 

deflections which are not wilful. That our Lord 

Jesus was not ignoring human imperfection is evident 

from the statement he makes in reference to the fifth 

of these blessed characteristics, viz., that the merciful 

"shall obtain mercy"— an implication of our need of 

mercy. Having assured us that we may obtain mercy, 

he is not in this sixth Beatitude declaring that we must 

be absolutely perfect in thought, word and deed; for 

if we were so, or could attain to such a condition, it 

would be wholly unnecessary for God to provide us 

mercy and forgiveness of sins through Christ's 

sacrifice. 

The thought of "pure in heart" is not perfection 
of conduct nor of word, nor of thought, but perfection 
of intention as respects all of these. Our desire 
and effort must be for perfection— in thought, word 



and deed. The standard before us, to which our 
hearts, our wills, must give assent, is the divine standard, 
"Be ye perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect." 
(Matt. 5:48.) God has set no lower standard 
than this absolute perfection, but he has provided for 
us grace, mercy and peace through Christ, if we will 
walk in his footsteps,— this purity of heart being one 
of the essential steps in the narrow way. 

Only the pure in heart have the promise of seeing 
God. They continue faithfully to the end of the pilgrimage, 
not only attaining the likeness of the Lord 
Jesus Christ in the present life (Rom. 8:29) in their 
purity of heart, purity of intention, sincerity of their 
efforts toward God and men, but eventually according 
to the Lord's promise, they shall, by the power of the 
first resurrection, be changed from earthly to heavenly, 
spiritual conditions. Then, as the Apostle declares, 
"we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is." 
And when we have thus become changed to be like 
the glorious Son of God, who is "the express image 
of the Father's person," we shall be able also unquestionably 
to see the Heavenly Father himself, and shall 
be introduced to him by our dear Redeemer— "complete 
in him," "without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. "-1 John 3:2; Heb. 1:3; Eph. 5:27; Col. 2:10. 

In this, as in the other blessings, a portion, a foretaste, 
comes in the present life. There is such a thing 
as having the eyes of our understanding opened, that 
we may be enabled to "comprehend with all saints 
what is the breadth and length and height and depth, 
and to know the love of Christ." (Eph. 3:18.) But 
not all have this opening of the mental eye; not all are 
privileged to see the glories of Jehovah's character in 
symmetrical harmony, divine justice, wisdom, love and 
power coordinated and cooperating in unison for the 
blessing of every creature, according to the purpose 
which God purposed in himself before the world was. 

But who may enjoy this blessing, this clearer vision, 
and who may, by seeing it, be enabled more and 
more to grow in likeness of that glorious perfection? 
Only "the pure in heart," only the sincere, the honest-hearted. 
Those who have a double mind, a double 
will, are Scripturally said to have a double vision, a 
double eye. They see spiritual things cross-eyed, see 
things double, and proportionately indistinctly. Many 
of God's people have failed thus far to grow up into 
Christ in all things, see thus doubly and confusedly— 
they see something of the heavenly things, and something 
of the earthly; they see but dimly and indistinctly 
the lines of the divine character, and proportionately 
they lack ability to copy it. Let all who have named 
the name of Christ seek more and more to have but 

R2588 : page 71 

the one Master, and an eye single to his glory and 



service— a pure, a sincere, a faithful heart. 

THE SONS OF GOD ALL PEACEMAKERS. 



The seventh Beatitude is an outward manifestation 
of the sixth. The purity of heart toward God, 
which others cannot discern, will manifest itself in this 
seventh characteristic of blessedness and growth— 
namely, in peaceable desires and efforts to promote 
peace in others. For beyond question no one will 
be a peacemaker from this divine standpoint unless he 
have already become sincere, pure in heart toward 
God; and unless he have also the preceding developments 
of grace in his heart: (1) humility, (2) sympathy, 
(3) patient submission, (4) hunger and thirst 
for righteousness (which includes trust), (5) a love 
or mercifulness toward others, (6) sincerity of heart. 
And one who has developed these characteristics to 
any particular degree can surely be nothing else than 
peaceably disposed himself, and a peacemaker with 
others. 

Very evidently but a small number of the Lord's 
people have progressed so far as to have this grace 
markedly developed and exemplified in their lives. 
The great majority, even of those who have named 
the name of Christ, seem to pursue a reverse course, 
which indicates that even if their hearts are pure and 
their sympathies large, they have still much to learn 
in the school of Christ; for instead of being peace promoters 
they are strife promoters. Yet this is not of 
evil intent, but rather of habit, and of ignorance and 
of failure to discern the wide difference between the 
divine course of love, and the opposite course of 
selfishness which prevails in the world. Strife-making 
is chiefly stirred up with the tongue, tho it may be 
aroused by a gesture or by a glance. Likewise, 
peacemaking is chiefly done with the tongue, tho it 
also may operate through the eye. How many Christian 
people we all know who have tongues which are 
continually stirring up strife! The Adversary controls 
many in this manner long after they have escaped 
from his control in many other respects; and this is 
largely because they do not detect that in this they 
are doing Satan service— do not even detect that they 
are stirrers up of strife, hatred, envy, malice, and 
planters of roots of bitterness by which many are 
defiled. 

When will Christians learn the length and breadth 
and depth of the injunctions "Speak evil of no man," 
and "Let no corrupt communication proceed out of 

R2588 : page 72 

your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying?" 



(Titus 3:2; Eph. 4:29.) How long will it take 
some of God's true children to learn that in uttering an 
evil thing (even if they were positive of its truth), they 
may be doing a world of evil? How long will it take 
them to learn that it is not always necessary to speak 
the truth, nor ever proper to do so except when it 
would be for the edifying of others? How many lessons, 
line upon line, must they have to convince them 
that they are not only to avoid gossip about other people's 
business, and fault-finding, and cynicism, but that 
all these are evidences of their deficiency in love— of 
their deficiency in the likeness of Christ, and their lack 
of the qualities of the peacemaker; and that these lacks 
need to be striven against earnestly, if they would make 
their calling and election sure to a place in the heavenly 
kingdom? 

Oh, that all would learn by heart, and continually 
seek to exemplify in life, the words of the Apostle, 
"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and 
if there be any praise, think on these things." Those 
who are thinking on the true and lovely and good and 
beautiful things will speak to each other of the same; 
hence the importance of having our hearts filled with 
good things, in order that out of the abundance of the 
good things of our hearts our mouths may speak continually 
good things, that the Lord would approve, and 
that would minister blessing to those who hear.— Phil. 4:8; 
Luke 6:45. 

Such have a very precious promise, well worthy 
of their efforts— "They shall be called the children of 
God"— they have God's spirit, the likeness of his dear 
Son has been traced in their hearts; they have been 
sanctified with the truth; they shall ultimately be "meet 
for the inheritance of the saints in light." Only such at 
heart will the Lord ever recognize as his sons and 
joint-heirs with his great Son, our Lord, in the Kingdom. 
Moreover, this is a test which we may well recognize 
for ourselves particularly, and to some extent 
for each other, as evidencing the degree of our growth 
as children of God— our peaceable dispositions, and 
our carefulness to pursue such a course in life as will 
tend toward peace. 

Some of the Lord's people find in themselves naturally 
considerable of a spirit of combativeness, unfavorable 
to peace. Indeed, it requires something of the 
spirit of combativeness to fight a good fight against 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary, and to "contend 
earnestly for the faith"; so that those who have 
combativeness naturally find themselves in antagonism 
with others along some line continually. However, 
they should not be discouraged by this, but should remember 
that combativeness is a valuable servant and 
soldier, if turned and exercised in the right direction. 



Its exercise toward fellow creatures must be modified 
by mercy, by a realization of our own imperfections 
and the imperfections of all. Combativeness must be 
trained to fight along the lines of love and mercy— to 
fight for the truth and for all the servants and agencies 
of the truth, and against the error,— but not against the 
blinded and ignorant servants of the error. Combativeness 
must be given plenty to do in fighting 
against the imperfections and weaknesses of our own 
natures, and being thus busily engaged in this good 
work, it will find comparatively little time for assaulting 
others: and realizing the difficulties connected with 
the conquering of self it will have the greater compassion 
for the weaknesses of others. 

ATTAINING GREAT REWARD IN HEAVEN. 



The blessing that comes through persecution is 
the eighth Beatitude. It is not until the Lord's people 
have experienced some of these preceding blessings 
of His grace that they reach the point where they can 
"glory in tribulations also," as did the Apostle Paul. 
But our Lord carefully distinguishes as between different 
kinds of persecution, marking out the blessed kind 
as distinct from all other sorts. We are not to invite 
persecution by fault-finding and general cantankerousness 
and combative opposition to everybody and 
everything; nor are we to invite persecution by fanaticism. 
Rather, we are to cultivate the "spirit of a 
sound mind," and to learn gradually what the sound 
mind of the Lord is, as revealed in the Scriptures. 
Even then, no doubt we will be falsely accused by the 
world of "fanaticism," because the wisdom of God is 
oft esteemed foolishness with men, as often the wisdom 
of men is foolishness from the divine standpoint. 

Whenever a course of action would appear to be 
fanatical and unreasonable, we are to hesitate to do it 
until we have first made sure that we find the same 
spirit, teaching and example in our Lord and in the 
apostles: then we may safely follow, regardless of what 
the world may say or think respecting our course. For 
instance, from the divine standpoint it is insanity for 
a man to labor day and night to amass millions, for his 
children to fight over at his death; but from the human 
standpoint this is the reasonable course. From the 
divine standpoint it was wise for the apostles to spend 
their lives in the service of the truth, sacrificing earthly 
interests and prospects, name and fame, to obtain 
eventually a better resurrection, and eternal glory, 
honor and immortality; but this, from the world's 
standpoint was foolishness, fanaticism. 

If persecution come to us as a result of our following 
the Lord, and the apostles,— their teachings and 
example, and if it is because of our faithfulness to the 



vows of consecration to His service that all manner 
of evil is said against us, falsely, then indeed we may 
rejoice; for so were the prophets persecuted, so was 
our Lord persecuted, so were the apostles and all the 
faithful ones since persecuted. Being thus in good 
company in our experiences, it becomes a witness or 
testimony to us that we shall be in like good company 
in that day when the Lord shall make up his Jewels. 
All who have such experiences may well rejoice, 
and if, as the Lord's words intimate, the more of such 
experiences we have the more will be our reward in 
heaven, then the more we may rejoice in these experiences. 
And if we be without any such experiences 
it behooves us to look well to ourselves, lest peradventure 
it mean that we are not faithfully walking in 
the "narrow way" of self-sacrifice,— or are not doing 
with our might what our hands find to do, but are holding 

R2588 : page 73 

back our sacrifice. Should such be the reflection 
of any let him not be discouraged, but, in the language 
of the Prophet, let him "bind the sacrifice to the altar," 
with fresh cords of love and of zeal, praying the Lord 
to accept the sacrifice, and to furnish opportunities for 
being and doing and suffering for His cause, and for 
the Lord's and the truth's sake.— Psa. 118:27. 

The prismatic sum of all these graces is— Love; 
and those who have them are loveable and shall by and 
by be made gloriously lovely, with and like him who is 
"altogether lovely." Our call is to attain these blessed 
conditions in the Kingdom. 



R2589 : page 73 

THE ROYAL LAW-THE GOLDEN RULE. 

-MATT. 7:1-14. -APRIL 8.- 

"Whatsoever ye would that men should 
do to you, do ye even so to them." 

IN THIS lesson we have another leaf from our 

Lord's great Sermon on the Mount. This is 

not a sermon to sinners but to the Lord's consecrated 

people; and although there were multitudes 

within the hearing of our Lord's voice, all of whom 

belonged to the typically consecrated nation, yet our 

Lord addressed himself specially to his twelve chosen 

disciples, who were being particularly and fully instructed, 

that they, under the spirit dispensation soon 

to be inaugurated, might become the twelve foundations 

of the heavenly Kingdom, represented symbolically 

in the New Jerusalem of Revelation.— 



Rev. 21:14. 

True, many of the features of this Royal Law were 
then and still are sound advice for all who can receive 
them; but the fact remains that comparatively few 
are blessed with the opening of eyes and unstopping 
of ears to permit their appreciation of these holy pearls 
of truth; and assuredly they were addressed to and 
intended for only those who could receive them. 
Thank God for the good hope that ere long, the Kingdom 
being established, all the blind eyes shall be opened, 
all the deaf ears shall be unstopped, and that in 
God's "due time" these precepts of the Golden Rule 
of Love will be appreciated by all and be applicable 
to all— whether they respond to them or reject them. 

Following our Lord's example and injunction, we 
are endeavoring to set meat in due season, "things 
new and old," before the household of faith, the children 
of the Kingdom, and not before "dogs"— those 
who are still outside of divine favor, who have not 
yet received the grace of God and been adopted into 
his family and constituted sons. These precious 
truths are pearls of great price— of great value— to 
those who have the hearing ear and the understanding 
and appreciative heart— those who have been begotten 
of the spirit and are "new creatures in Christ Jesus," 
and seeking to live the new life. We do not attempt 
to present these matters to the brutish, the swinish, 
knowing that they would not appreciate them; but 
would merely feel a disappointment and resent our 
good intentions to our injury. Our Lord points this 
out later on in the discourse (verse 6), and his words 
are in full accord with those of Solomon, "Reprove 
not a scorner, lest he hate thee."— Prov. 9:7,8. 

It is to the household of faith, then, that the Lord 
says, "Judge not that ye be not judged." It is useless 
that we give this advice to others than the pupils in 
the school of Christ, for not having put themselves 
under the instruction of the great Teacher it gives 
evidence that his instructions are not appreciated by 
them. But all true disciples (learners, pupils) should 
give earnest heed to this injunction, and should understand 
that it contains a very important lesson, which 
unlearned will render them unready for the great examination, 
unready for graduation, unready for the 
Kingdom; because in their examination this will be 
one of the tests. If they have been fault-finding, cynical, 
hypercritical, etc., judging others harshly and 
uncharitably, it will be a clear token that they have 
not developed the spirit of Christ, the spirit of love, 
—which is full of kindness and consideration: hence 
such would be judged or condemned as unfit for the 
Kingdom, for according to our way of judging others 
we will be judged— since nothing else will better demonstrate 
our true spiritual condition,— the presence 
or absence of love. 

Whatever measure of mercy and generosity we 



mete out to others will be the measure of divine mercy 
that will be extended to us. If all the Lord's people 
could have well impressed upon their hearts this lesson 
from the great Teacher's lips, how wonderfully it 
would affect their attitude toward others, in thought 
as well as in deed; how generous, how forgiving, how 
sympathetic for the weaknesses of others they would 
become; how the spirit of love would grow in their 
hearts and manifest itself in their words and deeds ! 

RAFTERS IN THEIR EYES. 



Emphasizing this lesson, our Lord suggests that 
those who are always finding fault with the "brethren" 
who, like themselves, are seeking to walk in the narrow 
way— who can never see the noble efforts of the 
"brethren" to copy the Master, but are continually 
picking at them, are the very ones who have the greatest 
of faults in themselves,— lovelessness. The exaggeration 
of our Lord's words of reproof to this class 
seems to imply a vein of sarcasm, for literally he says, 
Why do you stare so at your fellow who is troubled 
with a grain of sawdust in his eye, while you have a 
whole rafter in your own eye? All the "brethren" are 
more or less troubled with difficulties of one kind or 
another, weaknesses of the flesh,— because all have 
the treasure of the new nature in imperfect earthen 
vessels— marred by original sin. "There is none 
righteous, no, not one" absolutely perfect. Yet the 
brethren whose hearts are full of love, even though 
they have sawdust in their eye of faith, or intellectual 
discernment or spiritual discernment, and perhaps also 
splinters in their hands, which affect all the deeds of 
life, and render their work imperfect, and tho many of 
them have splinters in their feet also, so that their walk 
is by no means perfect, as they would desire it to be- 
yet if they have the spirit of faith and of love and of 
sympathy, the spirit of Christ, they are his, and far 

R2589 : page 74 

more acceptable to him than any could possibly be 
who are devoid of the spirit of love and sympathy, 
and who therefore in this parable are represented as 
wholly perverted in their judgment of others, because 
possessing so little of the Lord's spirit and so much 
of the spirit of the Adversary— the great "accuser of 
the brethren." 

This loveless, fault-finding, brethren-accusing 
class the Lord denominates hypocrites. Why? Because 
in finding fault with others they are evidently 
wishing to give the inference that they are not afflicted 
with the same malady of sin themselves; they evidently 
wish to give the impression that they are holy, 



and since they know in their own hearts that this is 

untrue, and that they have many failings, many imperfections 

—therefore their course is hypocritical, 

false, deceptive, displeasing to God. Their claim that 

their fault-finding is prompted by love for the erring 

and a hatred of sin is deceptive and hypocritical as 

our Lord's words clearly show. Otherwise they 

would find plenty to do in hating and condemning 

and battling with their own sins and weaknesses;— 

casting out their own rafter of self-conceit and hypocrisy. 

The experiences thus gained would make them 

very tender and merciful and loving in their assistance 

of others. 

All of the "brethren" should carefully view this 
picture which our Lord portrayed, and should note 
well to see whether or not they have any of the evil 
disposition of heart— fault-finding, nagging, harsh 
criticism and denunciation— different degrees of the 
same fault. If they find any trace of such a "beam" of 
lovelessness and self-conceit in their spiritual eye, they 
should go at once to the great Physician and have it 
thoroughly eradicated, that they thus may speedily 
become gentle, sympathetic assistants to the "brethren," 
and be prepared as successful surgeons and physicians 
for the great work of the Millennial age— the 
kindly and sympathetic opening of the blind eyes of 
humanity and the healing of all the wounds of sin. 

TYING GRAPE CLUSTERS TO THORN BUSHES. 



But while we are not to judge our "brother," who 
with us professes to be endeavoring to walk in the 
footsteps of our Master, and who gives any evidences 
at all of sincerity in the matter, we nevertheless are to 
do a certain kind of judging as respects mankind in 
general. Elsewhere the Lord intimates that "by their 
fruits" we are to "know" grapevines from thorn-bushes, 
and figs from thistles. And in this sermon he intimates 
that we are to judge or discern as between the 
brethren and "dogs" and "swine"— the selfish, the sensual, 
who mind earthly things and who have never 
been begotten of the spirit of God. We may know 
these by outward evidences, for "If any man have not 
the spirit of Christ he is none of his;" and if he is none 
of his, not a branch of the Vine, we are not to waste 
our time in trying to tie onto him bunches of the fruits 
of the vine. We are not to attempt to deceive others 
or ourselves by helping to counterfeit the true holy 
spirit in the selfish, unregenerate world. We are not 
to expect that this class, whose appreciation is only 
for earthly things, to appreciate holy, heavenly things, 
any more than we would expect that dogs would appreciate 
the difference between meat from the butcher-shop 
and the holy, consecrated meat eaten only by 



the priesthood. We are not to expect that the swinish 
and groveling, who think only of money and the 
things of this life, would appreciate the pearls of truth 
which are so precious in the sight of the brethren, begotten 
of the spirit. 

This does not mean that we should never bring 
holy things to the attention of those who are not the 
Lord's consecrated people; but it does mean that a 
mere presentation of the first principles of righteousness 
and truth should quickly manifest to us those who 
have an ear for the truth, and those who have not,— 
that finding the hearing ear we might give diligence 
to serve it, and finding the ear closed we might cease 
to waste our time, knowing that the effort would be 
fruitless as respects the calling of this Gospel age— to 
saintship, to the divine nature, to joint-heirship in 
the Kingdom. The Millennial age will soon be ushered 
in, and that will be God's time for breaking the 
hard hearts, for opening the blind eyes, and unstopping 
the deaf ears. 

R2590 : page 74 

Indeed, in some respects the efforts which have 
been expended upon the "dogs" and the "swine"— 
the thorn-bushes and the thistles, endeavoring to tie 
to these various imitations of the fruits of the spirit of 
Christ, and to make the meat of the household palatable 
to them, have been positively injurious to the 
Lord's cause. The "brethren" have been neglected 
in the endeavor to feed the "dog" class; the making 
ready of the Bride for the Bridegroom, and adorning 
her with the pearls of truth, has been neglected in the 
endeavor to interest the "swine" in the pearls. The 
real value of the true vine, in producing good fruit, 
and the wide difference of nature between it and a 
bramble bush, has been greatly obscured by the appropriation 
of the vine's natural fruitage to the bramble. 
Let us not be wise above what is written; let 
us attend in the present time to the work which God 
has appointed for this age, and leave to his appointed 
time the general work for the world of mankind. 

HOW TO OVERCOME LOVELESS SELF-CONCEIT. 



Returning to the lessons which the "brethren" 
must learn, and possibly having specially in mind the 
correction of the tendency to judge one another, our 
Lord gives instructions how these wrong qualities 
may be eradicated. We are to ask of the Lord the 
needed measure of love and sympathy which will hinder 
us from judging others, and which will help us in 
correcting our own defects. If we ask sincerely, truly, 
we will receive his grace and help in this direction. 



And while asking, it is our duty to be seeking the 
things which we lack, the holy spirit of love to fill our 
hearts; and if we seek it we shall find it. We are to 
knock upon the Lord's store-house of grace and blessing 
by continued efforts, as well as prayer without 
ceasing, and as a result it will surely be opened to us. 
The asking, the seeking, the knocking, will all imply 
faith in the Lord, which will be pleasing in his sight, 
and it will also imply faithfulness on our part and a 
desire to be conformed fully to the Lord's will. And 
these good desires of our hearts shall be gratified, 
because, as an earthly parent would respond to his 

R2590 : page 75 

child's request for earthly food, so will the Lord respond 

and supply grace in every time of need to his 

children. He will not deceive us nor give us evil things, 

when we desire the good, but will do for us exceedingly 

abundantly more than we could ask or think; 

for is not our heavenly Father much better than any 

imperfect human father could possibly be? 

Luke's reference to this discourse (1 1:13) declares 
that the good thing that God will be pleased 
to give these asking, seeking, knocking ones, is his 
holy spirit. And this is exactly what is needed, as 
an offset to the unholy, unloving, selfish, judging and 
fault-finding spirit of the flesh, which must be cast out. 
The antidote for the poison is that we should be filled 
with the holy spirit, the spirit of love, for "love worketh 
no ill to his neighbor;" love "suffereth long and is 
kind;" love "is not puffed up" to see the faults of 
others and to be blind to its own; it "vaunteth not itself" 
to be a general critic, fault-finder and "accuser of 
the brethren." Love is sympathetic, helpful, the spirit 
of God.-l Cor. 13:4; Rom. 13:10. 

"WORKING IN YOU THAT WHICH IS WELLPLEASING IN 
HIS SIGHT."-HEB. 13:21. 

"Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that 
men should do unto you, do ye even so to them." The 
word "therefore" shows the connection between this 
and the preceding features of the lesson: it signifies 
that this will be a test or rule by which we may discern 
when and to what extent we are misjudging the 
motives of others, and officiously endeavoring to perform 
the very delicate operation of removing their 
splinters. This verse is therefore known as the "Golden 
Rule,"— the rule which God would have his people 
use in respect to all the affairs of life— especially in 
their relationship and dealings with the "brethren." 
When disposed to find a fault, or pick a flaw, when disposed 
to condemn another or to criticize another's 
faults, or to hold him up to odium, we can generally 
know of the propriety or impropriety of so doing or 



thinking by asking ourselves the question: Would 

I wish the brother to do, to say or to think thus respecting 

me, if I were he and he were I? 

This rule, closely followed, will very generally 
be a guide, and yet we have known instances in which 
the Lord's people seemed so anxious for an excuse for 
slander, for evil speaking, for gossip, that they found 
some kind of a way of excusing themselves for the 
violation of the Golden Rule, even when they remembered 
it and at heart wished to obey it. Let us be 
very careful, dear brethren, how we handle the Lord's 
rule— that we do not handle the Word of God deceitfully 
—that we do not blind and deceive ourselves respecting 
its true importance— that we do not thus 
vitiate and impair our consciences— that we do not 
thus thwart our prayers for the holy spirit. For the 
holy spirit can flow into our hearts only as the channel 
is open; and the channel can be kept open only by 
keeping this Golden Rule continually at work at its 
full gauge. This Golden Rule and all these lessons, 
that seem so new because presented by the great 
Teacher in a clearer and sharper light than ever before, 
were nevertheless the gist or essence of the Mosaic 
Law, and of the Lord's teachings through the 
prophets. 

NARROW IS THE WAY. 



Our Lord intimates that such a life of carefulness 
respecting not only our actions but also our words 
and even our very thoughts (which are the springs 
from whence proceed our words and actions) will be a 
very "narrow way"— a difficult way. And yet it is the 
only way by which we can hope to enter into the life 
and Kingdom of joys which are now set before us 
in the Gospel call. The broad way, the easy way, the 
selfish way, the worldly way, does not lead to the 
Kingdom: on the contrary, it leads to death— to the 
Second Death, to utter destruction. The many are 
going in that way now, and only the few find and 
enter into the straight gate and narrow way to the 
Kingdom and its glory, honor and immortality. 

This does not, however, either say or imply that 
the present age is the only one in which any opportunity 
will be given to escape the destruction toward which 
the broad way and the world tend; though it is the 
only way now open. The Word of the Lord elsewhere 
points out to us that after the select little flock, 
the elect Church, the Bride, the body of Christ, shall 
have been selected from amongst mankind— composed 
of those who seek and walk in the narrow way— after 
these shall have been glorified with the Redeemer, 
will come a time when, in the Lord's providence, a 
grand highway of holiness shall be opened to the world 



of mankind, during the Millennial age. While it 
will be an upward way and not a downward one, so 
that it will require effort to walk thereon and to 
attain to the full restitution, the prize at its further end, 
nevertheless it will be very different from the narrow, 
the difficult way now open before the elect church, 
God's peculiar people. It will be a way of righteousness, 
but not a way of sacrifice, as is the present narrow 
way, which thus selects the "royal priesthood," 
each one of whom must present his body a living sacrifice, 
in order to make his calling and election sure. 

No lions shall be in that grand Millennial highway; 
nothing to hurt or destroy or intimidate from 
well-doing; nothing to seduce or to devour as a prey 
those who seek to walk righteously and to come back 

R2590 : page 76 

into harmony with the Lord; whereas all these besetments 

are now about us, because Satan, the prince of 

this world, is still unbound. (Isa. 35:8,9; Rev. 20:2.) 

All who now enter the "narrow way" are compelled to 

fight a good fight, to contend earnestly for the faith, 

to resist the devil, if they would secure the greater 

"prize" of our high calling. We must not only contend 

with the weaknesses of the flesh, which we have 

inherited, but we must also wrestle with wicked spirits 

in exalted places (Eph. 6:12), but the Lord giveth 

us the more grace, that thereby we may come off conquerors 

through him who loved us and bought us 

with his own precious blood.— 1 Tim. 6:12; Jude 3; 

Jas. 4:7; Rom. 8:37. 



R2592 : page 76 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



OUR USUAL CUSTOM of celebrating our dear 
Redeemer's death on its anniversary will be 
followed this year by a larger number, we believe, than 
ever before. The date will be the evening of April 
12th after 6 P.M.;— that date corresponding to "the 
fourteenth day of the first month" Jewish time. 

Our Lord, as the antitype of the Passover lamb 
(1 Cor. 5:7), was crucified the day before the "Feast 
of Passover" began; and "on the same night in which 
he was betrayed" he took bread, representing his 
flesh, and "fruit of the vine," representing his blood, 
and with these instituted a new memorial by which 
the spiritual Israelites were to celebrate their greater 
antitypical Passover, secured by his "blood of sprinkling 
applied by faith, and his flesh, eaten by faith, 



"meat indeed."— John 6:55. 

Our celebration has nothing in common with that 
of the Jews: indeed what they celebrate is the "Feast" 
week; while we celebrate on the day preceding their 
Feast the death of the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world. The day we celebrate represents 
the entire Gospel age, in which the entire 
Church— the body of Christ Jesus, the Head— must 
suffer with him as voluntary sacrificers. The Feast 
week to us typifies the glory and joy soon to be introduced, 
—in the Millennium. 

Our Lord's words respecting this Memorial are, 
"This do ye in remembrance of me." And the Apostle 
adds, "As oft as ye do this ye do show forth the 
Lord's death till he come"— till he in his Kingdom 
shall have come in power and shall have gathered you 
unto himself. Many Christian people have assumed 

R2593 : page 76 

the liberty to celebrate this Memorial at various times 
—weekly, monthly, quarterly, etc.; but in harmony 
with the early Church we understand our Lord to 
mean that we should celebrate this as we celebrate any 
other event— on its anniversary: just as we now might 
say, As oft as the Fourth of July is celebrated it shows 
forth the independence of this nation. 

Those who celebrate our Lord's death in the 
"Last Supper" at noon every Sunday, mistake it for 
the weekly "Love Feast" or "Breaking of Bread" 
practiced every Lord's Day by the early Church in 
memory of our Lord's resurrection and his opening of 
the eyes of their understanding in the breaking of 
bread. Rightly understood, nothing in these weekly 
feasts of joy resembled the annual commemoration of 
our Master's sorrow and death— nor is the "cup" ever 
mentioned in connection with them. 

The Church at Allegheny will celebrate the Memorial 
Supper commemorative of our Redeemer's death 
for us, and of our Pass-over from death unto life 
through the merit of his sacrifice, and of our consecration 
to "be dead with him"— to drink his "cup"— 
on the evening of April 12th at 7:30 o'clock at Bible 
House chapel, Allegheny, Pa. Friends of the Truth 
who can make it convenient to meet with us will be 
welcomed cordially: but we advise that wherever there 
are home-meetings or wherever such gatherings seem 
possible they be not deserted. No other season seems 
so favorable for the drawing of the hearts of the Lord's 
people closely together;— even as it seems also to be 
specially an hour of temptation to all professing to be 
the Lord's followers, who like Peter of old seem to be 
specially sifted at this season of the year. 

The advice of our Lord to the early disciples, at 
this time of the year, seems still specially appropriate, 
"Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation!" And 



recognizing this the older systems, Roman Catholic 
and Episcopalian, still precede the Memorial with a 
fast or Lenten season— which entered into not formally 
but in the spirit we believe is a very helpful custom 
to many— not only physically but spiritually. 

"Good Friday" was substituted for the Memorial 
Supper as originally observed by the Lord's people— 
the system of counting being slightly changed. The 
more frequent celebrations of the Lord's Supper by 
Protestants are based upon Papacy's celebration of the 
"Mass" an institution which both in fact and theory 
is an abomination to our Lord— denying as it does the 
fullness of the efficacy of the original sacrifice at 
Calvary. 

We trust that the Lord's people everywhere will 
"do this" in remembrance of the great sin-sacrifice— 
not merely as an outward memorial but also and specially 
at the same time feeding on the Lord by faith 

R2594 : page 77 

in their hearts, and afresh pledging their consecration 
unto death with him while partaking of the "cup." 
For further particulars see our issue of March 1, 1898. 

We will be glad to have prompt postal card reports 
from the appointed secretary or scribe of each 
little group— wherever "two or three" meet in his 
dear name to do this. Make all your arrangements 
beforehand that the precious season of heart "communion" 
be not disturbed by business affairs. Let us 
not only all unite in prayer and communion, but also 
so far as practicable in our songs of praise— using 
numbers 23, 122 and 1 of Hymns of Dawn. 



R2590 : page 77 

JESUS SAID UNTO HIM, FOLLOW ME. 

-MARK 2:13-22.-MARCH 18.- 

CAPERNAUM, where our Lord had been teaching 

and healing, was situated on the sea of 

Galilee, or, as we today should say, the 

Lake of Galilee. It was a city of considerable commercial 

importance, especially for the fish business, 

and undoubtedly the lake-shore in that vicinity was 

quite populous. The tense of the Greek would seem 

to indicate that our Lord kept going by the sea-shore, 

stopping here and there to discourse to the people, 

multitudes of whom flocked to hear him. It was during 

this journey that he passed Matthew, formerly 

known as Levi, a custom-house agent of the Roman 

government— a revenue collector, who was attending 

to his business, and whom our Lord addressed, saying, 



"Follow me," and who obeyed the call to discipleship. 

Many get a very false thought from the brevity of 
the narrative, and infer that Levi (Matthew) had never 
heard of Jesus before, and that our Lord, as he passed 
him, cast upon him some kind of a spell which led him 
to instantly drop his business, as though bereft of his 
senses. On the contrary, we are to remember that 

R2591 : page 77 

the Lord and his disciples were well known in that 
vicinity for years, and that probably Matthew had not 
only knowledge of our Lord, but also faith in him, as 
the Messiah. Not until now, however, had Jesus invited 
him to become one of His immediate disciples; 
not until now, therefore, could Matthew essay to become 
such. There evidently were many who heard the 
Lord discourse time and again, and who were to be 
reckoned as amongst his friends, but who were by no 
means invited to become special followers, companions 
and associates in the ministry of the gospel, as 
were the Twelve. 

Nor are we to suppose that Matthew left his 
money-drawer open, and his accounts with the Roman 
government unsettled, to immediately follow the Master. 
Rather, we may assume that it may have taken 
days, or possibly weeks, to straighten his affairs and to 
enable him to respond to the Lord's call to apostleship. 
We should remember that the history of several years, 
and many discourses, conversations and incidents, are 
crowded in the gospel narrative into very brief space. 

It would seem probable that as Simon's name was 
changed by the Lord to Peter, so Levi's name was 
changed to Matthew, which signifies "the gift of God." 
He was a publican— a person who farmed the taxes 
and the public revenue. The name "publican" and the 
profession were both extremely odious to the Jews, 
who very reluctantly submitted themselves to the tax 
regulations of the Romans. Publicans were counted 
unpatriotic, disloyal to their own nation, in that they 
accepted the service of an alien government, and made 
use of their knowledge of their country and people in 
assisting to collect revenues deemed unjust. The office, 
as will be readily seen, offered many opportunities 
for dishonesty and extortion, bribery, etc., but we 
cannot for a moment suppose that Levi was one of 
these dishonest publicans, for had he been so we may 
be sure he would not have been called to the apostleship 
and would not have responded to the call, for we 
are not to forget that it is written, "No man can come 
to me except the Father which sent me draw him."— 
John 6:44. 

THE CONSECRATED HOME HONORED. 



Matthew was a man of influence, and as soon as 
he accepted the Lord's call, and responded by consecrating 
himself and his all, he set about to use his influence 
in drawing others to the Savior. He would 
announce his own devotion to the cause in such a manner 
and under such favorable circumstances as if possible 
would win some. To these ends he arranged a 
banquet for the Lord and his disciples at his house, and 
invited many of his friends and business associates. 
These in our lesson are called "Many publicans and 
sinners." 

We have seen why the publicans were ostracised by 
the scribes and Pharisees— not because they were 
wicked, but because their business was disesteemed: 
and being thus cut off socially from the ultra-religious, 
the publicans were forced to have most of their social 
intercourse with the non-religious, by way of contrast 
called "sinners." By the term sinners we are not 
necessarily to understand vile persons and evildoers, 
but rather persons who did not profess nor attempt the 
holiness claimed by the Pharisees— persons who did 
not claim to be absolute keepers of the divine Law— 
who did not profess to make the outside of the cup or 
platter absolutely clean, tho perhaps in many instances 
the inside was as clean or more clean than were 
the hearts of the Pharisees, who professed perfect holiness. 
This our Lord intimated on several occasions. 
When, therefore, we read that our Lord was the friend 
of publicans and sinners we are not to understand that 
he made companions of the rowdies or moral lepers of 
his time. We are rather to understand that in the 
usage of that time one class of Jews was designated 
the holy people (Pharisees), and another class designated 
as not professing absolute holiness (sinners). 

Matthew's endeavor to bring his friends and associates 
into contact with the Master and his teachings 
is certainly commendable, and is a good illustration of 

R2591 : page 78 

what each one who enters the Lord's flock should do. 
Each should seek to exert his influence where it is 
greatest, amongst those with whom he is acquainted 
and who are acquainted with him, and upon whom 
either his past honesty and good character should have 
an influence, or else those to whom his radical change 
of life would be the most manifest. Another lesson for 
us is the propriety of using hospitality as a channel for 
the advancement of the truth— the homes of those who 
have consecrated themselves to the Lord should be 
consecrated homes, in which the first consideration 
should be the service of the Master; and its influence 
should be to draw out friends to the Lord, that they 
might be taught of him. Too frequently the consecration 
of the home is overlooked and antagonistic influences 



are permitted to dominate, with the result that 

neither the Lord nor the Lord's people are entertained, 

nor his cause served in them. Such a house and home 

loses a great blessing, and the head of such a house 

has serious reason to question whether or not he is overcoming 

and therefore an "overcomer," to whom only 

the prize is promised,— or whether he is being overcome 

by adverse influences. 

The Lord desires a courageous people, a people so 
full of faith, and love to him and his, that they will conquer 
adverse influences in the interest of righteousness. 
What would we think of Matthew if he had said to the 
Lord: Master, I would much like to have a banquet at 
my home, and to invite there some of my friends, that 
I might introduce you to them, and that thus a favorable 
influence might be exerted on behalf of the truth; 
but I have no liberty in my own home— my wife would 
not hear of it for a moment,— or, my children are unruly, 
have no respect for me as a parent, and would 
create a great disturbance if I were to mention such a 
thing as a banquet in your honor, so greatly are they 
offended that I am giving up my lucrative business, 
and so fearful are they that they will not have the same 
social standing as before, or the same privileges of 
extravagance? 

We would consider him a most unfit man to be an 
apostle, or to occupy even the position of elder or deacon 
in the Church, according to the terms laid down by 
the Apostle Paul. (1 Tim. 3:4,5.) We would esteem 
such an one unworthy of any responsible position in 
the Church, and so deficient in the qualities of an 
"overcomer" that he would be in great danger of 
losing the prize, unless he promptly instituted a reform 
of his character. It is only what we should expect, 
to find Matthew's case very different from this— 
to find that he had a strong character. Nor can we expect 
that the Master would have said to him, "Follow 
me," unless he had such character that would permit 
him to follow in the Master's footsteps, for surely our 
Lord Jesus, while gentle, kind and loving, was never 
weak or characterless. 

And what would we have thought of Matthew's 
wife and family, had they objected to the banquet? 
We would have considered them rather hopeless as respects 
saintship, and that his wife had not learned 
even the first element of wifehood;— that she was a 
hinderer instead of a helping mate. As it was we 
may be assured that with the Lord came a special 
blessing to that home. 

SPIRITUAL FOOD AT THE BANQUET. 



It would seem from other narratives of this same 
banquet (which was probably several weeks after Matthew's 



call) that a large number of people were 

gathered at Matthew's house, aside from those who 

partook of the banquet (Luke 5:29), and from the connection 

of the narrative it is supposed that it was on 

one of the regular fast days of the Pharisees. These 

facts led to the two questions: 

(1) Why does your Teacher associate with these 
people, who do not profess sanctification? The objection 
was not that our Lord should not teach the publicans 
and sinners, but that he should not eat with 
them, which implied a social equality, and the Pharisees 
evidently recognized that our Lord and his apostles 
were professing and living lives of entire consecration 
to God. 

In answer to this query our Lord said, "They 
that are whole need not a physician, but they that are 
sick"; the implication being that the physician had a 
right to go to and mingle with those whom he sought 
to relieve, and might mingle with them in whatever 
manner he saw to be expedient for their cure. This language 
does not imply that the Pharisees were not sick, 
and that they did not need our Lord's ministry, tho the 
fact was that not admitting that they were sin-sick they 
were not disposed to receive his good medicine of doctrine. 
The same thought is otherwise expressed by 
our Lord in the same connection, saying, "I came not 
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." Anyone 
who considered himself to be righteous would be 
beyond the call of repentance. His first lesson would 
be to learn that he was not righteous, not perfect; 
hence our Lord went chiefly to those who admitted 
that they were not righteous, and whose hearts therefore 
were better soil for the truth than others. Our 
Lord intimated this in his parable of the publican's and 
the Pharisee's prayers, assuring us that in God's sight 
the publican had the better standing, because of his 
acknowledgment of imperfections and his petition for 
mercy. 

Another of the Evangelists adds others of our 
Lord's words— "Go ye and learn what that meaneth: I 
will have mercy and not sacrifice." (Matt. 9:13.) Our 
Lord here evidently quoted from Hosea 6:6. The lesson 
the Pharisees should have learned from this was 
that in their particularity respecting sacrifices, self-denials, 
tithing of mint, anise, cummin, etc., the very 
things in which they boasted as evidences of their holiness 
were things which God did not appreciate nearly 
so much as he would have appreciated mercy. They 
should have had compassionate feelings toward their 
fellow Jews, the yearning compassion which would 
have delighted to have lifted them out of sin and 
brought them nearer to the Lord and nearer to righteous 
influences. Instead of having this spirit of mercy, 
which would have been very pleasing in God's sight, 
and would have prepared them to be recipients of his 
mercy, they had instead a loveless sentiment which 



despised others and boasted of self,— a self-satisfied and 
complacent condition of mind and heart, very reprehensible 
to the Lord— a condition of heart unready to 
be blessed with divine mercy. 

R2592 : page 79 

FASTING AND FEASTING-TYPICAL AND ANTITYPICAL. 



(2) The next question was: Why is it that your 
Master and all who affiliate with him are banqueting 
and feasting and rejoicing, while we Pharisees "fast 
twice in the week," and the followers of John's teachings 
also fast? Is not this a sign that you and your 
Master are not so devout as we?— Luke 18:12. 

The Lord's answer is very comprehensive and 
far-reaching, and requires considerable study to be appreciated. 
He explained:— 

(a) That it would be inappropriate for his followers 
to be in sadness and mourning at a time when 
they were receiving such wonderful blessings— at a 
time when the Bridegroom himself was present, cheering 
their hearts, refreshing and strengthening them, 
opening the eyes of their understanding, and giving 
them hearing ears to appreciate the divine favor that 
was coming unto them. Such would not be an appropriate 
time for fasting and mourning. By and by, 
when the Bridegroom would be away, there would be 
an abundance of perplexity and sorrow and then fasting 
would be in order. And so surely it has been: the 
Lord's people throughout the Gospel age have frequently 
felt called upon in times of darkness and adversity 
to seek a very close approach to the Lord by 
the humbling of the flesh, and have found fasting a 
valuable means to this end. 

But fasting has a typical significance— it means 
self-denial. So long as the Master was with his people, 
and especially so long as he was honored by the multitudes, 
it required comparatively little self-denial to be 
one of his followers— it was in many respects an honor 
to be called to follow him, and an honor to sacrifice 
something of earthly interests to be a follower; and 
this made this kind of self-denial or fasting really a 
feast of pleasure. But later on trials came, when the 
Master got into the toils of his enemies, when his 
cause was unpopular, and the multitudes clamored for 
his death— then it required self-denial (antitypical 
fasting) to confess him and follow him; and so it has 
been all through the Gospel age— none can be a follower 
of the Lamb without self-denial, fasting, refusing 
the desires and appetites of the flesh— sacrificing some 
and mortifying others in the interest of the new 
creature and its spiritual development. 

Now, in the Lord's Second Presence, we might 



say that the feast has begun again— that from a spiritual 

standpoint there are so many and so great blessings, 

so much and so dainty spiritual food, that to 

those who are invited into the Lord's banqueting house 

and whom he causes to sit down to meat, and to whom 

he brings forth things new and old, newly and refreshingly 

served, it almost appears as tho the fasting 

time has passed, and that the feasting and "joys of 

the Lord" have begun. Not that there are no trials 

and difficulties, according to the flesh, but that as new 

creatures his people are so refreshed and exhilarated 

with the meat in due season that the trials and difficulties 

and self-denials (fastings) incidental to the way 

may now be esteemed so lightly as not to be worthy 

to be compared with the spiritual refreshments enjoyed, 

tho these be but foretastes of the great Marriage 

Feast soon to be enjoyed. 

(b) In addition to the fast that our Lord's presence 
with his disciples would antidote sorrow, was another 
fact which the Pharisees did not comprehend, 

viz., that our Lord's work was not like that of John 

the Baptist— was not a work of reformation, seeking to 

patch up the Jewish system and arrangement. John 

had been commissioned to do that if he could, and had 

failed and been beheaded; and the work which Jesus 

was doing was a new work altogether: he was not attempting 

to patch and reform Judaism with his doctrines, 

but was making an entirely new institution, 

gathering out a Church, which would not be a Jewish 

Church nor a Reformed Jewish Church, but a wholly 

different institution, a Christian Church. This was the 

reason he was not attempting to discuss with the Pharisees 

the proprieties and improprieties of their methods, 

and to straighten them out. He would let alone the 

old garment, already worn out and ready to be laid 

aside; he would provide as a new garment, not the impossible 

righteousness required by the Law, but an 

imputed righteousness according to faith, based upon 

the merits of his own sacrifice for sins. 

Had he attempted to combine Christianity with 
Judaism the result would have been disastrous to both, 
for they are opposites— the one demanding absoluteness 
of righteousness, which was impossible to sinners; 
the other demanding that the impossibility of personal 
righteousness should be acknowledged, and that faith 
should be the only condition of forgiveness and mercy. 

(c) The same lesson was illustrated by the custom 
of that time in the use of skins of animals as instead 
of the barrels and bottles of today— indeed, such 
skins are used to the present time in various parts of 
the world, and called bottles. New wine put into such 
skins in fermenting would stretch them to almost 
bursting point, and such skins could never be used 
again for new wine, because the elasticity having gone 
out of them the new wine in fermenting would surely 
burst them. The lesson which our Lord taught here 



is that Judaism having had its day, had accomplished 
its purpose; and that it was not the divine intention 
that it should be reformed, as his hearers expected. 
The system had become effete, and to have attempted 
to put into Judaism the new doctrines, the new wine 
of the Gospel, would have meant that not only the 
Jewish nation would have been convulsed and wrecked 
by the spirit of the new teachings, but also that the 
doctrines themselves would have gone down with the 
wreck of the nation. Consequently it was the divine 
plan that a new Israel should be started, "a holy nation, 
a peculiar people," and that it should be the receptacle 
of the new grace and truth then due. 

Similarly now in the end of the Gospel age we 
perceive the impossibility of putting the new wine 
which the Master is now providing into the old wineskins 
of sectarianism, and all sectarians realize this too 
—they realize that to receive what is now being presented 
as present truth into their denominations 

would unquestionably mean the utter wreck of the denominations. 
God is therefore now, as in the end of 
the Jewish age, calling out of the whole system such 
as are Israelites indeed, that they may receive at his 
hands the wine (doctrine) of the new dispensation just 

R2592 : page 80 

at hand. As for the old institutions, they have served 
a purpose, partly good and partly bad. Their work, so 
far as the divine plan is concerned, is at an end. "The 
voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride shall no 
more be heard" in Babylon at all. (Rev. 18:23.) Babylon 
will not permit them to be heard. The voice, 
the teaching of present truth is consequently outside 
her walls; and whoever has an ear for the truth, whoever 
desires to be filled with present truth, must come 
outside of sectarianism before he can be thus filled and 
blessed and used as a vessel in bearing the blessing to 
others. -Rev. 18:4,23. 



page 80 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-By way of introduction 
let me say "Thank you!" for the spiritual food 
which my hungry soul has found in the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series. Years ago I "left the church" as the 
phrase goes, i.e., I withdrew from membership in the 
Methodist church, and burned my ships behind me, 
destroying my church letter and telling the good people 
who came to labor with me in the matter that it 



was a matter of conscience with me not to call men 
my brothers one day in the week knowing that the 
other six I must watch them like a hawk, lest they 
cheat me out of my eyeteeth. I would not "take 
communion" with the knowledge that beside me sat 
one who fed poisoned grain to my fowls and poisoned 
meat to my dog and whispered scandalous stories 
about every person she knew in the church and out of 
it. So for years I have been counted a heathen. 

How marvelous is God's leading! And because 
I could not see his hand in thus making my very soul 
sick over the hypocrisy and sham religion of the nominal 
church, I thought there was no church at all and 
wandered out into the desert beyond sight of the promised 
land. Theosophy, Spiritism, Christian Science, 
the Higher Criticism— O, the barren months and years 
of hungry searching! And while planning a course 
of study in Swedenborgianism and hunting for some 
second-hand copies of his works I ran across VOL. I. 
of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series. Do you know that 
I bought that volume and two others of the series as 
a joke? I said, "I'll lend them to some Second Adventist 
neighbors of ours," for I could see that the 
author turned the tables on that doctrine of fire and 
fury in a style as comprehensive as it was logical. 
But Swedenborg went into the box of "books to exchange 
and burn" and "The Helping Hand" led me 
out of the desert and set my feet once more in the narrow 
path. And now I want to help others enjoy these 
truths— the ministers particularly. The most of them 
here are good men, they see but they don't see far 
enough. They know that I will not join any of their 
churches, but the Methodist preacher and the Congregationalist 
both tell me where Want has knocked at 
the door of one, or where trouble has found out another; 
and the Baptist preacher will talk Prophecy to me, and 
the Presbyterian, Practical Christianity. I believe I can 
get hold of them and of members of their churches 
better than if I "belonged" to any of them. I have 
told them that the only reason I sit still and listen to 
them slander the Word is because I know they as 
individuals are broader than their creeds, and that I 
guess God can forgive them if I can. 

And now to get down to business. I have but 
little money that the Lord lets me call mine because 
he shows me so many ways to use it as soon as it comes, 
in that the purse is very slim. When I want books 
or papers he always shows me a way to pitch in and 
make tents, like Paul. I have wanted to send you a 
dollar for the WATCH TOWER for the last month, but 
he did not show me the way to make it until yesterday. 
I inclose it in stamps in this letter. Send me 
any extra copies or tracts that you can spare; I will 
put them into empty hands. 

Near me lives a lady who has sore domestic trouble 
—a Swiss, reads French and German fluently— and she 



will gladly read anything that will help her to believe 
that "the Herr Gott is not deaf" as she expresses it. 

Pardon this long letter. 

Very sincerely your sister in Christ, 

ELIZABETH ANNE GRAHAM,-California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In Jan. 1st TOWER 
you speak of the time being short before the door of 
opportunity is closed. Some of us find the door to 
many churches closed to us. It was only on the last 
day of December, '99 that the minister of the church 
where I was giving out tracts ordered me off from the 
church and forbade me giving any more. He said 
that we ought to be ashamed of ourselves, giving those 
to the people. I asked him if he had ever read it. 
He said that he had never read it, but knew all about 
it. I asked him what he knew about it. He said that 
it was breaking up all the churches and he would not 
allow me to explain. 

The "Volunteer" work is a grand work for many 
reasons. (1) It enables us to preach with the printed 
page; (2) it gives us an opportunity to study character 
as well as to build character; (3) it gives us an 
opportunity to confess with our lips what we believe 
with our heart; (4) it strengthens us to be always 
able to give a "reason for the hope that is within us;" 
(5) it creates in us a love and sympathy for those 
whom we are trying to rescue from the awful blackness 
of infidelity; (6) it empties us of selfishness and 
causes us to sacrifice pleasures for the welfare of others. 
So as long as the Lord permits I will consider it a 
pleasure to be able to serve in so grand a work. 

Enclosed please find check and order. With best 
wishes, Yours in redeeming love, 

WM. J. DAVIS. --Massachusetts. 



R2593 : page 80 

In a recent letter one of the "Pilgrims," after 
giving particulars respecting his efforts to feed the 
Lord's sheep and lambs concludes thus:— 

"Pray for me, dear brother, that I may be kept 
a 'servant.' Could you not in some way through the 
TOWER suggest to the friends not to praise a 'pilgrim' 
to his face: they do not know what 'offences' they 
sometimes cause, what feelings of latent pride they 
arouse." 



page 81 



VOL. XXI. MAR. 15 & APR. 1, 1900. Nos. 6 & 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Which Is the True Gospel? 83 

Various Theories Found Wanting 84 

But One Stands the Tests of Scripture 

and Reason 86 

What Say the Scriptures About Hell? 89 

The Theory and The Word Hell in 
English, Hebrew and Greek 90 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 99 

The Sheep and the Goats 101 

Everlasting Punishment 103 

The Lake of Fire and Brimstone 104 

Parabolic and Symbolic Figures 106 

Forgivable and Unpardonable Sins 110 

Future Retribution 110 

Let Honesty and Truth Prevail 112 

page 82 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



DOUBLE IN SIZE AND IN QUANTITY. 

WE are sending two copies of this double issue to each subscription, 

believing that you will enjoy loaning the extra 

one to your friends and neighbors. In our judgment it will be 

specially good eyesalve for some dear Christian people. Keep 

your extra copies busy in the service of the truth as a part of 

the stewardship the Lord thus puts into your hands. 

NONE TOO POOR TO HAVE THIS JOURNAL REGULARLY. 

IF a developed child of God, you are interested in Bible study; 
and if so you cannot afford to deprive yourself of the helping 



hand God has provided for all such through the semi-monthly 
visits of this journal. If obliged to ask for it on credit, 
do so: if never able to pay you need not fear offending us. We 
will cancel the debt at any time on request. If you have no 
prospect of being able to pay then say so as above and have it 
free— paid for out of a special fund provided by loving "brethren" 
who desire thus to assist you and serve the Lord. Write 
at once and be sure to RENEW each December. 

HOW TO WRITE TO US. 

WRITE your name and full address very plainly at the head 
of your letter sheet if it is not printed there;— giving street 
and number. And do this on every letter. Write your order 
on a separate sheet from your letter,— or on a separate page. 

Address business communications to our Society as above, 
and personal or doctrinal queries to the Editor at same address. 

VOLUNTEERS-SERVICE FOR JESUS. 

OUR Society's object is— The Promulgation of Christian 

Knowledge: to the intent that the Lord's people may be 

sanctified by the Truth— the only genuine and acceptable sanctification. 

Everyone willing is invited to share this service as a 

true soldier of the cross. Ammunition in the form of tracts 

will be supplied free to all who will promise to use the same 

faithfully and judiciously. Write for samples free. 



R2593 : page 83 

WHICH IS THE TRUE GOSPEL? 



"I am not Ashamed of the Gospel of Christ."— Rom. 1:16. 



A Discourse by Pastor C. T. Russell of Allegheny, Pa., delivered at The 
Florida Chautauqua Assembly, Defuniak Springs, Fla., March 4, 1900, 
as reported by the Associated Press. 

NO APOLOGY seems necessary for our subject 
—"Which is the true Gospel of which the 
Apostle was not ashamed?" If time and 
thought may be profitably expended in the study of 
the earthly sciences— sociology, finance, etc., etc., 
built largely upon human inferences and conjectures 
—surely none could dispute the propriety of studying 
the science of divine revelation. If it be profitable to 
investigate the physical diseases of mankind and their 
causes, and the laws of medicine and of sanitation 
for the offset of these, it surely cannot be disputed 
that the Gospel which God has presented as the antidote 



for soul-sickness and soul-death, and as the 
science pertaining to life eternal, is worthy of still 
greater and more profound consideration. 

The greatest minds, the noblest specimens of our 
race, have admitted our topic to be the one above all 
others in importance; and have weighed it carefully 
—whether as a result they accepted or rejected it. We 
are not now discussing the weight of mental acumen 
enlisted for and against the Gospel: we are merely 
noting the fact that all men of ability have recognized 
that the subject is worthy of their careful consideration, 
and as having claims upon their attention paramount 
to any and all others. Indeed, it may be set 
down as a fact that whoever has given the subject of 
religion no consideration is one of three things,— a 
novice in mental exercise, or a near relative to "the 
fool who hath said in his heart there is no God," or 
a coward, preyed upon by fears, instigated by Satan 
to hinder honest investigation of the divine message 
of love and mercy. 

Even a hasty glance into the intelligent faces of 
this large audience assures me that you all have given 
some thought to our theme;— though experience assures 
me that comparatively few of you have ever 
reached conclusions on this subject fully satisfactory 
to yourselves. Hence your faith and love and zeal 
toward God and your zeal for the Gospel are less 
strong than you could desire. Let us hope that as 
we reason together on this great subject to-day, we 
may, by God's grace, see more clearly than ever before 
which is the true Gospel— the one of which the 
Apostle was not ashamed, and of which, therefore, 
none of us need feel ashamed,— the Gospel, therefore, 
which should more and more move and energize us, 
as the power of God unto salvation. 

No one of intelligence will dispute the meaning 
of the word "Gospel;" it signifies "good tidings," 
good news,— a good message. Nevertheless, in some 
unaccountable manner, by common consent, "a real 
Gospel sermon" is almost universally understood to 
signify bad tidings— tidings of eternal misery to the 
great mass of our race— to all except the little flock 
of God's faithful people. As a consequence the 
preacher of a "Gospel sermon" is expected to figuratively 
shake the congregation over an abyss of everlasting 
torture, making as strong an effort as possible 
to intimidate them thereby to a thorough reformation 
of life, in hope of thus escaping an awful eternity. 

True, this that we might term "the Gospel (?) of 
damnation" is not so generally preached as it once 
was, because more enlightened minds of cultured people 
repudiate it as a fetich of the past. Yet this perversion 
of the Gospel is still to be heard in country 
places, at camp meetings, occasionally in the city pulpit, 

R2593 : page 84 



and universally in Salvation Army meetings. 
Nothing is further from our intention than a criticism 
of the consciences and honesty of intention of 
those who thus preach. It is no part of our mission 
to criticise persons and motives, but "With malice 
toward none and with charity toward all" we consider 
it not only our privilege but our duty to criticise doctrines, 
that thereby the truth may be more firmly established, 
and error brought into disrepute. 

Before we proceed to the consideration of the 
Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed— the 
Gospel set forth in the Scriptures— it will be expedient 
for us to take a glance at the different Gospels set 
forth by the various denominations of Christendom. 
It is not our thought that each denomination represents 
a different Gospel, for the differences in many 
instances are chiefly respecting ceremonies, forms, 
methods of government, name, etc., and not in respect 
to the message or Gospel held forth. Nevertheless, 

R2594 : page 84 

there are three distinct lines of faith, or doctrine- 
three distinct Gospels set forth in Christendom, all 
recognized as "orthodox," because they all contain as 
their fundamental the doctrine of the eternal torment 
of all mankind, except the comparatively few "saved." 
Each of these three Gospels have millions of supporters, 
divided into numerous denominations. These 
in point of numbers are 

(1) The Roman Catholic faith, or Gospel, in 

which concur the Greek Catholics and Arminian Catholics, 
and some of the high-church Episcopalians. 

(2) The Calvinistic Gospel, which is held by the 
various Presbyterian denominations, the Congregationalists, 
Baptists, and many Lutherans and 

Episcopalians. 

(3) The Arminian Gospel, held and chiefly represented 
by the Methodists of various names and connections, 
and by the Free-Will Baptists: however, 

many of other denominations at heart accept the Arminian 
Gospel, while their church connections identify 
them with the Calvinistic Gospel. Hence we may say, 
so far as Protestantism is concerned, that the Arminian 
and the Calvinist Gospels are about equally 
supported. 

It may not be possible for us to handle our subject 
properly and thoroughly without offering some 
criticism of these three Gospels which for centuries 
have entrenched themselves in Christian minds, each 
fortified by the decisions of its own Councils, backed 
by voluminous opinions from their several theological 
seminaries, but we can and assuredly will 
strenuously avoid saying one solitary word in criticism 
of those who we believe conscientiously uphold these 



several conflicting Gospels. We call you to witness 
that we are all Scripturally enjoined to "Contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints" 
(the true Gospel), at the same time that we are enjoined 
by the same authority to "Speak evil of no man." 
We shall endeavor to keep strictly within these admittedly 
proper lines, and, additionally, as the Apostle 
admonishes, "Speak the truth in love." 

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ROMAN CATHOLICISM. 



The Gospel according to Roman Catholicism is 
that all men fell into sin and under sentence of eternal 
torment: that Christ accomplished a redemptive work 
which, supplemented by the sacrifice of the mass, and 
by prayers and penances, permits all believers (Roman 
Catholics) to escape that eternal torment, which 
will be the sure portion of all heretics, regardless of 
their good works or morals. As for its own people, 
it holds that even its highest officials, including 
Bishops and Popes, go to Purgatory for refinement, 
purification from sin and to be prepared for heaven. 
It claims that some will spend only a short time in 
Purgatory, assisted out of it by the merit of prayers, 
masses, etc., on their behalf by their friends after 
death. But their expectation is that ultimately Purgatory 
will be no more, its thousands of millions being 
prepared for a better and happier condition. But 
according to all the great theologians of Papacy, and 
according to all the Papal bulls, all Protestants, all 
rejecters of Papacy's teachings, will suffer endless 
torment. This is the Roman Catholic Gospel fairly 
presented, as we understand it. It does not seem to us 
to be very good news— not very good tidings, even to 
those who get the very best it has to offer, and it 
certainly would be very bad tidings to all out of 
harmony with Papacy. 

Let us next look at the great Protestant doctrine 
represented in the word Calvinism— the doctrine of 
the election of the Church and the reprobation of all 
others. 

THE GOSPEL PRESENTED BY CALVINISM. 



Calvinism claims that faith in Christ is essential 
to salvation and it admits that faith comes by hearing 
and hearing by the Word of God. Calvinism requires 
more than a mere knowledge of Christ and belief in 
him as a good and exemplary man, who died a martyr 
to his too extreme convictions. It requires faith in 
Christ's death as a sacrifice for man's sin, and at least 
some manifestation towards righteousness of life before 



any could be recognized as being of the elect 

Church. Consequently, according to Calvinism, the 

elect Church could not include the heathen of the 

present time and all the way back through the past, 

who have never heard of the only name given under 

heaven or amongst men whereby we must be saved. 

Stretched to its very broadest, Calvinism could not 

include more than one in twenty of earth's fifty thousand 

millions that are estimated to have lived from 

Adam's day until the present time. In other words, 

according to the broadest possible estimate of this 

view, more than forty-seven thousand millions of humanity 

were, in the language of the Westminster Confession 

of Faith, "passed by" as non-elect in the divine 

plan. 

And what does this mean— "passed by" or 
"non-elect?" It means, according to Calvinism, that 
God, who knew the end from the beginning, before 
creating this world and mankind upon it, determined 
that he would "pass by" and not elect those forty-seven 
thousand millions of his creatures to life and 
happiness, but would predestine them to an eternity of 
torture, and that carrying out this diabolical plan, he 
prepared a great place large enough to hold forty-seven 
thousand millions, and fuel sufficient to produce 
the necessary combustion there to all eternity— did 
all this with a full appreciation of all the awful facts 
and circumstances of the case. 

R2594 : page 85 

Moreover, we remember the statement of Calvinism 
which many of us learned in our youth, to the 
effect that God's favor toward the elect is not because 
of any worthiness on their part, nor because of any 
works which they had done, but "of his own sovereign 
grace" he saves them from all the horrible conditions 
which he has predestined shall be upon the others. 
Now if the salvation of the elect is not because of 
their works or worthiness, but because of God's sovereign 
grace only, the simplest mind can see that God 
might without any violation of principle have extended 
that sovereign grace to others— to all, since it was 
not because of worthiness nor because of works, but 
merely of his own volition that any are saved,— according 
to Calvinism. 

The celebrated Jonathan Edwards, when preaching 
upon this subject in New England years ago, after 
picturing the awful torment of the non-elect, was 
asked the question, Would not the thought of the 
anguish of the lost mar the bliss of God's people in 
glory? His answer in substance was, No; you will 
be so changed that such matters will not affect you; 
you will look over the battlements of heaven and see 
in torment your neighbors and friends, yea, your own 
parents and children, brothers and sisters, and turning 



round will praise God the louder because his justice 
is made manifest. 

Now, my dear friends, I do not charge any who 
are here present with having so false a view of the 
divine character and plan as this. Indeed, I am glad 
to note that our Calvinistic friends in general are repudiating 
this doctrine, realizing that there is in it 
a serious lack, not only as respects divine love, but 
also as respects divine justice. I was glad some years 
ago to note that some of our Presbyterian friends 
were so moved by higher and nobler conceptions of 
the Almighty that they wished to rid themselves of 
any part in so blasphemous a statement respecting 
his character and his plan. I was sorry, however, 
that when the matter of "the revision of the Presbyterian 
standards" was taken up it was found that only 
a minority was in favor of revision, and I was still 
more sorry to note that that minority of intelligent, 
godly people was willing to continue to confess to 
such a horrible mis-statement of their true views- 
willing, shall I say, to continue to "blaspheme that 
holy name" because a majority of their brethren were 
unwilling that such blasphemous misrepresentations 
should be discontinued. 

I am glad to believe that if this matter were 
brought to the intelligent attention of Presbyterians 
in general, a large majority would be found willing, 
nay, anxious, to undo the wrong and to make such 
reparation as would be within their power, by way 
of honoring the great Jehovah and attesting their 
appreciation of his love and his justice, as well as of 
his wisdom and of his power. This is just the point: 
Calvinism, in its anxiety to establish the wisdom and 
power of God, his foreknowledge and his ability to 
carry out his plan, has conceived of a plan which is 
far from the correct one, lacking both injustice and 
in love. 

It may be argued that Love is a grace and that 
its exercise is not incumbent upon Jehovah; that all 
that could be asked or expected of him would be simple 
Justice, and some might be ready to claim that 
for God to eternally torment these forty-seven thousand 
millions "passed by" would be in strict accord 
with Justice. This we deny! We claim that having 
the power to create mankind would not justify their 
creation if the Creator saw that the result would be 
the everlasting torture of a single creature. Justice 
would say that power is not to be exercised to 
the injury of another, and that to exercise the creative 
power under such foreknown conditions would be 
injustice. And Wisdom attuned to Justice would say, 
Better a thousand times never to have created anybody 
than to have created one being to suffer unjustly 
eternally. 

This statement, dear friends, is a fair, impartial 
statement of the Gospel according to our beloved 



brother, John Calvin, and those who subscribe to the 
Westminster Confession, and their allies. This surely 
is not the Gospel of which the Apostle Paul, in 
our text, declared, "I am not ashamed of the Gospel 
of Christ." Paul would assuredly have been ashamed 

R2595 : page 85 

of such a Gospel, and so are all true Christians, who 

have the true spirit of love and justice,— none more 

so, perhaps, than those who unfortunately, through 

circumstances of birth, etc., and hitherto without realizing 

what it meant, have been lending their name 

and influence to this great blasphemy against the divine 

character. 

THE ARMINIAN VIEW OF THE GOSPEL. 



Let us now examine the Arminian view. This 
view is growing popular. Its message or Gospel is, 
God is love— he loves you; he loves everybody; he 
is doing all that he can to save everybody; if you are 
lost it will not be God's fault, but your own. On 
the surface, at least, this theory seems much more 
loving and much more just than the one already examined, 
but before we go far we will also find it very 
defective, very far from being either a reasonable or a 
Scriptural Gospel. We will find it inconsistent with 
its own statement— illogical. 

For instance, while it sounds nice theoretically 
to say that God is doing all that he can do to save 
the whole world at the present time, everybody knows 
that this is not true; that on the contrary you or I 
or any other intelligent human being if possessed 
of the one-thousandth part of the divine power and 
wisdom could speedily accomplish the evangelization 
of the whole world. Nor will it do to say that God 
has committed himself to a certain mode of procedure 
through his Church, and that if the Church fails to 
contribute with sufficient liberality both money and 
evangelists the heathen will not hear of "the only name 
given under heaven or amongst men whereby we 
must be saved," but will go to eternal torment, etc. 
Neither will it do to say that God is doing all that 
he can do and is hampered by the lack of interest in 
the Church; because his wisdom and foreknowledge 
foresaw all these conditions as they are, and he could 
not justly be excused from the real responsibility of 
the matter, since he is the Creator, and in him is 
vested the all-power as well as the all-wisdom. Such 
a claim as this would be tantamount to saying that 
God has erred in wisdom when he thought to leave 
the conversion of the world to the Church, seeing 
that the Church has not accomplished this. Such a 



R2595 : page 86 

claim would be merely excusing God from doing all 
that he can do, instead of showing that he is doing all 
that he can do. 

But let us look more critically into this matter. 
If this view we are criticising is correct, if God is 
doing all that he can to save the world, and if he has 
been doing this during all the past ages, then without 
question the world's conversion is a hopeless 
thing, and we can never expect to see better results 
than at present. This theory presupposes a race or 
battle between the Almighty and Satan, each seeking 
to capture the human family, and to the discredit 
of the theory it shows Satan the victor thus far. Starting 
out with one pair, both on the Lord's side, the first 
1656 years ended with a flood in which the whole 
world of mankind was blotted out because of wickedness, 
and only eight persons reckoned sufficiently 
righteous to be preserved. Starting again with those 
eight persons counted sufficiently righteous for preservation, 
we find that there are in the world to-day sixteen 
hundred millions, and that out of that whole 
number there are about one hundred millions nominal 
Roman Catholics and one hundred millions nominal 
Protestants, and a very much smaller number of true 
"saints of God." 

What would be the lesson from this if the Arminian 
theory be correct, that God is doing all that 
he can do to save the world? The lesson would be 
that with all his good intentions of love and mercy 
our God is thoroughly incapable of the work he undertook 
to do. And if these are the results in six 
thousand years, what could we hope for in the future? 
How many hundreds of millions of years would it 
be before the whole world would be converted? We 
answer that according to statistics it would never be, 
for statistics show that the natural increase of population 
throughout the world is far, far beyond the 
proportion of even nominal conversions from heathendom. 
Indeed, according to some good reckonings, 
the percentage of Christians every year is decreasing, 
the births of heathen lands so far outnumbering 
the births of Christian lands— even counting all the 
children born in Christendom as Christians. 

Is any Christian, in view of these facts, prepared 
to claim that our God has been doing all that he 
could do for the conversion of the world? If so, that 
Christian may as well write upon his hopes at once 
the word "Ichabod." If we saw that the Calvinistic 
view magnifies the wisdom and power of God at the 
expense of his justice and love, we find on the other 
hand that the Arminian view magnifies the love of God 
at the expense of his wisdom and power. The true 
Gospel must show divine Wisdom and Power in full 



accord with divine Justice and Love: of any other 
we must needs be ashamed. 

DISTINCTIONS WITHOUT PRACTICAL DIFFERENCE. 



But, my dear friends, we may as well now as at 
any time concede that there is comparatively little 
difference in the outcome of these two popular 
Protestant Gospels— the difference is merely a theoretical 
one respecting how the results are to be 
reached. The results themselves are the same in both 
cases— the eternal doom and torment of over forty-seven 
thousand millions of human creatures. For 
our Arminian friends no less than Calvinists agree 
that there is no salvation aside from faith in Christ, 
the only name given; and they admit also that of 
those who believe in Christ only the sanctified are 
of the real Church; and their Gospel is also that only 
the real Church is to be saved and that all others are 
to be eternally and most horribly tormented;— some 
claim in literal flames, others say by the torments 
and gnawings of conscience and remorse, which they 
proceed to say will be worse than the literal flames,— 
and we respond, if worse, so much worse for the 
argument. 

All will surely agree as respects these two 
theories or Gospels held out to the world by Protestant 
Christendom that it would make no difference 
to the forty-seven thousand millions, whether they got 
into that awful state of hopeless woe by divine predestination 
and lack of love and justice, or by divine 

incapacity and lack of foreknowledge and proper arrangements. 
We believe that no true Christian will 
be ready after examining the subject thus far to say 
that he fully approves either of these theories, and 
that he is not ashamed of both of them. 

CONSIDER NOW THE TRUE GOSPEL. 



Let us now proceed to examine what is the true 
Gospel, presented to us in the Word of God— the 
Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed. 

The word "gospel" itself should be the clue- 
should save the intelligent Christian from being misled 
by the various theories of bad tidings of great 
misery for nearly all people, miscalled "gospel." He 
who thinks it good news that one out of a thousand of 
the human family is to be saved and the remaining 
999 to be eternally tormented, is either not a Christian 
at all, or he is decidedly undeveloped in Christian 
character, in mercy, in love, in justice. In our opinion 
he is at most only a "babe in Christ" who has need 



first of the milk of the Word and subsequently of the 

"strong meat" thereof, that he may grow up into 

Christ in all things, and be able to comprehend with 

all saints the lengths and breadths and heights and 

depths of the love of God which passeth all understanding. 

-Eph. 3:18,19. 

When occasionally we come across some one 
who gives evidence of being a Christian, and who still 
entertains such horribly blasphemous views respecting 
the Heavenly Father's character, we feel like quoting 
to him the Lord's words through the Prophet, "My 
ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your 
thoughts, for as the heavens are higher than the earth 
so are my ways higher than your ways and my plans 
higher than your plans." (Isa. 55:8,9.) And part 
of our object in this discourse, dear friends, is to have 
those, whose eyes are anointed of the Lord, that they 
may see spiritual things, discern some of the Lord's 
higher ways and higher plans which he presents to 
us in his Word under the name "gospel"— good 
tidings. 

NOT UNIVERSAL SALVATION BUT A UNIVERSAL 
OPPORTUNITY FOR SALVATION. 



The Apostle tells us that God preached the Gospel 
beforehand to Abraham, "beforehand" signifying 

R2595 : page 87 

before it was due to begin; for the Gospel did not begin 

with Abraham, but with our Lord Jesus Christ, 

as the Apostle again declares, this salvation "began 

to be declared by our Lord and was confirmed unto 

us by them that heard him." (Heb. 2:3.) All that 

ever went before our Lord's preaching was not the 

Gospel, but merely types and promises which foreshadowed 

it. Let us notice next what, according to 

the Apostle, constituted this forestatement of the Gospel 

to Abraham: he says that it was couched in the 

words, "In thee and in thy seed shall all nations be 

blessed." (Gal. 3:16,29.) Note this carefully: it does 

not say, In thy seed shall one out of a thousand out 

of the families of the earth be blessed, and the remainder 

be doomed to an indescribably horrible eternity, 

but that the whole Gospel is a Gospel of blessing, applicable 

to all the families of the earth— through 

Christ, the true seed of Abraham. 

When our Lord Jesus was born into the world, 
the Heavenly Father sent a message respecting him, 
and the angels who bore that message declared that 
it was a Gospel message. Let us hearken to what 
the angels said about the eternal torment of the vast 



R2596 : page 87 

majority of our race. They said to the shepherds, 
"Behold we bring you good tidings [gospel] of great 
joy, which shall be unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) 
Let it be distinctly noted that the Gospel of the angels, 
like the Gospel communicated to Abraham, contains 
no reference to the damnation and eternal misery of 
any of the Lord's creatures, and that consequently 
our friends of the Salvation Army and others, who in 
ignorance preach damnation and call it the Gospel, 
are doing so in utter violation of the meaning of the 
word and of all the uses of that word throughout the 
Scriptures. However well they may mean, they are 
in this certainly committing a wrong, a grievous 
wrong, and we long to see the light of the knowledge 
of the goodness of God shine into their hearts and relieve 
them of this blindness which comes not from 
God nor from his Word, but from the prince of darkness. 
-2 Cor. 4:4. 

It will require all the Millennial age (which is 
to follow this Gospel age in which we live) to bless 
all the families of the earth with the joyful knowledge 
of divine grace in Christ. Just so surely as the forty-seven 
thousand millions went down into death without 
hearing of the Saviour, without coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, without the good tidings of 
great joy reaching their ears,— just so surely must 
they all come forth from the grave that this very Gospel 
message of "good tidings" may be declared to 
them, and that they may be tested thereby and either 
be accepted to eternal life or destroyed, as unworthy 
of life, in the Second Death. We say just so surely, 
for three reasons: 

(1) The announcement of the Gospel to Abraham 
says, "In thy seed shall all the families of the 

earth be blessed," and all of these forty-seven thousand 
millions belong to this very class specified, the 
families of the earth— and they have not yet been 
blessed with this knowledge of the only name wherein 
is the blessing. 

(2) The same is true of the message by the angels, 
—the good tidings of great joy is for all people, 

and these forty-seven thousand millions of humanity 
are surely the great bulk of all people. 

(3) We are sure that this testimony must be 
given to them in the future because the Scriptural 
declaration is that "Christ died for the ungodly;" "he 
tasted death for every man," and as a consequence 
every man must have an opportunity granted him for 
benefitting by that death, and of availing himself of 
the privilege of eternal life which was secured by 
our Lord's ransom sacrifice. 

DID CHRIST DIE FOR THE CHURCH ONLY? 



But some one would perhaps say, Christ died 
only for the sins of the Church and not for the sins 
of the world, and consequently the sins of the world 
cannot be forgiven them. We answer, No; the Scriptural 
declaration most positively is that "Jesus Christ 
by the grace of God tasted death for every man," "to 
be testified in due time." And, additionally, the Apostle 
says, "He is a propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
[the Church's] sins, and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world."— 1 John 2:2. 

What could be plainer than this? If the price 
for the sins of the whole world has been paid to Justice, 
we may rest well assured that Justice will furnish 
opportunity through the Redeemer whereby all these 
whose sins were atoned for may come to a knowledge 
of Christ, and to an opportunity of accepting divine 
grace through him. 

But some one will say, Why should God adopt 
a plan which would necessitate a resurrection of the 
dead, and a post-resurrection trial for eternal life except 
for all the elect Church of this Gospel age? 

We answer,— (1) It is not for us to inquire why 
the Lord adopts certain plans which differ from those 
which our poor finite minds might arrange for him: 
rather it is for us to acknowledge that our wisdom is 
insufficient on such a subject and that we should come 
humbly to the Lord to hear from his Word whatever 
he may be pleased to inform us respecting his purposes. 
(2) As a matter of fact only those who approach 
the question from this standpoint need expect 
to see the truth or to "comprehend with all saints 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the love of God."-Eph. 3:18; 1 Cor. 2:12. 

God has been pleased, however, to reveal to us 
some of his reasons for arranging his plan as we see 
it. He assures us of his full wisdom and power to 
manage every feature of his own work according to 
his own good pleasure, assuring us that he knows the 
end from the beginning, and that the end will fully 
justify every step that he has taken. His Word, no 
less than observation, shows us that during all these 
six thousand years the world has been getting a lesson 
respecting the exceeding sinfulness of sin and its 
wages of sorrow and death. His Word assures us also 
that during the next age, the Millennium, the whole 
world will be brought to a knowledge of the way of 
righteousness and love and peace, and will see the 
divine law in practical operation, and witness its beneficent 
results in all those who will come into harmony 
with the great Mediator. 

Thus mankind learns the lesson of evil and its 
consequences first in the present life, and the lesson 
of righteousness and its blessed results under divine 



R2596 : page 88 

providence, in the Millennium; and when thus fully 
equipped with knowledge on both sides of the question 
and instructed by the Royal Priesthood, (the 
completed and glorified elect Gospel Church), mankind 
will be ready for the tests, that will be applied 
by the Lord Jesus, under which the obedient and faithful 
will be granted full perfection and eternal life, and 
the disobedient and incorrigible will "be destroyed 
from amongst the people."— Acts 3:22,23. 

"IF YE BE CHRIST'S, THEN ARE YE ABRAHAM'S 
SEED AND HEIRS." 



Another matter, really the key to the whole question 
which we are discussing, is revealed in God's 
Word, viz., that in the divine purpose the promised 
"Seed of Abraham" that should perform the great 
work of blessing all the families of the earth, is to be 
one, in the sense of one kind, but not in the sense 
of one person— that is to say, that the seed of Abraham 
consists of Jesus Christ the Head, and of the 
Church which is the body. Not the nominal or professing 
church, but the true Church, "whose names 
are written in heaven," and who walk in the footsteps 
of their Lord, and are found faithful unto death, and 
shall be granted with their Lord the crown of life. 

This Gospel age intervening between the time of 
the great sin offering and the time when the blessing 
of earth's billions will commence, God has set 
apart for the work of selecting or electing the body of 
Christ, the Church, the Bride, the "little flock," the 
"royal priesthood," the joint heirs with Christ in his 
kingdom. These, like their Head, are called with a 
"high calling," a "heavenly calling," and the salvation 
provided for them is higher than that which God 
purposes for the world in general. He is selecting 
this "little flock" and trying them and 
proving them, fitting them and polishing them 
for the heavenly Kingdom, and it is to these, as 
the Apostle Peter declares, God has given "exceeding 
great and precious promises [far beyond any 
promises given to any other of his creatures] that by 
these [promises] we might become partakers of the 
divine nature," and joint-heirs with his Son. This is 
denominated a "heavenly calling" in contrast with 
the earthly salvation intended for whosoever will "in 
due time." 

This true view of the calling and election of the 
Church is another feature of the Gospel. If it is 
splendid, good news to know that ultimately all families 
of the earth are to be blessed with opportunities 
for salvation through the Christ, it is still an additional 



feature to the good news to know that God has invited 
us to become members of the Christ company, "members 
in particular of the body of Christ." No wonder 
the Apostle calls this our "high calling," our 
"heavenly calling": it is to the attainment of this great 
prize that the Apostle exhorts all the faithful to lay 
aside every weight and every besetment and to run 
with patience the race set before us in the Gospel, 
looking unto Jesus, the author, until he shall have 
become the finisher of our faith. 

This is the true Gospel, dear friends, the one we 
find set forth in the Scriptures, set forth by Paul himself, 
and of which he was not ashamed. This Gospel 
shows the character of our Creator in a most wonderful 
light,— his Wisdom, able to discern the end from 
the beginning; his Power, able to accomplish that 
which he pleases; his Justice, squaring every feature 
of the plan from first to last, according to the most 
absolute features of righteousness; his Love, whose 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths we have 
not yet been able to explore; a love which sympathizes 
with his creatures in their fallen estate; a love which 
provided a Saviour, and a great one; a love which 
prompted that Saviour to give his life as our ransom 
price; a love which met all the requirements of divine 
justice for us; a love which still pursues mankind, 
and in this Gospel age calls us to joint heirship 
with his Son in a nature and kingdom far above angels, 
principalities and powers, of which the Apostle 
says: 

"Behold what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons 
of God." This divine love, still pursuing its original 
plan for man's salvation, will use the "elect" glorified 
house of sons, of which Christ Jesus is the Head (Eph. 1:22), 
in blessing all families of the earth with full opportunity 
of knowledge and full assistance up the 
highway of holiness (Isa. 35:8) that so many as will 
may attain to restitution to all that was lost in Adam 

R2597 : page 88 

by coming back into harmony with God through the 
great Mediator.-Acts 3:19-23. 

NONE NEED BE ASHAMED OF THE TRUE GOSPEL. 



Verily, dear friends, of this Gospel we are not 
ashamed, "for it is the power of God unto salvation 
to everyone that believeth." It has in our hearts a 
transforming and renewing power, a sanctifying power 
which no error could possibly have, and which all 
the theories of eternal torment have never equaled 
and never will. Let us more and more "show forth 



the praises of our God, who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light," by renouncing 
all God-dishonoring creeds and theories, and instead 
hold forth the Word of life, and witness the good 
confession— the "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people." 

All who will declare the true Gospel will need 
to be well shod with the preparation of the gospel 
of peace (gentleness, patience, meekness) for, strange 
to say, they will find bitter opposition from professed 
servants of the Lord who have been blinded and prejudiced 
by Satan's misrepresentations of the Gospel,— 
by which he seeks to drive from the Lord all who have 
a remnant of reason in their religious thinking. All 
who have ears to hear, and who do hear the true Gospel, 
will quickly distinguish it from the miserable counterfeits 
which for so long have passed current among 
God's people. Let all such remember that ability 
to hear is an evidence of divine favor, and let them 
not be ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf. Let 
such remember, also, that their acceptance of truth 
as due, in the face of unpopularity, is a part of their 
testing. The Lord puts his plan, his Word, as his 
representative, saying— He that is ashamed of me 
and my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, 
when he cometh in the glory of his Father with his 
holy angels.— Mark 8:38. 



R2597 : page 89 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES CONCERNING HELL? 



"To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to 
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

A CORRECT understanding of this subject has 
become almost a necessity to Christian steadfastness. 
For centuries it has been the 

teaching of "orthodoxy," of all shades, that God, before 
creating man, had created a great abyss of fire 
and terrors, capable of containing all the billions of the 
human family which he purposed to bring into being; 
that this abyss he had named "hell"; and that all of the 
promises and threatenings of the Bible were designed 
to deter as many as possible (a "little flock") from such 
wrong-doing as would make this awful place their 
perpetual home. 

As knowledge increases and superstitions fade, 
this monstrous view of the divine arrangement and 
character is losing its force; and thinking people cannot 
but disbelieve the legend, which used to be illustrated 
on the church walls in the highest degree of art 



and realism, samples of which are still to be seen in 
Europe. Some now claim that the place is literal, but 
the fire symbolic, etc., etc., while others repudiate the 
doctrine of "hell" in every sense and degree. While 
glad to see superstitions fall, and truer ideas of the 
great, and wise, and just, and loving Creator prevail, 
we are alarmed to notice that the tendency with all 
who abandon this long revered doctrine is toward 
doubt, skepticism, infidelity. 

Why should this be the case, when the mind is 
merely being delivered from an error,— do you ask? 
Because Christian people have so long been taught 
that the foundation for this awful blasphemy against 
God's character and government is deep-laid, and 
firmly fixed, in the Word of God— the Bible— and, 
consequently, to whatever degree that belief in "hell" 
is shaken, to that extent their faith in the Bible, as the 
revelation of the true God, is shaken also;— so that 
those who have dropped their belief in a "hell," of some 
kind of endless torment, are often open infidels, and 
scoffers at God's Word. 

Guided by the Lord's providence to a realization 
that the Bible has been slandered, as well as its divine 
Author, and that, rightly understood, it teaches nothing 
on this subject derogatory to God's character nor 
to an intelligent reason, we will attempt to lay bare 
the Scripture teaching on this subject, that thereby 
faith in God and his Word may be re-established, in 
the hearts of his people, on a better, a reasonable 
foundation. Indeed, it is our opinion that whoever 
shall hereby find that his false view rested upon human 
misconceptions and misinterpretations, will, at the 
same time, learn to trust hereafter less to his own and 
other men's imaginings, and, by faith, to grasp more 
firmly the Word of God, which is able to make wise 
unto salvation. 

That the advocates of the doctrine of eternal torment 
have little or no faith in it is very manifest from 
the fact that it has no power over their course of action. 
While all the denominations of Christendom 
sustain the doctrine that eternal torment and endless, 
hopeless despair will constitute the punishment of the 
wicked, they are mostly quite at ease in allowing the 
wicked to take their course, while they pursue the 
even tenor of their way. Chiming bells and pealing 
organs, artistic choirs, and costly edifices, and upholstered 
pews, and polished oratory which more and 
more avoids any reference to this alarming theme, 
afford rest and entertainment to fashionable congregations 
that gather on the Lord's day and are known 
to the world as churches of Christ and representatives 
of his doctrines. But they seem little concerned about 
the eternal welfare of the multitudes, or even of themselves 
and their own families, though one would naturally 
presume that with such awful possibilities in view 
they would be almost frantic in their efforts to rescue 



the perishing. 

The plain inference is that they do not believe it. 
The only class of people that to any degree show their 
faith in it by their works is the Salvation Army; and 
these are the subjects of ridicule from almost all other 
Christians, because they are somewhat consistent with 
their belief. Yet their peculiar, and often absurd, 
methods, so strikingly in contrast with those of the 
Lord of whom it was written, "He shall not cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street" (Isa. 42:2), 
are very mild compared with what might be 
expected if they were fully convinced of the doctrine. 
We cannot imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the ordinary 
affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance every Sunday 
to hear an essay from the pulpit on the peculiar 
subjects often advertised. Could they do so while 
really believing all the time that fellow mortals are 
dying at the rate of one hundred a minute, and 
entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer"? 

If they really believed this few saints could complacently 
sit there and think of those hurrying every 
moment into that awful state described by that good, 
well-meaning, but greatly deluded man, Isaac Watts 
(whose own heart was immeasurably warmer and 
larger than that he ascribed to the great Jehovah), 
when he wrote the hymn— 

"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm." 

People often become frantic with grief when 
friends have been caught in some terrible catastrophe, 
as a fire, or a wreck, though they know they will 
soon be relieved by death; yet they pretend to believe 
that God is less loving than themselves, and that he 
can look with indifference, if not with delight, at billions 
of his creatures enduring an eternity of torture 
far more terrible, which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from forever. Not only so, but they 
expect that they will get literally into Abraham's bosom, 
and will then look across the gulf and see and hear 
the agonies of the multitudes (some of whom they now 
love and weep over); and they imagine that they will 
be so changed, and become so like their present idea 
of God, so hardened against all pity, and so barren of 
love and sympathy, that they will delight in such a 
God and in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible men and 
women, who love their fellows, and who establish hospitals, 
orphanages, asylums, and societies for the prevention 
of cruelty even to the brute creation, are so 
unbalanced mentally that they can believe and subscribe 



R2597 : page 90 

to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent 
about investigating its authority! 

Only one exception can we think of— those who 
hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who believe that 
God has decreed it thus, that all the efforts they 
could put forth could not alter the result with a single 
person; and that all the prayers they could offer would 
not change one iota of the awful plan they believe 
God has marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for their 
fellows is concerned: but why sing the praises of such 
a scheme for the damnation of their neighbors whom 
God has told them to love as themselves? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine of 
devils," this blasphemy against the great God, hatched 
in the "dark ages," when a crafty priesthood taught 
that it is right to do evil that good may result? 

R2598 : page 90 

The doctrine of eternal torment was undoubtedly 
introduced by Papacy to induce pagans to join her 
and support her system. It flourished at the same 
time that "bull fights" and gladiatorial contests were 
the public amusements most enjoyed; when the Crusades 
were called "holy wars," and when men and 
women were called "heretics" and were often slaughtered 
for thinking or speaking contrary to the teachings 
of the Papacy; at a time when the sun of gospel 
truth was obscure; when the Word of God had fallen 
into disuse and was prohibited to be read by any but 
the clergy, whose love of their neighbors was often 
shown in torturing "heretics" to induce them to recant 
and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 
them, if possible, they explained, from the more awful 
future of "heretics,"— eternal torture. They did not 
borrow this doctrine from the heathen, for no heathen 
people in the world have a doctrine so cruel, so fiendish 
and so unjust. Find it, whoever can, and show 
it up in all its blackness, that, if possible, it may be 
shown that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 
ungodliness has not been exclusively appropriated by 
those whom God has most highly favored with light 
from every quarter, and to whom he has committed 
the only oracle— his Word. Oh! the shame and confusion 
that will cover the faces of many, even good 
men, who verily thought that they did God service 
while propagating this blasphemous doctrine, when 
they awake in the resurrection, to learn of the love 
and justice of God, and when they come to know that 
the Bible does not teach this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing 
truth-beclouding, saint-hindering, sinner-hardening, 
"damnable heresy" of eternal torment. 
-2 Pet. 2:1. 



But we repeat that, in the light and moral development 
of this day, sensible people do not believe this 
doctrine. However, since they think that the Bible 
teaches it, every step they progress in real intelligence 
and brotherly kindness, which hinders belief in eternal 
torment, is in most cases a step away from God's 
word, which is falsely accused of being the authority 
for this teaching. Hence the second crop of evil 
fruit, which the devil's engraftment of this error is producing, 
is skepticism. The intelligent, honest thinkers 
are thus driven from the Bible into vain philosophies 
and sciences, falsely so-called, and into infidelity. Nor 
do the "worldly" really believe this doctrine, nor is it 
a restraint to crime, for convicts and the lower classes 
are the firmest believers in it. 

But, says one, Has not the error done some good? 
Have not many been brought into the churches by 
the preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but always 
harm. Those whom error brings into a church, 
and whom the truth would not move, are an injury 
to the church. The thousands terrorized, but not at 
heart converted, which this doctrine forced into Papacy, 
and which swelled her numbers and her wealth, 
diluted what little truth was held before, and mingled 
it with their unholy sentiments and errors so that, to 
meet the changed condition of things, the "clergy" 
found it needful to add error to error, and resorted to 
methods, forms, etc., not taught in the Scriptures and 
useless to the truly converted whom the truth controls. 
Among these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help the unconverted 
heathen to a form of godliness more nearly 
corresponding to their former heathen worship, but 
lacking all the power of vital godliness. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they were still 
heathen in God's sight, but deluded into aping what 
they did not understand or do from the heart. They 
were added "tares" to choke the "wheat," without being 
profited themselves. The Lord tells who sowed 
the seed of this enormous crop. (Matt. 13:39). The 
same is true of those who assume the name "Christian" 
to-day, who are not really at heart converted 
by the truth, but merely frightened by the error, or 
allured by promised earthly advantages of a social or 
business kind. Such add nothing to the true Church: 
by their ideas and manners they become stumbling 
blocks to the truly consecrated, and by their inability 
to digest the truth, the real food of the saints, they 
lead even the few true pastors to defraud the true 
"sheep" in order to satisfy the demands of these 
"goats" for something pleasing to their unconverted 
tastes. No: in no way has this error accomplished 
good except in the sense that God is able to make 
even the wrath of man to praise him. So also he will 
overrule this evil thing eventually to serve his purposes. 



When by and by all men (during the Millennium) 

shall come to see through this great deception by 

which Satan has blinded the world to God's true character, 

it will perhaps awaken in them a warmer, 

stronger love for God. 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's view, 
let us lay aside human opinions and theories and come 
to the Word of God, the only authority on the subject, 
remembering that 

"God is His own interpreter, and He will make it plain.' 

"HELL," AS AN ENGLISH WORD. 



In the first place bear in mind that the Old Testament 
Scriptures were written in the Hebrew language, 
and the New Testament in the Greek. The word 
"hell" is an English word sometimes selected by the 
translators of the English Bible to express the sense 
of the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek words hades, 
tartaroo and gehenna,— sometimes rendered "grave" 
and "pit." 

The word "hell" in old English usage, before 
Papal theologians picked it up and gave it a new and 
special significance to suit their own purposes, simply 
meant to conceal, to hide, to cover; hence the concealed, 

R2598 : page 91 

hidden or covered place. In old English literature 
records may be found of the helling of potatoes 
—putting potatoes into pits; and of the helling of a 
house— covering or thatching it. The word hell was 
therefore properly used synonymously with the words 
"grave" and "pit," to translate the words sheol and 
hades as signifying the secret or hidden condition 
of death. However, the same spirit which was willing 
to twist the word to terrorize the ignorant is willing 
still to perpetuate the error;— presumably saying— 
"Let us do evil that good may follow." 

If the translators of the Revised Version Bible 
had been thoroughly disentangled from the Papal 
error, and thoroughly honest, they would have done 
more to help the English student than merely to substitute 
the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek word 
hades as they have done. They should have translated 
the words. But they were evidently afraid to tell 
the truth, and ashamed to tell the lie; and so gave us 
sheol and hades untranslated, and permitted the inference 
that these words mean the same as the word 
"hell" has become perverted to mean. Their course, 
while it for a time shields themselves, dishonors God 
and the Bible, which the common people still suppose 
teaches a "hell" of torment in the words sheol 
and hades. Yet anyone can see that if it was proper 



to translate the word sheol thirty-one times "grave" 
and three times "pit," it could not have been improper 
to have so translated it in every other instance. 

A peculiarity to be observed in comparing these 
cases, as we will do shortly, is that in those texts where 
the torment idea would be an absurdity the translators 
of the King James version have used the words 
"grave" or "pit"; while in all other cases they have 
used the word "hell"; and the reader, long schooled 
in the Papal idea of torment, reads the word "hell" 
and thinks of it as signifying a place of torment, instead 
of the grave, the hidden or covered place or condition. 
For example, compare Job 14:13 with Psa. 86:13. 
The former reads,— "Oh, that thou wouldst 
hide me in the grave [sheol] etc.," while the latter 
reads,— "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell [sheol]." The Hebrew word being the same in 
both cases, there is no reason why the same word 
"grave" should not be used in both. But how absurd 
it would have been for Job to have prayed to God to 
hide him in a hell of eternal torture! The English 
reader would have asked questions and the secret 
would have gotten out speedily. 

While the translators of the Reformation times 
are somewhat excusable for their mental bias in this 
matter, as they were just breaking away from the old 
Papal system, our modern translators, specially those 
of the recent Revised Version, are not entitled to any 
such consideration. Theological professors and pastors 
of congregations consider that they are justified 
in following the course of the revisers in not explaining 
the meaning of either the Hebrew or Greek words 
sheol or hades and by their use of the words they also 
give their confiding flocks to understand that a place 
of torture, a lake of fire, is meant. While attributing 
to the ignorant only the best of motives, it is manifestly 
only duplicity and cowardice which induces educated 
men, who know the truth on this subject, to 
prefer to continue to teach the error inferentially. 

But not all ministers know of the errors of the 
translators, and deliberately cover and hide those errors 
from the people. Many, indeed, do not know of 
them, having merely accepted, without investigation, 
the theories of their seminary professors. It is the 
professors and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about "hell" 
for several reasons. First, there is evidently a sort 
of understanding or etiquette among them, that if they 
wish to maintain their standing in the "profession" 
they "must not tell tales out of school"; i.e., they must 
not divulge professional secrets to the "common people," 
the "laity." Second, they all fear that to let it 
be known that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would break down the popular respect 
and reverence for the "clergy," the denominations 
and the theological schools, and unsettle confidence 



R2599 : page 91 

in their wisdom. And, oh, how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when God's 
Word is so generally ignored! Third, they know that 
many of the members of their sects are not constrained 
by "the love of Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by 
the fear of hell, and they see clearly, therefore, that 
to let the truth be known now would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their flocks; and 
this, to those who "desire to make a fair show in the 
flesh" (Gal. 6:12) would seem to be a great calamity. 

But what will be the judgment of God, whose 
character and plan are traduced by the blasphemous 
doctrine which these untranslated words help to support? 
Will he commend these unfaithful servants? 
Will he justify their course? Will the Chief Shepherd 
call these his beloved friends, and make known to them 
his further plans (John 15:15) that they may misrepresent 
them also to preserve their own dignity and 
reverence? Will he continue to send forth "things 
new and old," "meat in due season," to the household 
of faith, by the hand of the unfaithful servants? No, 
such shall not continue to be his mouthpieces or to 
shepherd his flock. (Ezek. 34:9,10.) He will choose 
instead, as at the first advent, from among the laity— 
"the common people"— mouthpieces, and will give 
them words which none of the chief priests shall be 
able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) And, as foretold, 
"the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
-Isa. 29:9-19. 

"HELL" IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in the 
Old Testament, and in every instance it is sheol in the 
Hebrew. It does not mean a lake of fire and brimstone, 
nor anything at all resembling that thought: 
not in the slightest degree! Quite the reverse: instead 
of a place of blazing fire it is described in the context 
as a state of "darkness" (Job 10:21); instead of a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described in 
the context as a place of "silence" (Psa. 115:17); instead 
of representing in any sense pain and suffering, 
or remorse, the context describes it as a place or condition 
of forgetfulness. (Psa. 88:11,12.) "There is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 

The meaning of sheol is "the hidden state," as 
applied to man's condition in death, in and beyond 
which all is hidden, except to the eye of faith; hence, 



R2599 : page 92 

by proper and close association, the word was often 
used in the sense of grave— the tomb, the hidden 
place, or place beyond which only those who have the 
enlightened eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it particularly 
noted that this identical word sheol is translated 
"grave" thirty-one times and "pit" three times in our 
common version by the same translators— more times 
than it is translated "hell"; and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the present 
accepted meaning of the English word "hell," that 
scholars have felt it necessary to explain in the margin 
of modern Bibles, that it means grave. (Isa. 14:9 and 
Jonah 2:2.) In the latter case, the hidden state, or 
grave, was the belly of the fish in which Jonah was 
buried alive, and from which he cried to God. 

ALL TEXTS IN WHICH "SHEOL" IS TRANSLATED 
"HELL." 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into hell, thence 
shall mine hand take them." [A figurative expression; 
but certainly pits of the earth are the only hells men 
can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16: 10.— "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 
corruption." [This refers to our Lord's three days 
in the tomb. -Acts 2:31; 3:15.] 

(3,4) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6-margin.-"The 
cords of hell compassed me about." [A figure in 
which trouble is represented as hastening one to the 
tomb.] 

(5) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick into hell" 
—margin, "the grave." 

(6) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell, and all the nations that forget God." This text 
will be treated later, under a separate heading. 

(7) Psa. 86: 13.— "Thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(8) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me." [Sickness 
and trouble are the figurative hands of the grave 

to grasp us.] 

(9) Psa. 139:8.— "If I make my bed in hell, behold, 
thou art there." [God's power is unlimited: even 
over those in the tomb he can and will exert it and 
bring forth all that are in the graves.— John 5:28.] 

(10) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in mine 
anger, and shall burn into the lowest hell." [A figurative 
representation of the destruction, the utter ruin, 

of Israel as a nation— "wrath to the uttermost," as 
the Apostle called it, God's anger burning that nation 
to the "lowest deep," as Leeser here translates the 
word sheol.— 1 Thes. 2:16.] 



(11) Job 11:8.— "It [God's wisdom] is as high as 
heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell [than 
any pit]; what canst thou know?" 

(12) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked before 
him, and destruction hath no covering." 

(13) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to death; 

her steps take hold on hell [i.e., lead to the grave]." 

(14) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to hell 
[the grave], going down to the chambers of death." 

(15) Prov. 9:18. -"He knoweth not that the dead 

are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell." 
[Here the harlot's guests are represented as dead, diseased 
or dying, and many of the victims of sensuality 
in premature graves from diseases which also hurry 
off their posterity to the tomb.] 

(16) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction are before 
the Lord." [Here the grave is associated with 
destruction and not with a life of torment] 

(17) Prov. 15:24.— "The path of life (leadeth) upward 
for the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath." 
[This illustrates the hope of resurrection from 

the tomb.] 

(18) Prov. 23:14. -"Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell" [i.e., wise 
correction will save a child from vicious ways which 
lead to premature death, and may also possibly prepare 
him to escape the "Second Death"]. 

(19) Prov. 27:20.— "Hell [the grave] and destruction 
are never full: so the eyes of man are never 
satisfied." 

(20) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged herself 
and opened her mouth without measure." [Here 

the grave is a symbol of destruction.] 

(21,22) Isa. 14:9,15.— "Hell [margin, grave] from 
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming." 
..."Thou shalt be brought down to hell" [the 
grave— so rendered in verse 11]. 

(23) Isa. 57:9.— "And didst debase thyself even 
unto hell." [Here figurative of deep degradation.] 

(24,25) Ezek. 31:15-17. -"In the day when he 
went down to the grave,... I made the nations to 
shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down 
to hell with them that descend into the pit.... 
They also went down into hell with him, unto them 
that be slain with the sword." [Figurative and prophetic 
description of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(26) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the mighty 
shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them 
that help him." [A continuation of the same figure 
representing Egypt's overthrow as a nation to join 
Babylon in destruction— buried.] 

(27) Ezek. 32:27. -"And they shall not lie with 

the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which 
are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and 
they have laid their swords under their heads; but 



their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they 
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war under 
their heads.] 

(28) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire as hell 
[the grave] and as death, and cannot be satisfied." 

(29) Jonah 2: 1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed unto the 
Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried 
by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he 
heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou 
heardest my voice." [The belly of the fish was for 

a time his grave— see margin.] 

(30,31) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell 
[the grave] are we at agreement; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto 
us, for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves: Therefore, saith the Lord, 
...Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, 
and your agreement with hell [the grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present prevalent 

R2599: page 93 

idea, by which death and the grave are represented 
as friends, rather than enemies, shall cease; and men 
shall learn that death is the wages of sin, now and 
that it is in Satan's power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14) and 
not an angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER TEXTS WHERE "SHEOL" OCCURS- 
RENDERED "GRAVE" AND "PIT." 



Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave unto 
my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down my gray 
hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See also the same 
expression in 44:29,31. The translators did not like 

R2600 : page 93 

to send God's servant, Jacob, to hell simply because 
his sons were evil.] 

1 Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: 
he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up." 

1 Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go down to 
the grave with peace. ...His hoar head bring thou 
down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the grave." 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me in 
the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret until thy 
wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint me a set 
time, and remember me [resurrect me]!" 



Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine house: 
I have made my bed in the darkness." [Job waits for 
resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the bars 
of the pit [grave], when our rest together is in the 
dust." 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in mirth, 
and in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24:19,20.— "Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters: so doth the grave those which have 
sinned." [All have sinned, hence "Death passed upon 
all men," and all go down to the grave. But all have 
been redeemed by "the precious blood of Christ"; 
hence all shall be awakened and come forth again in 
God's due time— "in the morning," Rom. 5:12,18,19.] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance of 
thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up my 
soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I 
should not go down to the pit." [This passage expresses 
gratitude for recovery from danger of death.] 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; let 
them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they are laid 
in the grave: death shall feed on them; and the upright 
[the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall have dominion over 
them in the morning [the Millennial morning]; and 
their beauty shall consume, the grave being an habitation 
to every one of them. But God will redeem my 
soul from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the grave." 

Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from the 
hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive as 
the grave: and whole, as those that go down into the 
pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, it is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither 
thou goest." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel as the 
grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down to the 
grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the grave: 
I am deprived of the residue of my years." 

Isa. 38:18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, death 
cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:30-33.— "If.. .they go down quick 
into the pit, then shall ye understand. ...The ground 
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth 



opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, 
and all their goods. They and all that appertained to 
them went down alive into the pit, and the earth 
closed upon them: and they perished from among the 
congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went down 
to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. 
O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be 
thy destruction. Repentance shall be hid from mine 
eyes." [The Lord did not ransom any from a place 
of fire and torment, for there is no such place; but he 
did ransom all mankind from the grave, from death, 
the penalty brought upon all by Adam's sin, as this 
verse declares.] 

The above list includes every instance of the use 
of the English word "hell" and the Hebrew word sheol 
in the Old Testament. From this examination it must 
be evident to all readers that God's revelations for 
four thousand years contain not a single hint of a 
"hell," such as the word is now understood to signify. 

"HELL" IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As 
proof see the quotations of the Apostles from the Old 
Testament, in which they render it hades. For instance, 
Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hades," is a quotation from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in sheol." And in 1 Cor. 15:54,55, 
"Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where 
is thy sting? O grave [hades], where is thy victory?" 
is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will swallow up death 
in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, "O death, I will be 
thy plagues; O sheol, I will be thy destruction." 

"HELL" FROM THE GREEK WORD "HADES." 



Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, which art 
exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell"; 
Luke 10:15: "Shall be thrust down to hell." 
[In privileges of knowledge and opportunity the city 
was highly favored, or, figuratively, "exalted unto 
heaven"; but because of misuse of God's favors, 
it would be debased, or, figuratively, cast down to 
hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is now so thoroughly 
buried in oblivion, that even the site where 

R2600 : page 94 



it stood is a matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, being 
in torments." [A parabolic figure explained further 
along, under a separate heading.] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed 
with him." [Symbol of destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16:18.— "Upon this rock I will build my 
church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against 
it." [Although bitter and relentless persecution, even 
unto death, should afflict the Church during the Gospel 
age, it should never prevail to her utter extermination; 
and eventually, by her resurrection, accomplished 
by her Lord, the Church will prevail over 
hades— the tomb.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED FROM 
"HELL" (HADES).-ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 



"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
...Peter. ..lifted up his voice and said,. ..Ye 
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, 
a man approved of God among you, ...being delivered 
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge 
of God ['He was delivered for our offenses'], ye have 
taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 
whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains 
[or bands] of death, because it was not possible that 
he should be holden of it [for the Word of Jehovah 
had previously declared his resurrection]; for David 
speaketh concerning him [personating or speaking for 
him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] always before 
my face; for he is on my right hand, that I should 
not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my 
tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest 
in hope, because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell 
[hades, the tomb, the state of death], neither wilt thou 
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou [Jehovah] 
hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of 
life.'" Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 
David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of 
a resurrection and in the full and glorious accomplishment 
of Jehovah's plan through him, and rejoices 
in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and brethren, 
let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, 
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is 
with us unto this day [so that this prophecy could not 
have referred to himself personally; for David's soul 
was left in "hell"— [hades, the tomb, the state of death 
—and his flesh did see corruption]: Therefore being 
a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an 



oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to 
the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of the resurrection 
of Christ [out of "hell"— hades, the tomb- 
to which he must go for our offenses], that his soul 
was not left in hell [hades— the death state], neither 
his flesh did see corruption." Thus Peter presents a 
strong, logical argument, based on the words of the 
prophet David— showing first, that Christ, who was 
delivered by God for our offenses, went to "hell," the 
grave, the condition of death, destruction (Psa. 16:10;) 
and, second, that according to promise he had been 
delivered from hell, the grave, death, destruction, 
by a resurrection— a raising up to life; being created 
again, the same identical being, yet more glorious, 
and exalted even to "the express image of the Father's 
person." (Heb. 1:3.) And now "this same Jesus" 
(Acts 2:36), in his subsequent revelation to the 
Church, declares— 

Rev. 1: 18.— "I am he that liveth, and was dead, 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore, Amen; and 
have the keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death." 

Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in his resurrection 
we see the glorious outcome of the whole 
plan of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power 

R2601 : page 95 

of the Resurrected One who now holds the keys of 
the tomb and of death and in due time will release 
all the prisoners who are, therefore, called the "prisoners 
of hope." (Zech. 9:12; Luke 4:18.) No craft 
or cunning can by any possible device wrest these 
Scriptures entire and pervert them to the support of 
that monstrous and blasphemous Papal tradition of 
eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, 
to be our vicarious sacrifice, must still, and to all 
eternity, endure such torment, which no one will 
claim. But death was our penalty, and "Christ died 
for our sins," and "also for the sins of the whole world." 
-1 Cor. 15:3; 1 John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14.— "And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell [the grave] delivered 
up the dead which were in them: and they were 
judged, every man, according to their works. And 
death and hell [the grave] were cast into the lake of 
fire: this is the Second Death." [The lake of fire is 
the symbol of final and everlasting destruction. 
Death and hell [the grave] both go into it. There 
shall be no more death; "the last enemy that shall be 
destroyed is death."— 1 Cor. 15:26; Rev. 21:4.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD "HELL." 



Having examined the word sheol, the only word 
in the Old Testament rendered "hell," and the word 
hades, most frequently in the New Testament rendered 
"hell" we now notice every remaining instance 
in Scripture of the English word "hell." In the New 
Testament two other words are rendered "hell"; 
namely, gehenna and tartaroo, which we will consider 
in the order named. 

"GEHENNA" RENDERED "HELL." 



This word occurs in the following passages— in 
all twelve times: -Matt. 5:22,29,30; 10:28; 18:9; 23:15,33; 
Mark 9:43-47; Luke 12:5; Jas. 3:6. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words which 
are translated "Valley of Hinnom." This valley lay 
just outside the city of Jerusalem, and served the purpose 
of sewer and garbage burner to that city. The 
offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there, and fires were 
kept continually burning to consume utterly all things 
deposited therein, brimstone being added to assist 
combustion and insure complete destruction. But 
no living thing was ever permitted to be cast into 
Gehenna. The Jews were not allowed to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating his dealings 
and plans, present and future, we should expect 

R2601 : page 95 

that this Valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, would also 
play its part in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood, the Christian Church as it will be, the 
true temple of God; and we know that their chief city 
was a figure of the New Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom 
power and center of authority— the city (government) 
of the Great King, Immanuel. We remember, 
too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after describing 
the class permitted to enter the privileges and 
blessings of that Kingdom— the honorable and glorious, 
and all who have right to the trees of life— we find 
it also declared that there shall not enter into it anything 
that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie; but only such as the Lamb shall write 
as worthy of life. This city, which thus will represent 
the entire saved world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified in the earthly city, Jerusalem; and the 
defiling, the abominable, etc., the class unworthy of 
life everlasting, who do not enter in, were represented 
by the refuse and the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast 



into Gehenna outside the city,— whose utter destruction 
was thus symbolized— the Second Death. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found worthy 
of life are to be cast into the "lake of fire" (Rev. 20: 15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as a 
symbol of destruction, and the symbol, lake of fire, 
being drawn from this same Gehenna, or Valley of 
Hinnom. 

Therefore, while Gehenna served a useful purpose 
to the city of Jerusalem as a place for garbage burning, 
it, like the city itself, was typical, and illustrated 
the future dealings of God in refusing and committing 
to destruction all the impure elements, thus preventing 
them from defiling the holy city, the New Jerusalem, 
after the trial of the Millennial age of judgment 
shall have fully proved them and separated with unerring 
accuracy the "sheep" from the "goats." 

So, then, Gehenna was a type or illustration of 
the Second Death— final and complete destruction, 
from which there can be no recovery; for after that, 
"there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," but only 
"fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries." 
-Heb. 10:26. 

Let us remember that Israel, for the purpose of 
being used as types of God's future dealing with the 
race, was typically treated as though the ransom had 
been given before they left Egypt, though only a typical 
lamb had been slain. When Jerusalem was built, 
and the Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be established 
by Christ in the Millennium— that people typified the 
world in the Millennial age. Their priests represented 
the glorified Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its 
demands of perfect obedience represented the law and 
conditions under the New Covenant, to be brought 
into operation for the blessing of all the obedient, and 
for the condemnation of all who, when granted fullest 
opportunity, will not heartily submit to the righteous 
ruling and laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then, that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, how 
appropriate that we should find the valley or abyss, 
Gehenna, a figure of the Second Death, the utter destruction 
in the coming age of all that is unworthy of 
preservation; and how aptly, too, is the symbol, "lake 
of fire burning with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn 
from this same Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the symbol, 
"fire," to express the utter and irrevocable destructiveness 
of the Second Death; for burning brimstone is 
the most deadly agent known. How reasonable, too, 
to expect that Israel would have courts and judges 
resembling or prefiguring the judgments of the next 
age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) courts 
of that (figurative) people under those (figurative) laws 



to that (figurative) abyss, outside that (figurative) 
city, would largely correspond to the (real) sentences 
of the (real) court and judges in the next age. If 
these points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in reference 
to Gehenna; for though the literal valley just at 
hand was named and referred to, yet his words carry 
with them lessons concerning the future age and the 
antitypical Gehenna— the Second Death. 

SHALL BE IN DANGER OF GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 5:21,22. 



"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill 
shall be amenable to the judges:' but I say unto you, 
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 
cause shall [future— under the regulations of the real 
Kingdom] be amenable to the judges; and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, 'Raca' [villain], shall be in danger 
of the high council; but whosoever shall say, 
Thou fool,' shall be in danger of hell [Gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council and 
judges and Gehenna, all should know something of 
Jewish regulations. The "Court of Judges" consisted 
of seven men (or twenty-three,— the number is in 
dispute), and had power to judge some classes of 
crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of recognized learning and ability. 
This constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its 
supervision was over the gravest offenses. The most 
serious sentence was death; but certain very obnoxious 
criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the carcasses 
of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into Gehenna, there to 
be consumed. The object of this burning in Gehenna 
was to make the crime and the criminal detestable in 
the eyes of the people, and signified that the culprit 
was a hopeless case. It must be remembered that 
Israel hoped for a resurrection from the tomb, and 
hence they were particular in caring for the corpses 
of their dead. Not realizing fully God's power, they 
apparently thought he needed their assistance to that 
extent. (Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in Gehenna after 
death (figuratively) implied the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus to such Gehenna represented 
the Second Death in the same figurative way 
that they as a people represented or illustrated a future 
order of things under the New Covenant. 

Notice that our Lord, in the above words, 
pointed out to them that their construction of the 
Law, severe though it was, was far below the real import 



R2601 page 96 

of that Law, as it shall be interpreted under the 
real Kingdom and Judges, which theirs only typified. 
He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou 
shalt not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation "shall 
be" considered a violation of God's Law, under the 
New Covenant; and that such as, under the favorable 
conditions of that new age, will not reform so thoroughly 
as to fully observe God's Law will be counted 
worthy of that which the Gehenna near them typified 
—the Second Death. However, the strict severity 
of that Law will be enforced only in proportion as the 
discipline, advantages and assistance of that age, enabling 
each to comply with its laws, shall be 
disregarded. 
The same thought is continued in 

R2602 : page 96 

MATTHEW 5:22-30. 



"Ye have heard," etc., "but I say unto you. ..it 
is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that 
thy whole body should be cast into Gehenna." 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the lesson of 
self-control is urged by the statement that it is far 
more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they be dear to them as a right 
eye, and apparently indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, in the 
Second Death, the future life provided through the 
atonement for all who will return to perfection, holiness 
and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to 
show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's Law, 
and how fully it will be defined and enforced in the 
Millennium, but they served as a lesson to the Jews 
also, who previously saw through Moses' commands 
only the crude exterior of the Law of God. Since 
they found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping the 
finer meaning of the Law revealed by Christ. Had 
they understood and received his teaching fully, they 
would have cried out, Alas! if God judges us thus, 
by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are 
all unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught but 
condemnation to Gehenna (to utter destruction, as 
brute beasts). They would have cried, "Show us a 
greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a High Priest 



and Teacher able fully to appreciate the Law, and 
able fully to appreciate and sympathize with our fallen 
state and inherited weaknesses, and let him offer for 
us 'better sacrifices,' and apply to us the needed 
greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a great physician 
heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts." Then they 
would have found Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears 
of their understanding were "dull of hearing"; hence 
they knew not that God had already prepared the 
very priest and sacrifice and teacher and physician 
they needed, who in due time redeemed those under 
the typical Law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, 
and hearing to their deaf ears. Then the 
"vail shall be taken away"— the vail of ignorance, 
pride and human wisdom which Satan now uses to 
blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show 
the Law of the New Covenant, and teach the Jew a 
lesson, but it is of benefit to the Gospel Church also. 
In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 
Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 
requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, 
and that we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 
God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance with 
the Father only in the merit of our Redeemer, while 
none can be of that "body," covered by the robe of his 
righteousness, except the consecrated who endeavor 
to do only those things well pleasing to God, which 
includes the avoidance of sin to the extent of ability. 
Yet their acceptability with God rests not in their perfection, 
but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as 
they abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited 
by a clear insight into the perfect Law of God, even 
though they are not dependent on the perfect keeping 
of it. They delight to do God's will to the extent of 
their ability, and the better they know his perfect Law, 
the better they are able to rule themselves and to conform 
to it. So, then, to us also the Lord's words have 
a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be specially noticed here 
is that Gehenna which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, was not a lake of fire to be 
kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be 
cast who get "angry with a brother" and call him a 
"fool." No; the Jews gathered no such extreme idea 
from the Lord's words. The eternal torment theory 
was unknown to them. It had no place in their theology, 
as will be shown. It is a comparatively modern 
invention, coming down, as we have shown, from 
Papacy— the great apostasy. The point is that Gehenna 
symbolizes the Second Death— utter, complete 



and everlasting destruction. This is clearly shown 
by its being contrasted with life as its opposite. "It 
is better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed, 
than otherwise to be cast into Gehenna." It is better 
that you should deny yourselves sinful gratifications 
than that you should lose all future life, and perish in 
the Second Death. 

ABLE TO DESTROY BOTH SOUL AND BODY IN 
GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul and body in hell [Gehenna]." See 
also another account of the same discourse by 
Luke-- 12:4,5. 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers the 
great cause they had for courage and bravery under 
the most trying circumstances. They were to expect 
persecution, and to have all manner of evil spoken 
against them falsely, for his sake, and for the sake of 
the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever 
would kill them would think that he did God 
a service. Their consolation or reward for this was 

R2602 : page 97 

to be received, not in the present life, but in the life 
to come. They were assured, and they believed, that 
he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and 
that all in their graves must in consequence, in due 
time, hear the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either 
to reward (if their trial had been passed in this life 
successfully), future trial, or judgment, as must be the 
case with the great majority who do not, in this present 
life, come to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
essential to a complete trial. 

Under present conditions men are able to kill our 
bodies, but nothing that they can do will affect our 
future being (soul),* which God has promised shall 
be revived or restored by his power in the resurrection 
day— the Millennial age. Our revived souls will have 
new bodies (spiritual or natural— "to each 'seed' his 
own [kind of] body"), and these none will have liberty 
to kill. God alone has power to destroy utterly— soul 
and body. He alone, therefore, should be feared, and 
the opposition of men even to the death is not to be 
feared, if thereby we gain divine approval. Our 
Lord's bidding then is, Fear not them which can 
terminate the present (dying) life in these poor dying 
bodies. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its 
pleasures, in comparison with that future existence or 



being which God has provided for you, and which, if 
secured, may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power can 
extend no farther than the present existence; who 
can harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. 
Rather have respect and deference to God, with whom 
are the issues of life everlasting— fear him who is able 
to destroy in Gehenna, the Second Death, both the 
present dying existence and all hope of future 
existence. 

UNDYING WORMS AND QUENCHLESS FIRES. 
MATTHEW 18:8,9; MARK 9:43-48. 



Here it is conclusively shown that Gehenna as a 
figure represented the Second Death— the utter destruction 
which must ensue in the case of all who, 
after having fully received the opportunities of a future 
being or existence through our Lord's sacrifice, prove 
themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to accept 
it, by refusing obedience to his just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul or body 
in Gehenna, but that in it he can and will "destroy" 
both. Thus we are taught that any who are condemned 
to the Second Death are hopelessly and forever 
blotted out of existence. 

[Since these two passages refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 44 and 46, 
and part of 45, are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS., though verse 48, which reads the same, 
is in all manuscripts. We quote the text as found 
in these ancient and reliable MSS.] "If thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
Gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. 
And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into Gehenna. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck 
it out: it is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom 
of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into Gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire 
is not quenched." 

After reading the above, all must agree with the 
prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in figures 
and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No 
one for a moment supposes that our Lord advised the 
people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean 
us to understand that the injuries and disfigurements 
of the present life will continue beyond the grave, 
when we shall "enter into life." The Jews, whom the 
Lord addressed, having no conception of a place of 
everlasting torment, and who knew the word Gehenna 
to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not 



a place of torment, nor a place where any living 
thing was cast, but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it, recognizing the 
Lord's expression regarding limbs and eyes to be 
figurative, knew that Gehenna also was used in the 
same figurative sense, to symbolize utter destruction. 



*We will supply free on application a tract on "What is the Soul?" 
R2603 : page 97 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for redeemed man, is of inestimable 
value, and it will richly pay you to make any 
sacrifice to receive and enjoy that life. Should it 
even cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss of 
these, yet life would be cheap at even such a cost. 
That would be better far than to retain your members 
and lose all in Gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers 
drew the lesson as applicable to all the affairs of life, 
and understood the Master to mean that it would 
richly repay them to deny themselves many comforts, 
pleasures and tastes, dear to them as a right 
hand, precious as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to come 
and be utterly destroyed in Gehenna— the Second 
Death. 

But what about the undying worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 

We answer, In the literal Gehenna, which is the 
basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, 
etc., frequently fell upon ledges of rocks and not into 
the fire kept burning below. Thus exposed, these 
would breed worms and be destroyed by them, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No 
one was allowed to disturb the contents of this valley; 
hence the worm and the fire together completed the 
work of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a never-ending 
fire, nor everlasting worms. The thought is 
that the worms did not die off and leave the carcasses 
there, but continued and completed the work of destruction. 
So with the fire: it was not quenched, it 
burned on until all was consumed. Just so if a house 
were ablaze and the fire could not be controlled or 
quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed, 
we might properly call such an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the 
completeness and finality of the Second Death, symbolized 
in Gehenna. All who go into the Second 
Death will be thoroughly and completely and forever 
destroyed; no ransom will ever again be given for any 



(Rom. 6:9); for none worthy of life will be cast into 
the Second Death, or lake of fire, but only those who 



R2603 : page 98 

love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge 
of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the Second 
Death pointedly illustrated by Gehenna, but it is evident 
that the same Teacher used the same figure to 
represent the same thing in the symbols of Revelation, 
—though there it is not called Gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as the basis 
of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes it; and all 
should notice that he speaks, not as some with false 
ideas might expect, of billions alive in flames and torture, 
but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

The two preceding verses show the time when 
this prophecy will be fulfilled, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it appertains 
to the new dispensation, the Millennium, the "new 
heavens and new earth" condition of things. Then 
all the righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, wilful 
enemies of righteousness, as it is written: "They shall 
be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

MATTHEW 23:15,33. 



The class here addressed was not the heathen who 
had no knowledge of the truth, nor the lowest and 
most ignorant of the Jewish nation, but the Scribes 
and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious, and the 
leaders and teachers of the people. To these our 
Lord said, "How can ye escape the judgment of Gehenna?" 
These men were hypocritical: they were 
not true to their convictions. Abundant testimony of 
the truth had been borne to them, but they refused to 
accept it, and endeavored to counteract its influence 
and to discourage the people from accepting it. And 
in thus resisting the holy spirit of light and truth, they 
were hardening their hearts against the very agency 
which God designed for their blessing. Hence they 
were wickedly resisting his grace, and such a course, 
if pursued, must eventually end in condemnation to 
the Second Death, Gehenna. Every step in the direction 
of wilful blindness and opposition to the truth 
makes return more difficult, and makes the wrongdoer 



more and more of the character which God abhors, 
and which the Second Death is intended to 
utterly destroy. The Scribes and Pharisees were 
progressing rapidly in that course: hence the warning 
inquiry of our Lord, "How can ye escape?" etc. The 
sense is this,— Although you boast of your piety, you 
will surely be destroyed in Gehenna, unless you 
change your course. 

SET ON FIRE OF GEHENNA. 

JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, 
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on 
fire the course of nature, and [or when] it is set on 
fire of Gehenna." 

Here, in strong, symbolic language, the Apostle 
points out the great and bad influence of an evil tongue 
—a tongue set on fire (figuratively) by Gehenna (figuratively). 
For a tongue to be set on fire of Gehenna 
signifies that it is set going in evil by a perverse disposition, 
self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, the sort 
of disposition which, in spite of knowledge and opportunity, 
unless controlled and reformed, will be 
counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for whom 
the "Second Death," the real "lake of fire," the real 
Gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude may by 
his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive disturbance, 
which, wherever it has contact, will work evil in 
the entire course of nature. A few malicious words 
often arouse all the evil passions of the speaker, engender 
the same in others and react upon the first. 
And continuance in such an evil course finally corrupts 
the entire man, and brings him under sentence 
as utterly unworthy of life. 

"TARTAROO" RENDERED "HELL." 



The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the 
Scriptures, and is translated hell. It is found in 
2 Pet. 2:4, which reads thus: 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast 
[them] down to hell [tartaroo], and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto 
judgment." 

Having examined all other words rendered "hell," 
in the Bible, and all the texts in which they occur, we 
conclude the examination with this text, which is the 
only one in which the word tartaroo occurs. In the 
above quotation, all the words shown in Italic type 
are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss to know how 
to translate the word, but concluded they knew where 



the evil angels ought to be, and so they made bold 
to put them into "hell," though it took six words to 
twist the idea into the shape they had pre-determined 
it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. But tartaroo 
seems to refer more to an act than to a place. The 
fall of the angels who sinned was from honor and 
dignity, into dishonor and condemnation, and the 
thought seems to be— "God spared not the angels 
who sinned, but degraded them, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness." 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to 
us through other Scriptures; for these fallen spirits 
frequented the earth in the days of our Lord and the 
apostles. Hence they were not down in some place, 
but "down" in the sense of being degraded from former 
honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, 
as by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in 
spiritualistic seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be certain dead human beings, 
they must always do their work in the dark, because 
darkness is the chain by which they are bound until 
the great Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will be able 
to materialize in daylight is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind 
and deceive for a short season— until the Sun of 
Righteousness has fully risen and Satan is fully 
bound. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible use 

R2603 : page 99 

of the word "hell." Thank God, we find no such place 
of everlasting torture as the creeds and hymn-books, 
and many pulpits, erroneously teach. Yet we have 
found a "hell," sheol, hades, to which all our race were 
condemned on account of Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and that "hell" 
is the tomb— the death condition. And we find 
another "hell" (Gehenna— the Second Death— utter 
destruction) brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all who, after being redeemed and 
brought to the full knowledge of the truth, and to 
full ability to obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing 
a course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen! True and righteous are 
thy ways, thou King of nations! Who shall not venerate 
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and 
worship before thee, because thy righteous dealings 
are made manifest— Rev. 15:3,4. 

PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 



--LUKE 16:19-31.— 

The great difficulty with many in reading this 
scripture is that, though they regard it as a parable, 
they reason on it and draw conclusions from it as 
though it were a literal statement. To regard it as a 
literal statement involves several absurdities; for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and gave nothing but 
crumbs to Lazarus. Not a word is said about his 
wickedness. Again, Lazarus was blessed, not because 
he was a sincere child of God, full of faith and trust, 

R2604 : page 99 

not because he was good, but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, the 
only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless 
we are poor beggars full of sores, we will never enter 
into future bliss; and that if now we wear any fine 
linen and purple, and have plenty to eat every day, 
we are sure of future torment. Again, the coveted 
place of favor is "Abraham's bosom"; and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be literal, 
and it surely would not hold very many of earth's 
millions of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, it 
is easy of interpretation. In a parable the thing said 
is never the thing meant. We know this from our 
Lord's own explanations of his parables. When he 
said "wheat," he meant "children of the kingdom"; 
when he said "tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil"; when he said "reapers" his servants were to be 
understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) The same classes were 
represented by different symbols in different parables. 
Thus the "wheat" of one parable correspond 
to the "faithful servants," and the "wise virgins" of 
others. So, in this parable, the "rich man" represents 
a class, and "Lazarus" represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as this, 
an explanation of which the Lord does not furnish 
us, modesty in expressing our opinion regarding it 
is certainly appropriate. We therefore offer the following 
explanation without any attempt to force our 
views upon the reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 
judgment may commend them as in accord 
with God's Word and plan. To our understanding, 
Abraham represented God, and the "rich man" represented 
the Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 
of the parable, and for a long time previous, the 
Jews had "fared sumptuously every day"— being the 
especial recipients of God's favors. As Paul says: 
"What advantage, then, hath the Jew? Much every 
way: chiefly, because to them were committed the 
oracles of God [Law and Prophecy]." The promises 



to Abraham and David and their organization as a 
typical Kingdom of God invested that people with 
royalty, as represented by the rich man's "purple." 
The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted them, in 
a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, represented 
by the rich man's "fine linen,"— symbolic of righteousness. 
-Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, sin-sick, hungered and 
thirsted after righteousness. "Publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, seeking a better life, and truth-hungry 
Gentiles who were "feeling after God" constituted 
the Lazarus class. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. They 
lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises of 
royalty were theirs; not even typically were they 
cleansed; but, in moral sickness, pollution and sin, 
they were companions of "dogs." Dogs were regarded 
as detestable creatures in those days, and the typically 
clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and "dogs," 
and would never eat with them, nor marry, nor have 
any dealings with them.— John 4:9. 

As to how these ate of the "crumbs" of divine 
favor which fell from Israel's table of bounties, the 
Lord's words to the Syro-Phoenician woman give us 
a key. He said to this Gentile woman— "It is not 
meet [proper] to take the children's [Israelites'] bread 
and to cast it to dogs [Gentiles]"; and she answered, 
"Truth, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs that 
fall from their master's table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) 
Jesus healed her daughter, thus giving the desired 
crumb of favor. 

But there came a great dispensational change in 
Israel's history when as a nation they rejected and 
crucified the Son of God. Then their typical righteousness 
ceased— then the promise of royalty ceased 
to be theirs, and the kingdom was taken from them 
to be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof 
—the Gospel Church, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(Titus 2:14; 1 Pet. 2:7,9; Matt. 21:43.) Thus 
the "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found himself in a 
cast-off condition,— in tribulation and affliction. In 
such condition that nation has suffered from that day 
to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the God-seeking "outcasts" of Israel 
underwent a great change, being carried by the angels 
(messengers— apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. 
Abraham is represented as the father of the faithful, 
and receives all the children of faith, who are thus 
recognized as the heirs of all the promises made to 
Abraham; for the children of the flesh are not the 
children of God, "but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); "which 



seed is Christ";— and "if ye be Christ's, then are ye 
[believers] Abraham's seed [children], and heirs according 
to the [Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. 
Yes, the termination of the condition of things 

R2604 : page 100 

then existing was well illustrated by the figure, death 
—the dissolution of the Jewish polity and the withdrawal 
of the favors which Israel had so long enjoyed. 
There they were cast off and have since been 
shown "no favor," while the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth [the 
polity] of Israel and strangers from the covenant of 
promise [up to this time given to Israel only] having 
no hope and without God in the world," were then 
"made nigh by the blood of Christ" and reconciled to 
God.-Eph. 2:12,13. 

To the symbolisms of death and burial used 
to illustrate the dissolution of Israel and their burial 
or hiding among the other nations, our Lord added 
a further figure— "In hell [hades, the grave] he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham 
afar off," etc. The dead cannot lift up their eyes, nor 
see either near or far, nor converse; for it is distinctly 
stated, "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave"; and the dead are 
described as those who "go down into silence." 
(Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 115:17.) But the Lord wished to 
show that great sufferings or "torments" would be 
added to the Jews as a nation after their national dissolution 
and burial amongst the other peoples dead 
in trespasses and sins; and that they would plead in 
vain for release and comfort at the hand of the formerly 
despised Lazarus class. 

And history has borne out this parabolic prophecy. 
For eighteen hundred years the Jews have 
not only been in distress of mind over their casting 
out from the favor of God and the loss of their temple 
and other necessaries to the offering of their sacrifices, 
but they have been relentlessly persecuted by 
all classes, including professed Christians. It was 
from the latter that the Jews have expected mercy, 
as expressed in the parable— "Send Lazarus, that he 
may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my 
tongue"; but the great gulf fixed between them 
hinders that. Nevertheless, God still recognizes the 
relationship established in his covenant with them, 
and addresses them as children of the covenant. 
(Verse 25.) These "torments" have been the penalties 
attached to the violation of their covenant, and 
were as certain to be visited upon them as the blessings 
promised for obedience.— See Lev. 26. 

The "great gulf fixed" represents the wide difference 
between the Gospel Church and the Jew— the 
former enjoying free grace, joy, comfort and peace, 



as true sons of God, and the latter holding to the Law, 
which condemns and torments. Prejudice, pride and 
error, from the Jewish side, form the bulwarks of 
this gulf which hinder the Jew from coming into the 
condition of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf 
which hinders true sons of God from going to the 
Jew— under the bondage of the Law— is their knowledge 
that by the deeds of the Law none can be justified 
before God, and that if any man keep the Law 
(put himself under it to try to commend himself to 
God by reason of obedience to it), Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we who are 
of the Lazarus class should not attempt to mix the 
Law and the Gospel, knowing that they cannot be 
mixed, and that we can do no good to those who still 
cling to the Law and reject the sacrifice for sins 
given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the change 
of dispensation which took place, argue that to deny 
the Law as the power to save would be to deny all 
the past history of their race, and to deny all of 
God's special dealings with the "fathers," (promises 
and dealings which through pride and selfishness they 
failed rightly to apprehend and use); hence they cannot 
come over to the bosom of Abraham, into the true 
rest and peace— the portion of all the true children 
of faith. -John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian 
faith all the way down the Gospel age, but so few 
as to be ignored in a parable which represented the 
Jewish people as a whole. As at the first, Dives represented 
the orthodox Jews, and not the "outcasts of 
Israel," so down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law Covenant 
and embraced the New Covenant, or such as have 
become infidels. 

The plea of the "rich man" for the sending of 
"Lazarus" to his five brethren we interpret as follows: 

The people of Judea, at the time of our Lord's 
utterance of this parable, were repeatedly referred to 
as "Israel," "the lost sheep of the house of Israel," 
"cities of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 

R2605 : page 100 

represented there; but actually the majority of the 
people were of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, 
but few of the ten tribes having returned from Babylon 
under Cyrus' general permission. If the nation 
of the Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony of numbers 
to understand the "five brethren" to represent the ten 
tribes chiefly scattered abroad. The request relative 
to them was doubtless introduced to show that all 
special favor of God ceased to all Israel (the ten 



tribes, as well as to the two more directly addressed). 
It seems to us evident that Israel only was meant, 
for no other nation than Israel had "Moses and the 
prophets" as instructors. (Verse 29.) The majority 
of the ten tribes had so far disregarded Moses and the 
prophets that they did not return to the land of promise, 
but preferred to dwell among idolaters; and hence 
it would be useless to attempt further communication 
with them, even by one from the dead— the figuratively 
dead, but now figuratively risen, Lazarus class. 
-Eph. 2:5. 

Though the parable mentions no bridging of this 
"great gulf," other portions of Scripture indicate that 
it was to be "fixed" only throughout the Gospel age, 
and that at its close the "rich man," having received 
the measurement of punishment for his sins,* will 
walk out of his fiery troubles over the bridge of God's 
promises yet unfulfilled to that nation. 

Though for centuries the Jews have been bitterly 
persecuted by pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, they are now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and although much of "Jacob's 
trouble" is just at hand, yet as a people they will be 
very prominent among the nations in the beginning 
of the Millennium. The "vail" (2 Cor. 3:13-16) of 
prejudice still exists, but it will be gradually taken 
away as the light of the Millennial morning dawns; 



*See Isa. 40:1,2, margin; Rom. 11:27-31, and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II, page 227. 

R2605 :page 101 

nor should we be surprised to hear of great awakenings 
among the Jews, and many coming to acknowledge 
Christ. They will thus leave their hadean state 
(national death) and torment, and come, the first of 
the nations, to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 
which is Christ, Head and body. Their bulwark of 
race prejudice and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning already 
to look upon him whom they have pierced, and to 
inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and 
supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, "Speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her 
appointed time is accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-32. Because of 
unbelief the natural branches were broken off, and 
the wild branches grafted into the Abrahamic root-promise. 
The parable leaves the Jews in their 
trouble, and does not refer to their final restoration 
to favor— doubtless because it was not pertinent to 



the feature of the subject treated; but Paul assures us 
that when the fulness of the Gentiles— the full number 
from among the Gentiles necessary to make up the 
bride of Christ— is come in, "they [natural Israel] shall 
obtain mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." He 
assures us that this is God's covenant with fleshly 
Israel (who lost the higher, spiritual promises, but 
are still the possessors of certain earthly promises), 
to become the chief nation of earth, etc. In proof of 
this statement, he quotes from the prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[the fleshly seed]." "As concerning the Gospel [high 
calling], they are enemies [cast off] for your sakes; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes." "For God hath concluded them all in 
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the 
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge 
ofGod!"-Rom. 11:26-33. 



R2606 :page 101 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



"These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but 
the righteous into life eternal."— Matt. 25:31-46. 

WHILE the Scriptures, as we have shown, do not 
teach the blasphemous doctrine of everlasting 
torment, they do most emphatically teach the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked, the class represented in 
the parable as "goats." Let us examine the parable, 
and then the sentence pronounced at its close. 

It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized how emphatically 
this is true. In glancing back over the 
plan of the ages, there is nothing which gives such 
conclusive evidence of a Divine Director as the order 
observed in all its parts. 

God has had definite and stated times and seasons 
for every part of his work; and in the end of each of 
these seasons there has been a finishing up of its 
work and a clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory 
to the beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the Jewish age order 
is observed— a harvesting and complete separation of 
the "wheat" class from the "chaff," and an entire rejection 
of the latter class from God's favor. With the few 
judged worthy in the end of that age, a new age— the 
Gospel age— began. And now we find ourselves amidst 
the closing scenes, the "harvest," of this age: the 
"wheat" and the "tares" which have grown together 



during this age are being separated. With the former 
class, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
age is about to be inaugurated, and these "wheat" are 
to reign as kings and priests in that new dispensation, 
while the "tare" element is judged as utterly unworthy 
of that favor. 

While observing this order with reference to the 
Jewish age and the one just closing, our Lord informs 
us through the parable under consideration that the 
same order will be observed with reference to the age 
to follow this Gospel age. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to the 
separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest of this age 
to the separation of wheat from tares; and the harvest 
of the Millennial age to the separation of sheep from 
goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated in 
verses 31 and 32— "When the son of man shall come 
in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then 
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before 
him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate 
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth 
his sheep from the goats." As in the present age 
every act of those on trial (the Church) goes to make 
a part of that character which, in due time, will determine 
the final decision of the Judge in our case, so 
will it be with the world (the "nations") in the age to 
come. As in the present age the trial of the majority 
of the individual members of the Church ends, and 
the decision of their case is reached, long before the 
end of the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual cases will be 
reached long before the end of the age (Isa. 65:20); 
but in each age there is a "harvest" or general separating 
time in the end of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the "time 
of trouble," there will be a gathering of the living 
nations before Christ, and, in their appointed time and 
order, the dead of all nations shall be called to appear 
before the judgment seat of Christ— not to receive 
an immediate sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial, 
individual trial (Ezek. 18:2-4,19,20) under 
the most favorable circumstances, the result of which 
trial will be a final sentence, as worthy or unworthy 
of everlasting life.* 

The scene of this parable, therefore, is laid after 
the time of trouble, when the nations shall have been 
subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:1,2) and the authority 
of Christ's kingdom established. Ere this, the bride 
of Christ (the overcoming Church) will have been 
seated with him in his throne of spiritual power and 
will have taken part in executing the judgments of the 



*See THE PLAN OF THE AGES, Chapter 8. 

R2606 : page 102 

great day of wrath. Then the Son of man and his 
bride, the glorified Church, will be revealed and be seen 
by men, with the eyes of their understanding and shall 
"shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it (Rev. 21), 
"that holy city [symbol of government]. ..coming 
down from God out of heaven." During the time 
of trouble it will be coming down, and before the end 
of it, it will have touched the earth. This is the stone 
cut out of the mountains without hands (but by the 
power of God), and it will then have become a great 
mountain (kingdom), filling the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), 
its coming having broken to pieces the evil kingdoms 
of the prince of darkness.— Dan. 2:34,35. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), and 
early in the dawn of the Millennium the nations will 
begin to walk in the light of it. (Verse 24.) These 
may bring their glory and honor into it, but "there 
shall in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, from 
the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure river of water 
of life (truth unmixed with error), and the Spirit and 
the Bride say, Come, and take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) 
Here begins the world's probation, the world's great 
judgment day— a thousand years.* 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, evil 
restrained, mankind in process of release from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which our 
Lord here likens to sheep and goats. These, he tells 
us, he will separate. The sheep class— those who are 
meek, teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the Millennial age, be gathered at the Judge's 
right hand— symbol of his approval and favor; but 
the goat class, self-willed and stubborn, always climbing 
on the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, while 
the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the truth furnished 
by the Good Shepherd— these are gathered to 
the Judge's left hand, the opposite of the position of 
favor— as subjects of his disfavor and condemnation. 

This work of separating sheep and goats will require 
all of the Millennial age for its accomplishment. 
During that age, each individual, as he comes gradually 
to a knowledge of God and his will, takes his place 
at the right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the opportunities 
of that golden age. By the end of that age, 
all the world of mankind will have arranged themselves, 



as shown in the parable, into two classes. 

The end of that age will be the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and then final disposition will be 
made of the two classes. The reward of this "sheep" 
class will be granted them because, during the age of 
trial and discipline, they cultivated and manifested the 
beautiful character of love, which Paul describes as 
the fulfilling of the Law of God. (Rom. 13:10.) They 
will have manifested it to each other in their times of 
sorest need; and what they will have done for one 
another the Lord will count as done unto him, counting 
them all as his brethren— children of God, though 
they will be of the human nature, while he is of the 
divine. 

The condemnation of the "goat" class is shown 
to be for the lack of this spirit of love. Under the 
same favorable circumstances as the "sheep," they 
wilfully resist the moulding influence of the Lord's 
discipline, and harden their hearts. The goodness 
of God does not lead them to true repentance; but, 
like Pharaoh, they take advantage of his goodness and 
do evil. The "goats," who will not have developed 
the element of love, the law of God's being and Kingdom, 
will be counted unworthy of everlasting life, and 
will be destroyed; while the "sheep," who will have 
developed God-likeness (love), and who will have exhibited 
it in their characters, are to be installed as the 
subordinate rulers of earth for future ages. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final adjustment 
of human affairs, Christ thus addresses his 
sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." 

It is manifest the "sheep" here addressed, at the 
close of the Millennium, are not the sheep of the Gospel 
age, the Gospel Church, but those "other sheep" 
to whom the Lord referred in John 10:16. And the 
kingdom prepared for them in the divine plan, from 
the foundation of the world, is not the kingdom prepared 
for the Gospel Church. The Church will receive 
her kingdom at the beginning of the Millennium; 
but this is the kingdom prepared for the "sheep" of the 
Millennial age. Their kingdom will be the dominion 
of earth which was originally given to Adam, but 
which was lost through sin, and which is again to be 
restored when man is brought to perfection, and so 
made fit to receive and enjoy it. That dominion will 
not be a dominion of some of the race over others, but 
a joint dominion, in which every man will be a king, 
and all will have equal rights and privileges in appropriating 
and enjoying every earthly good. It will be 
a sovereign people— a great and grand republic on a 
basis of perfect righteousness, wherein the rights of 
every man will be conserved; because the golden rule 
will be inscribed on every heart, and every man will 
love his neighbor as himself. The dominion of all 
will be over the whole earth, and all its rich and 



bountiful stores of blessing. (Gen. 1:28; Psa. 8:5-8.) 
The kingdom of the world, to be given to the perfected 



*See THE PLAN OF THE AGES, Chap. 8, The Day of Judgment. 

R2607 : page 102 

and worthy ones of the redeemed race at the close of 

the Millennium, is clearly distinguished from all others 

by being called the kingdom prepared for them "from 

the foundation of the world," the earth having been 

made to be the everlasting home and kingdom of perfect 

men. But the kingdom bestowed upon Christ, 

of which the Church, his "bride," becomes joint-heir, 

is a spiritual kingdom, "far above angels, principalities 

and powers," and it also shall "have no end"— 

Christ's Millennial Kingdom, which will end, being 

merely a beginning of Christ's power and rule. (1 Cor. 15:25-28.) 

This endless heavenly, spiritual kingdom 

was prepared long before the earth was founded— its 

inception being recognized in Christ, "the beginning 

of the creation of God." It was intended for Christ 

Jesus, the First Begotten; but even the Church, his 

bride and joint-heir, was chosen or designed also, 

in him, before the foundation of the world.— Eph. 1:4. 

The kingdom or rule of earth, is the kingdom 
that has been in preparation for mankind from the 
foundation of the world. It was expedient that man 
should suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results of misery and 
death, in order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom 
and goodness of God's law of love. Then it will 

R2607 : page 103 

require the seventh thousand-years, under the reign 
of Christ, to restore him from ruin and death, to the 
perfect condition, thereby fitting him to "inherit the 
kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world." 

That kingdom, in which all will be kings, will be 
one grand, universal republic, whose stability and 
blessed influence will be assured by the perfection of 
its every citizen, a result now much desired, but an 
impossibility because of sin. The kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium will be, on the contrary, a theocracy, 
which will rule the world (during the period of 
its imperfection and restoration) without regard to its 
consent or approval. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church are not the 
only "brethren" of Christ. All who at that time will 
have been restored to perfection will be recognized as 
sons of God— sons in the same sense that Adam was a 
son of God (Luke 3:38)— human sons. And all of 



God's sons, whether on the human, the angelic or the 
divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's love for these, 
his human brethren, is here expressed. As the world 
now has the opportunity to minister to those who are 
shortly to be the divine sons of God, and brethren of 
Christ, so they will have abundant opportunity during 
the age to come to minister to (each other) the human 
brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into existence 
will need food, raiment and shelter. However 
great may have been their possessions in this life, 
death will have brought all to a common level: the 
infant and the man of mature years, the millionaire 
and the pauper, the learned and the unlearned, the 
cultured and the ignorant and degraded: all will have 
an abundant opportunity for the exercise of benevolence, 
and thus they will be privileged to be co-workers 
with God. We are here reminded of the illustration 
given in the case of Lazarus: Jesus only awakened 
him from death, and then were the rejoicing friends 
permitted to loose him from his grave clothes and to 
clothe and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in prison" 
(more properly, under ward or watch). The grave is 
the great prison where the millions of humanity have 
been held in unconscious captivity; but when released 
from the grave, the restoration to perfection is not to 
be an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick, and under ward: 
not dead, neither are they yet perfected in life: and 
any condition between those two may be properly 
symbolized by sickness. And they will continue to be 
under watch or ward until made well— physically, 
mentally and morally perfect. During that time there 
will be abundant opportunity for mutual helpfulness, 
sympathy, instruction and encouragement, and 
any failure to assist will mark a lack of the Lord's 
spirit of love. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, but 
gradually, during the thousand years, each new group 
will find an army of helpers in those who will have preceded 
it. The love and benevolence which men will 
then show to each other (the brethren of Christ) the 
King will count as shown to him. No great deeds 
are assigned as the ground for the honors and favors 
conferred upon the righteous: they will have simply 
come into harmony with God's law of love and proved 
it by their works. "Love is the fulfilling of the law" 
(Rom. 13:10), and "God is love." So, when man 
is restored again to the image of God— "very good"— 
man also will be a living expression of love. 

"Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world," does not signify a rule independent 
of the divine law and supremacy: for although 
God gave earth's dominion to man at first, and designs 
restoring it to him when he has prepared him for 



the great trust, we are not to suppose that God intends 
man to rule it, otherwise than as under, or in harmony 
with, his supreme law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of government. 
Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in harmony 
with the law of heaven— delighting continually 
to do his will in whose favor is life, and at whose 
"right hand [condition of favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) Oh! who would not say, 
"Haste ye along, ages of glory!" and give glory and 
honor to him whose loving plans are blossoming 
into such fulness of blessing? 

Let us now examine the message to those on the 
left— "Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding and shaping 
influences of divine love. When these, "brethren," 
were hungry and thirsty, or naked, sick, and in 
prison, ye ministered not to their necessities, thus 
continually proving yourselves out of harmony with 
the heavenly city (Kingdom); for "there shall in no 
case enter into it anything that defileth." The decision 
or sentence regarding this class is— "Depart 
from me into everlasting fire [symbol of destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his angels." Elsewhere 
(Heb. 2:14) we read without symbol that Christ "will 
destroy. ..him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil." 

"And these [the "goats"] shall go away into everlasting 
[Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, but the 
righteous into life eternal [Greek, aionios— lasting.]" 
The punishment will be as lasting as the reward. 
Both will be everlasting. 



R2607 : page 103 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



THE EVERLASTINGNESS of the punishment 
being thus established, only one point is left open 
for discussion; namely, the nature of the punishment. 
Take your Concordance and search out what saith the 
great Judge regarding the punishment of wilful sinners 
who despise and reject all his blessed provisions for 
them through Christ. What do you find? Does God 
there say— All sinners shall live in torture forever? 
No; we find not a single text where life in any condition 
is promised to that class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately he 
will have a clean universe, free from the blight of sin 
and sinners,— because "All the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 



But while we do not find one verse of the Bible 
saying that this class can have life in torment, or in 
any other condition, we do find numerous passages 
teaching the reverse. Of these we give a few merely 
as samples— "The wages of sin is death" (Rom. 6:23.) 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 

R2607 : page 104 

"The wicked shall perish." (Psa. 37:20.) "Yet a little 
while and the wicked shall not be." (Psa. 37:10.) 
Thus God has told us plainly the nature of the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked— that it will be 
death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the 
incorrigible, taught ever since the great "falling away," 
which culminated in Papacy, and instilled into our 
minds from childhood, are alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the everlasting punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torment. This 
view is held, notwithstanding the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Hear Paul state very explicitly what the punishment 
is to be. Speaking of the same Millennial Day, 
and of the same class, who, despite all the favorable 
opportunities and the fulness of knowledge then, will 
not come into harmony with Christ, and hence will 
"know not God," in the true sense and "obey not," 
he says— "Who shall be punished." Ah, yes! but how 
punished? He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction [a destruction from which 
there shall be no recovery, no redemption or resurrection 
— Heb. 10:26-29] from the presence of the Lord 
and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:9.) This 
destruction is represented in the parable as the everlasting 
"fire" prepared for the devil and his angels: 
it is "the lake of fire and brimstone," which is the 
Second death (Rev. 20:14), into which the "goat" 
class of this parable are sent— Matt. 25:41. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment are 
readily seen when looked at from the correct standpoint. 

R2608 : page 104 

The fire of the parable, by which the punishment 
(destruction) is to be accomplished, will not be 
literal fire, for the "fire" is as much a symbol as the 
"sheep" and "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any sense 
preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and consider 
that we have fully shown that the everlasting 
punishment of the "goat" class will be destruction; but 
we direct attention to one other point which clinches 
the truth upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 



word kolasin, translated "punishment," in verse 46. 

This word has not in it the remotest idea of torment. 

Its primary signification is to cut off, or prune, or lop 

off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary meaning 

is to restrain. The wicked will be everlastingly 

restrained, cut off from life in the Second death. Illustrations 

of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 

Greek classical writings. The Greek word for "torment" 

is basinos, a word totally unrelated to the word 

kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs in 
but one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" in the common 
version, whereas it should read, "Fear hath restraint." 
Those who possess a copy of Young's Analytical 
Concordance will see from it (page 995) that the 
definition of the word kolasis is "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, 
after translating kolasin in Matt. 25:46 by the words 
"cutting off," says in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern ones 
render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' conveying 
the idea, as generally interpreted, of basinos, 
torment. Kolasin in its various forms occurs in only 
three other places in the New Testament: Acts 4:21; 
2 Pet. 2:9; 1 John 4: 18. It is derived from kolazoo, 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The 
Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains [kalazei] his 
fiery steeds.' 3. To chastise, to punish. To cut off 
an individual from life, or from society, or even to restrain, 
is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. The 
primary signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force and 
beauty of the antithesis. The righteous go to life, the 
wicked to the cutting off from life, death.— 
2Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the 
antithesis, the contrast, shown between the reward of 
the "sheep" and the reward of the "goats," which the 
correct idea of kolasin gives— the one class goes into 
everlasting life, while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life— forever restrained in death. And this exactly 
agrees with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 
concerning the wages or penalty of wilful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed by Christ 
from the Adamic curse or condemnation to death, but 
now condemned or cursed, as worthy of the Second 
death, by the One who redeemed them from the first 
curse], into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his messengers 
[servants]." 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the 



close of the final trial— at the close of the Millennium; 

and that none will then be servants of Satan ignorantly 

or unwillingly, as so many now are; for the great 

Deliverer, Christ, will remove outside temptations, and 

provide assistance toward self-improvement, which 

will enable all who will to overcome inherent weaknesses 

and to attain perfection. These "goats," who 

love evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ("angels") 

of Satan. For these and Satan, and for no 

others, God has prepared Second death— the everlasting 

destruction. Fire will come from God out of 

heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and devouring 

fire all can appreciate, unless their eyes are 

holden by false doctrine and prejudice. No one ever 

knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves, 

but always consumes, God uses it as a symbol of 

utter destruction.— Rev. 20:9. 

"THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE, WHICH IS THE 
SECOND DEATH." 

-REV. 19:20; 20:10,14,15; 21:8.- 

"The lake of fire and brimstone" is several times 
mentioned in the book of Revelation, which all Christians 
admit to be a book of symbols. However, they 
generally think and speak of this particular symbol 
as a literal statement giving strong support to the torment 
doctrine, notwithstanding the fact that the symbol 
is clearly defined as meaning the Second death: 
"And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. 
This is the Second Death," etc. (Rev. 20:14.) It is 
sometimes spoken of as "a lake of fire burning with 
brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), the element brimstone being 

R2608 : page 105 

mentioned to intensify the symbol of destruction, the 
Second death: burning brimstone being one of the 
most deadly elements known. It is destructive to all 
forms of life. 

The symbolism of this lake of fire is further shown 
by the fact that the symbolic "beast" and the symbolic 
"false prophet," and death and hell [hades], as well as 
the devil and his followers, are destroyed in it— Rev. 19:20; 
20:10,14,15; 21:8. 

This destruction or death is called the Second 
death in contradistinction to the First or Adamic 
death, and not to signify that everything which goes 
into it dies a second time. For instance, death (the 
first or Adamic death), and hades, the grave, are to be 
cast into it;— this work will require the entire Millennium 
to accomplish it; and in no sense will they ever 
have been destroyed before. So also "the devil," "the 
beast," and "the false prophet," will never have been 
destroyed before. 



From the first, or Adamic death, a resurrection 
has been provided. All that are in their graves shall 
therefore come forth. The Revelator prophetically 
declares: "The sea gave up the dead which were in 
it, and death and hell [hades, the grave] gave up the 
dead which were in them. ...And I saw the dead, 
small and great, stand before God, and the books were 
opened." (Rev. 20:13,12.) It was in view of God's 
plan for redeeming the race from Adamic death that in 
both the Old and New Testaments it is called a "sleep." 
In Israel's history of the good and the wicked it is repeatedly 
stated that they "slept with their fathers." 
The Apostles used the same symbol, and our Lord 
also. But no such symbol is used in reference to the 
Second death. On the contrary, the strongest figures 
of total and utter destruction are used to symbolize 
it; viz., "fire and brimstone;" because that will be a 
destruction from which there will be no recovery. 

Blessed thought! the Adamic death (which claimed 
the whole race for the sin of their progenitor) shall be 
forever swallowed up, and shall cease in this Second 
death into which it is to be cast by the great Redeemer 
who bought the whole world with the sacrifice of 
himself. Thus God tells us through the Prophet, "I 
will ransom them from the power of the grave [sheol]. 
I will redeem them from death.... O grave [sheol] 
I will be thy destruction." (Hos. 13:14.) The first 
or Adamic death shall no longer have liberty or power 
over men, as it has had for the past six thousand years; 
no longer shall any die for Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:12; 
Jer. 31:29,30; Ezek. 18:2.) Thenceforth the New 
Covenant, sealed with the precious blood, shall be in 
force, and only wilful transgressions will be counted 
as sin and punished with the wages of sin— death— 
the Second death. Thus will the Adamic death be cast 
into and swallowed up by the Second death. 

And hades and sheol— the dark, secret condition, 
the grave, which in the present time speaks to us of a 
hope of future life by God's resurrection power in 
Christ— shall be no more; for the Second death will 
devour no being fit for life— none for whom there 
remains a shadow of hope, but such only as, by the 
unerring Judge, have been fully, impartially and individually 
found worthy of destruction. And Satan, 
that lying tempter who deceived and ruined the race, 
and who, with persistent energy and cunning, has 
sought continually to thwart the purpose of God for 
our salvation through Christ, and with him all who 
are of his spirit, "his angels," shall be destroyed, and 
shall never awake from death to trouble the world 
again. Here he is said to be cast into "the lake of 
fire,"— the Second death; and Paul in Heb. 2:14, referring 
to the same thing, calls it destruction— "that he 
might destroy death, and him that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil." And "the beast and the 
false prophet," the great false systems which have 



long oppressed and misled nominal Christendom, shall 
never escape from it. These systems are said to be 
cast "alive" (that is, while they are still organized and 
operative) into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. 
-Rev. 19:20. 

The great time of trouble, the Lord's judgment, 
which will utterly destroy these systems, will undoubtedly 
cause great social, financial and religious difficulty 
and pain to all those identified with these deceived 
and deceiving systems, before they are utterly destroyed. 
These systems will be cast in, destroyed, at 
the beginning of the Millennium, while Satan's destruction 
is reserved until its close, when all the 
"goats" shall have been separated from the "sheep," 
and they shall perish with Satan in the Second death, 
as "his angels," messengers or servants. None of 
those abominable characters among men, who, knowing 
the truth, yet love unrighteousness— none of "the 
fearful and unbelieving"— those who will not trust 
God after all the manifestations of his grace afforded 
during the Millennial reign of Christ; nor the 
abominable, who, at heart are murderers and whoremongers 

R2609 : page 105 

and sorcerers and idolaters and liars: none 
of these shall escape from the Second death, to defile 
the earth again. All such, after a full and abundant 
opportunity for reformation, will be judged unworthy 
of life, and will be forever cut off in the Second death, 
symbolized by the lake of fire and brimstone. 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 21 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result of that age of trial, 
in harmony with the remainder of the Scriptures already 
noted. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of that Age of 
Judgment, and the restraining of blinding errors and 
misleading systems. The "beast" and the "false 
prophet" are the chief symbols, and represent the organizations 
or systems of error which, together, constitute 
"Babylon." This judgment against the 
"thrones" of the present time, and against "the beast 
and the false prophet" systems follows speedily upon 
the introduction of this Millennial judgment reign. The 
thrones of the present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the great 
Prophet, Priest, King and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) Then the 
systems of error will be speedily judged worthy of 
destruction, "the lake of fire," "the Second death."— 
Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment: it begins with the 
false systems symbolized by the beast, false prophet, 



etc., but it will not reach the world of mankind, as 
individuals, until they have first had full trial, with full 
opportunity to choose life and live forever. Chapters 20:12,13, 
and 21:3-7, indicate the blessed, favorable 

R2609 : page 106 

trial in which all, both dead and living (except 
the Church, who, with Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, 
joint-heirs and judges), will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain, 
and freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a clean 
universe. As the Revelator expresses it, "Every creature 
which is in heaven and on the earth. ..heard I 
saying, Blessing and honor and glory and power be 
unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and present, 
which have always recognized man's freedom of will 
to choose good or evil, life or death. 

We cannot doubt then that in the close of the 
Millennial age, God will again for a "little season" permit 
evil to triumph, in order thereby to test his creatures 
(who will by that time have become thoroughly 
acquainted with both good and evil, and the consequences 
of each, and will have had his justice and love 
fully demonstrated to them), that those who finally 
prefer and choose evil may be cut off— destroyed. 
Thus God will for all eternity remove all who do not 
love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan will 
endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose numbers 
will then be as the sand of the sea for multitude; but 
that many of them will follow Satan's evil example and 
choose evil and disobedience, with past experience 
before them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we need not suppose. However, 
when God does not tell us either the number or 
the proportion of those to be found worthy of life, and 
those to be judged worthy of death (the Second 
death), we may not dogmatize. Of one thing we may 
be confident, God willeth not the death of the wicked, 
but would that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and brimstone" 
(figurative of utter destruction,— Gehenna) who 
is worthy of life, whose living longer would be a blessing 
to himself or to others in harmony with 
righteousness. 

That utter and hopeless destruction is intended 
only for wilful evil doers, who, like Satan, in pride of 
heart and rebellion against God, will love and do evil 
notwithstanding the manifestations of God's disapproval, 
and notwithstanding their experience with its 
penalties. Seemingly the goodness and love of God 



in the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and another 

opportunity of life for man, instead of leading all to an 

abhorrence of sin, will lead some to suppose that God 

is too loving to cut them off in the Second death, or 

that if he did so he would give them other, and 

yet other future opportunities. Building thus upon a 

supposed weakness in the divine character, these may 

be led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 

of God, as a license for wilful sin. But they 

shall go no further, for their folly shall be made manifest. 

Their utter destruction will prove to the righteous 

the harmony and perfect balance of Justice, 

Wisdom, Love and Power in the Divine Ruler. 

REVELATION 21:8 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed. 
"The fearful and unbelieving [who will not trust God], 
the abominable, murderers [brother-haters], whoremongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self or any other 
creature or thing that service and honor which belong 
to God], and all liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh 
a lie" [in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] "shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone 
[Gehenna, symbol of utter destruction], which is 
the Second death." Such company would be repulsive 
to any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize with them, 
knowing that such dispositions are now in great measure 
the result of inherited weakness of the flesh. We 
are moved to a measure of sympathy by the remembrance 
that in our own cases, often, when we would 
do good, evil is present with us. But in the close of 
the Millennial judgment, when the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall have given every advantage and opportunity 
of knowledge and ability, this class will be an abhorrence 
and detestation to all who are in harmony 
with the King of Glory. And the righteous will be 
glad when, the trial being ended, the gift of life of 
which these shall have proved themselves unworthy, 
shall be taken from them, and when the corrupters of 
the earth, and all their work and influence, shall be 
destroyed. 

THE DEVIL, THE BEAST AND THE FALSE PROPHET 
TORMENTED. 

Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those individuals 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other words, 
using the symbol "lake of fire." They are devoured 
or consumed in fire. This being the case, the torment 
of verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings who 
are consumed, destroyed. Hence the question narrows 



down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet and 
a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse so 
teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked 
will he destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy 
of God and man, God expressly advises us that he will 
be destroyed, and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which during 
the Gospel age have deceived and led astray, will be 
cast into a great, consuming trouble in the close of this 
Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be 
aionion, i.e., lasting. It will continue as long as they 
last, until they are utterly consumed. So also the system 
of error, which will suddenly manifest itself at the 
end of the Millennial age and lead the "goats" to destruction, 
will be consumed. (Rev. 20:7-10.) That 
deceiving system (not specified as to kind, but merely 
called Satan, after its instigator) will be cast into the 
same sort of trouble and destruction, in the end of the 
Millennial age, as the beast and false prophet systems 
are now being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, says, 
"Her smoke rose up forever and ever." That is to 
say, the remembrance ("smoke") of the destruction of 
these systems of deception and error will be lasting, 
the lesson will never be forgotten— as smoke, which 
continues to ascend after a destructive fire, is testimony 
that the fire has done its work.— See also Isa. 34:8-10. 

Of Rev. 14:9-1 1 we remark, incidentally, that all 
will at once concede that if a literal worshiping of a 

R2609 : page 107 

beast and image were meant in verse 9, then few, if 
any, in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of verse 1 1 ; 
and if the beast and his image and worship and 
wine and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

The casting of death and the grave into utter destruction, 
the Second death, during the Millennial age, 
is a part of the utter destruction which will include 
every improper, injurious and useless thing. (Isa. 11:9; 
Psa. 101:5-8.) The Second death, the sentence 
of that individual trial, will be final: it will never be 
destroyed. And let all the lovers of righteousness say, 
Amen; for to destroy the Second Death, to remove the 
sentence of that just and impartial trial, would be to let 
loose again not only Satan, but all who love and practice 
wrong and deception, and who dishonor the Lord 
with their evil institutions— to oppose, offend and endeavor 
to overthrow those who love and desire to serve 
him and enjoy his favor. We rejoice that there is 
no danger of this, but that divine justice unites with 
divine wisdom, love and power, to bring in everlasting 
righteousness on a permanent basis. 



R2610 :page 107 

TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 
Psalmist we find without any qualification whatever, 
and we must accept it as a positive fact. If the claims 
of "Orthodoxy" respecting hell were true, this would 
be, indeed, a fearful message. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the word 
sheol, and our text will read: "The wicked shall be 
turned into the condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; but next, who are 
the wicked? In one sense all men are wicked, in that 
all are violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the remedy provided 
for their recovery from its baneful effects, wilfully 
persist in sin. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers— have 
come to a true knowledge of God. The world knows 
him not, and the nations cannot forget God until they 
are first brought to a knowledge of him. The consecrated 
have been enlightened, led of the Spirit through 
faith to understand the deep and hidden things of God, 
which reveal the glory of God's character, but which, 
though expressed in his Word, appear only as foolishness 
to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so in the 
age to come, for then "The earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isa. 11:9.) Much that we now receive by faith will 
then be demonstrated to the world. When he who has 
ransomed man from the power of the grave (Hos. 13:14) 
begins to gather his purchased possessions back 
from the prison-house of death (Isa. 61:1), when the 
sleepers are awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be slow to realize 
the truth of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent of the 
King's Highway of Holiness in that age will be possible 
to all, and comparatively easy, because all the 
stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will have been 
gathered out, and straight paths made for their feet. 
It is in that age that this text applies. Those who 
ignore the favoring circumstances of that age, and will 
not be obedient to the righteous Judge or Ruler- 
Christ— will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 



subject of the Kingdom of God will approve the 
righteous judgment which turns such an one again 
into sheol— the condition of death. Such an one 
would be unworthy of life; and, were he permitted to 
live, his life would be a curse to himself and to the 
rest of mankind, and a blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the Second Death, from which there 
will be no resurrection. Having been ransomed from 
the grave (sheol) by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die 
again on account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) "Christ 
dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over 
him." (Rom. 6:9.) The Second death should be 
dreaded and shunned by all, since it is to be the end of 
existence to all those deemed unworthy of life. But 
in it there can be no suffering. Like Adamic death, 
it is the extinction of life. 

It is because through sin mankind had become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ Jesus came 
to deliver us and save us from death. (1 John 3:8; 
Heb. 2:14.) Death is a cessation of existence, the absence 
of life. There is no difference between the conditions 
in the Adamic and Second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while from the second 
there will be no release, no return to life. The first 
death sentence passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the Second death can be incurred only by 
wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to the 
coming age is evident, for both saints and sinners go 
into sheol or hades now. This scripture indicates that, 
in the time when it applies, only the wicked shall go 
there. And the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been brought to 
that knowledge, nor will they be until the coming 
time, when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say unto his neighbor, 
Know thou the Lord, for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them.— Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The Hebrew word goi, rendered "nations" in this 
verse, is elsewhere used by the same writer and rendered 
"heathen," "Gentiles" and "people." The thought 
seems to be,— any who do not become God's covenant 
people, even though they be not openly wicked. The 
nations (Gentiles, all who under that full knowledge 
do not become Israelites indeed) who are forgetful 
or negligent of God's favors enjoyed, and of their 
duties and obligations to him, shall share the fate of 
the wilfully "wicked," and be cast into the Second 
death. 

In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated "turned," 
signifies turned back, as to a previous place or condition. 
Those referred to in this text have been either 
in sheol or liable to enter it, but being redeemed by 



the precious blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all who forget 
God, shall be turned back or returned to sheol. 

R2610 :page 108 

DID THE JEWS BELIEVE IN EVERLASTING TORMENT? 



Noting that we teach that the doctrine of everlasting 
torment was engrafted upon the doctrines of the 
Christian Church during the period of the apostasy, 
the great falling away which culminated in Papacy, 
some have inquired whether it does not seem, according 
to the works of Josephus, that this doctrine was 
firmly held by the Jews; and, if so, they ask, does it not 
seem evident that the early Christians, being largely 
converts from Judaism, brought this doctrine with 
them, in the very outstart of Christianity? 

We answer, No; the doctrine of everlasting torment 
sprang naturally from the doctrine of human 
immortality, which as a philosophic question was first 
promulgated in anything like the present form by the 
Platonic school of Grecian philosophy. These first 
affirmed that each man contained a fragment of deity, 
and that this would prevent him from ever dying. This 
foundation laid, it was as easy to describe a place for 
evil-doers as for well-doers. But to the credit of those 
heathen philosophers be it recorded that they failed 
to develop, or at least to manifest, that depth of degradation 
from benevolence and reason and pity, necessary 
to paint, by word and pen and brush, such 
details of horrors and agonies as were soon incorporated 
into their doctrine, and a belief thereof declared 
"necessary to salvation" in the professed church of 
Christ. 

To appreciate the case, it is necessary to remember 
that, when the Christian Church was established, 
Greece stood at the head of intelligence and civilization. 
Alexander the Great had conquered the world, 
and had spread respect for Greece everywhere; and 
though, from a military point of view, Rome had taken 
her place, it was otherwise in literature. For centuries, 
Grecian philosophers and philosophies led the intellectual 
world, and impregnated and affected everything. 
It became customary for philosophers and 
teachers of other theories to claim that their systems 
and theories were nearly the same as those of the Grecians, 
and to endeavor to remove differences between 
their old theories and the popular Grecian views. And 
some sought to make capital by claiming that their 
system embraced all the good points of Platonism 
with others which Plato did not see. 

Of this class were the teachers in the Christian 
Church in the second, third and fourth centuries. Conceding 



the popularly accepted correctness of the philosophers, 
they claimed that the same good features 
of philosophy were found in Christ's teachings, and 
that he was one of the greatest philosophers, etc. Thus 
a blending of Platonism and Christianity took place. 
This became the more pronounced as kings and emperors 
began to scrutinize religious teachings, and to 
favor those most likely to awe the people and make 
them law-abiding. While heathen teachers were 
truckling to such imperial scrutiny, and teaching an 
everlasting punishment for those who violated the 
laws of the emperors (who ruled as divinely appointed), 
we cannot suppose otherwise than that the ambitious 
characters in the church at that time, who were seeking 
to displace heathenism and to become the dominant 
religious power instead, would make prominent 
such doctrines as would in the eyes of the emperors 
seem to have an equal hold upon the fears and prejudices 
of the people. And what could be more to 
the purpose than the doctrine of the endless torment 
of the refractory? 

The same motives evidently operated with Josephus 
when writing concerning the belief of the Jews. 
His works should be read as apologies for Judaism, 
and as efforts to exalt that nation in the eyes of Rome 
and the world. It should be remembered that the 
Jews had the reputation of being a very rebellious 
people, very unwilling to be ruled even by the Caesars. 
They were hoping, in harmony with God's promises, 
to become the chief nation. Many rebellious outbreaks 
had occurred among them, and their peculiar 
religion, different from all others, came in for its share 
of blame for favoring too much the spirit of liberty. 

Josephus had an object in writing his two principal 
works, "Antiquities" and "Wars of the Jews." 
He wrote them in the Greek language while living at 
Rome, where he was the friend and guest successively 
of the Roman emperors Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, 

R2611 :page 108 

and where he was in constant contact with the 
Grecian philosophers. These books were written for 
the purpose of showing off the Jewish people, their 
courage, laws, ethics, etc., to the best advantage before 
the Grecian philosophers and Roman dignitaries. This 
object is covertly admitted in his preface to his "Antiquities, 
in which he says: 

"I have undertaken the present work as thinking 
it will appear to all the Greeks worthy of their study. 
...Those that read my book may wonder that my discourse 
of laws and historical facts contains so much of 
philosophy. ...However, those that have a mind 
to know the reasons of everything may find here a 
very curious philosophical theory." 

In a word, as a shrewd man who himself had 



become imbued with the spirit of the Grecian philosophers 
then prevailing, Josephus drew from the Law 
and the Prophets, and from the traditions of the elders 
and the theories of the various sects of the Jews, all he 
could find that in the most remote degree would tend 
to show:— 

First, that the Jewish religion was not far behind 
popular Grecian philosophy; but that somewhat analogous 
theories had been drawn from Moses' Law, and 
held by some Jews, long before the Grecian philosophers 
broached them. 

Secondly, that it was not their religious ideas 
which made the Jews as a people hard to control or 
"rebellious," as all liberty-lovers were esteemed by the 
Caesars. Hence he attempts to prove, at a time when 
virtue was esteemed to consist mainly in submission, 
that Moses' Law "taught first of all that God is the 
Father and Lord of all things, and bestows a happy life 
upon those that follow him, but plunges such as do 
not walk in the paths of virtue into inevitable miseries." 
And it is in support of this idea, and for such 
purposes, evidently, that Josephus, after saying: 
"There are three philosophical sects among the Jews; 
first, the Pharisees; second, the Sadducees, and third, 
the Essenes," proceeds to give an account of their 
three theories; especially detailing any features which 
resembled Grecian philosophy. And because the 
last and least, the Essenes, most resembled the doctrines 
of the Stoics and leading Grecian theories, 
Josephus devotes nearly ten times as much space 
to their views as to the views of both Sadducees 

R2611 :page 109 

and Pharisees combined. And yet the Essenes 
were so insignificant a sect that the New Testament 
does not even mention them, while Josephus 
himself admits they were few. Whatever views they 
held, therefore, on any subject, cannot be claimed as 
having Jewish sanction, when the vast majority of 
Jews held contrary opinions. The very fact that our 
Lord and the apostles did not refer to them is good 
evidence that the Essenes' philosophy by no means 
represented the Jewish ideas. This small sect probably 
grew up later and probably absorbed from 
Grecian philosophy its ideas concerning immortality 
and the everlasting torment of the non-virtuous. 
It should be remembered that Josephus 
was not born until three years after our Lord's 
crucifixion, and that he published his "Wars" A.D. 75 
and "Antiquities" A.D. 93— at a time when he and 
other Jews, like all the rest of the world, were eagerly 
swallowing Grecian philosophy and science falsely so 
called, against which Paul warned the church.— Col. 2:8; 
1 Tim. 6:20. 
Josephus directed special attention to the Essenes 



because it suited his object to do so. He admits that the 

Sadducees, next to the largest body of Jewish people, 

did not believe in human immortality. And of the Pharisees' 

views he makes a blind statement, calculated to 

mislead, as follows: "They also believe that souls have 

an immortal vigor in them [this might be understood 

to mean that the Pharisees did not believe as the Sadducees 

that death ended all existence, but believed in 

a vigor or life beyond the grave— by a resurrection 

of the dead], and that under the earth there will be rewards 

and punishments, according as they have lived 

virtuously or viciously in this life; and that the latter 

are to be detained in an everlasting prison [death— not 

torture], but that the former [the virtuous] shall have 

power to revive and live again." 

Is it not apparent that Josephus has whittled and 
stretched the views of the Pharisees, as much as his 
elastic conscience would allow, to show a harmony 
between them and the philosophies of Greece? Paul, 
who had been a Pharisee, contradicts Josephus. While 
Josephus says they believed "that only the virtuous 
would revive and live again [Does not this imply 
a resurrection, and imply also that the others would 
not live again, but remain dead, in the great prison 
—the tomb?]" Paul, on the contrary, says: "I have 
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, 
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of 
the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

We have no hesitancy about accepting the testimony 
of the inspired Apostle Paul, not only in regard 
to what the Jews believed, but also as to what he and the 
early Church believed; and we repeat, that the theory 
of the everlasting torment of the wicked, based upon 
the theory that the human soul cannot die, is contrary 
to both the Old and the New Testament teachings, 
and was introduced among Jews and Christians 
by Grecian philosophers. Thank God for the purer 
philosophy of the Scriptures, which teaches that the 
death of the soul (being) is the penalty of sin (Ezek. 18:20); 
that all souls condemned through Adam's sin 
were redeemed by Christ's soul (Isa. 53:10); and that 
only for wilful, individual sin will any die the Second 
death— an everlasting punishment, but not an everlasting 
torment. 

CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, 
death and evil." "I have set before thee life and 
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that 
both thou and thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 

We come now to the consideration of other Scripture 
statements in harmony with the conclusions set 
forth in the preceding articles. 



The words here quoted are from Moses to Israel. 
To appreciate them we must remember that Israel 
as a people, and all their covenants, sacrifices, etc., had 
a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by keeping 
the Law, no matter how much they would choose 
to do so, because they, like all others of the fallen race, 
were weak, depraved through the effect of the "sour 
grape" of sin which Adam had eaten, and which his 
children had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could not 
give them life because of the weaknesses or depravity 
of their fallen nature. -Rom. 8:3; Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them from 
even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly; namely, 
that it would develop them, as well as show them the 
need of the better sacrifice (the ransom which our Lord 
Jesus gave) and a greater deliverer than Moses. And 
with all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the individual trial insured to the whole world 
(which Israel typified) and secured by the better sacrifices 
for sin, which were there prefigured, to be accomplished 
by the great prophet of whom Moses was 
but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death presented 
to Israel was but typical of the individual trial 
of the whole world, and its issues of life and death (of 
eternal life or the Second death), may help some to see 
that the great thousand-year-day of trial, of which our 
Lord Jesus has been appointed the Judge, contains the 
two issues, life and death. All will then be called upon 
to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, for 
righteousness and life or sin and death, and a choice 
must be made. And, although there will be rewards 
and "stripes" according to the deeds of the present 
life, as well as according to their conduct under that 
trial (John 3:19; Matt. 10:42; Matt. 11:20-24), the 
verdict in the end will be in harmony with the choice 
expressed by the conduct of each during that age of 
trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result, are 
also shown in the words of Moses quoted by Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me. 
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every 
soul [being] which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from among 
the people." In few words this calls attention to the 
world's great trial, yet future. It shows the great 
Prophet or Teacher raised up by God to give a new 
judgment or trial to the condemned race which he has 
redeemed from the condemnation which came upon 
it through its progenitor, Adam. It shows, too, the 
conditions of eternal life to be righteous obedience, 
and that with the close of that trial some will be 



R2611 :page 110 

judged worthy of that life, and some worthy of destruction 
—the Second death. 

Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his perfect 
and precious sacrifice, is the Head of this great 
Prophet; and during the Gospel age God has been selecting 
the members of his body, who, with Christ 
Jesus, shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or Teacher 
promised. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?"- 1 Cor. 6:2. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only upon 
man. But the second trial is to be much more comprehensive. 
It will not only be the trial of fallen and 
imperfect mankind, but it will include every other 
thing and principle and being out of harmony with 

R2612:page 110 

Jehovah. "God will bring every work into judgment, 
with every secret thing." 

The "judgment to come" will include the judgment 
to condemnation of all false systems— civil, 
social and religious. These will be judged, condemned 
and banished early in the Millennial day, the light 
of truth causing them to come into disrepute and 
therefore to pass away. This judgment comes first, in 
order that the trial of man may proceed unhindered 
by error, prejudice, etc. It will also include the trial of 
"the angels which sinned"— those angels "which kept 
not their first estate" of purity and obedience to God. 
Thus it is written by the Apostle of the members of the 
body of the great Prophet and High Priest, who is 
to be Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge angels?"— 1 Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
Millennial trial (destruction, second death) will cover a 
wider range of offenders than the penalty or curse 
for the sin of Adam, which "passed upon all men." 
In a word, the destruction at the close of the trial will 
be the utter destruction of every being and every 
thing which will not glorify God and be of use and 
blessing to his general creation. 



R2612:page 110 

FORGIVABLE AND UNPARDONABLE SINS. 



IN THE preceding pages we briefly show the extreme penalty 



for wilful sin. Adam's penalty, which involved his 
entire race, was of this sort; and only as the result of 
Christ's death as our ransom from that penalty of that wilful 
sin, is any forgiveness of it or subsequent sins possible. 

Forgivable sins are those which result from weaknesses 
incurred through that one Adamic sin which Christ settled 
once for all. They are such as are not wilful, but are committed 
through ignorance or weaknesses of the flesh. God 
stands pledged to forgive all such sins upon our repentance, 
in the name and merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

Unpardonable sins, sins which cannot be forgiven, are 
such as are wilfully done. As the penalty of the first wilful 
sin was death— extinction of being— so death is the penalty of 
every wilful sin against full knowledge and ability to choose 
and to do the right. This is called Second Death, in distinction 
from the first or Adamic penalty, from which Christ's 
ransom sacrifice will release all mankind. 

The "sin unto [second] death," for the forgiveness of 
which the Apostle declares it is useless to pray (1 John 5:16), 
is not only a wilful sin but a sin against clear knowledge; a 
sin for which no adequate excuse can be found. Because it 
is a sin against clear knowledge, or enlightenment in holiness, 
it is called the "sin against the Holy Spirit" (Matt. 12:31,32), 
for which there is no forgiveness. 

But there are other partly-wilful sins, which are, therefore, 
partially unpardonable. In such the temptations within 
and without (all of which are directly or indirectly results of 
the fall) have a share;— the will consenting under the pressure 
of the temptation or because of the weakness. The Lord 
alone knows how to properly estimate our responsibilities and 
guilt in such cases. But to the true child of God there is but 
one proper course to take;— repentance and an appeal for 
mercy in the name and merit of Christ, the great sacrifice for 
sin. The Lord will forgive such a penitent, in the sense of 
restoring him to his favor; but he will be made to suffer 
"stripes" (Luke 12:47,48) for the sin, in proportion as God 
sees it to have been wilfully committed. 

Not infrequently a conscientious person realizes that he 
has committed sin, and that it had some wilfulness in it. He 
properly feels condemned, guilty before God; realizing his own 
guilt, and forgetting the fountain for sin and uncleanness, opened 
by God for our weak, fallen race, he falls into a state of 
sadness, believing that he has committed the sin unto death. 
Such wander in deserts drear, until they find the cleansing 
fountain. Let such remember, however, that the very facts of 
their sorrow for sin and their desire to return to divine favor 
are proofs that they have not committed the sin unto death; 
for the Apostle declares that those who commit sin of this sort 
cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Heb. 6:6.) Penitents, 
then, may always feel confident that their sins were in part, at 
least, results of the fall, and hence not unto death, but requiring 
forgiveness and stripes. 

Such is the wonderful provision of God, through Christ, 
for the acceptance of every soul which, forsaking sin and the 
love of it, seeks righteousness and life through him who is 
the Way, as well as the Truth and the Life. Thus all, whether 



naturally stronger or weaker, have an equal opportunity to 

gain everlasting life as well as to gain the great prize of joint-heirship 

with Christ. 

FUTURE RETRIBUTION. 



While the Scriptures teach that the present Gospel age is 
the Church's Judgment-day or period of trial, and that the 
world's Judgment-day or time of trial will be the Millennial 
age, it is, nevertheless, a reasonable question to ask,— To what 
extent will those who are not of the consecrated Church be 
held responsible, in the Millennial age, for their misdeeds, of 
cruelty, dishonesty and immorality, of the present time? And 
to what extent will those of the same class then be rewarded 
for present efforts to live moral and benevolent lives? 

These are important questions, especially to the world; 
and well would it be for them if they could realize their importance 
and profit thereby. They are important also to the 
Church, because of our interest in the world, and because of 

R2612:page 111 

our desire to understand and teach correctly our Father's 
plans. 

We have learned that the sacrifice of Christ secures for 
all mankind, however vile, an awakening from death, and the 
privilege of thereafter coming to perfection, and, if they will, 
of living forever. "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The object 
of their being again brought into existence will be to give 
them a favorable opportunity to secure everlasting life, on the 
conditions which God requires— obedience to his righteous 
will. We have no intimation whatever in the Scriptures that, 
when awakened, the moral condition of men will have changed, 
but we have much, in both reason and revelation, to show 
that as they went into death weak and depraved so they will 
come out of it. As there is "no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10), they will have 
learned nothing; and since they were sinners and unworthy of 
life and divine favor when they died, they will still be unworthy; 
and as they have received neither full rewards nor full 
punishments for the deeds of the present life, it is evident that 
just such a time of awakening as God has promised during 
the Millennium is necessary;— for rewarding, and punishing, 
and giving to all mankind the opportunity for eternal life secured 
by Christ's great ransom-sacrifice. 

While, strictly speaking, the world is not now on trial: 
that is, the present is not the time for its full and complete 
trial, yet men are not now, nor have they ever been, entirely 
without light and ability, for the use of which they are accountable. 
In the darkest days of the world's history, and in 
the deepest degradation of savage life, there has always been at 
least a measure of the light of conscience pointing more or 
less directly to righteousness and virtue. That the deeds of 



the present life have much to do with the future, Paul taught 
very clearly when, before Felix, he reasoned of justice and 
self-government, in view of the judgment to come, so that 
Felix trembled.— Acts 24:25, Diaglott translation. 

At the first advent of our Lord, an increased measure 
of light came to men, and to that extent increased their responsibility, 
as he said: "This is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 
light, because their deeds were evil." (John 3:19.) For those 
evil deeds committed against the light possessed, whether of 
conscience or of revelation, men will have to give an account, 
and will receive, in their day of judgment, a just recompense 
of reward. And, likewise, to the extent of their effort to live 
righteously: they will receive their reward in the day of trial. 
-Matt. 10:42. 

If men would consider what even reason discerns, that a 
time of reckoning, of judgment, is coming, that God will not 
forever permit evil to triumph, and that in some way he will 
punish evil-doers, it would undoubtedly save them many sorrows 
and chastisements in the age to come. Said the Prophet, 
"Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel 
from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they 
say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" (Isaiah 29:15.) 
Behold, "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good" (Prov. 15:3); and "God shall 
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, 
whether it be good, or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 12:14.) 
He "will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and 
will make manifest the counsels of the hearts."— 1 Cor. 4:5. 

The age of Christ's reign will be a time of just judgment; 
and though it will be an age of golden opportunities 
to all, it will be a time of severe discipline, trial and punishment 
to many. That the judgment will be fair and impartial, 
and with due consideration for the circumstances and 

R2613 :page 111 

the opportunities of each individual, is also assured— by the 
character of the Judge (the Christ— John 5:22; 1 Cor. 6:2), 
by his perfect knowledge, by his unwavering justice and 
goodness, by his divine power and by his great love as shown 
in his sacrifice to redeem men from death, that they might 
enjoy the privilege of this favorable, individual trial. 

The varied circumstances and opportunities of men, in 
this and past ages, indicate that a just judgment will recognize 
differences in the degree of individual responsibility, 
which will also necessitate differences in the Lord's future 
dealings with them. And this reasonable deduction we find 
clearly confirmed by the Scriptures. The Judge has been, 
and still is, taking minute cognizance of men's actions and 
words (Prov. 5:21), although they have been entirely unaware 
of it; and he declares that "Every idle ["pernicious," 
injurious or malicious] word that men shall speak, they shall 
give account thereof in the day of judgment" (Matt. 12:36); 
and that even a cup of cold water, given to one of his little 
ones, because he is Christ's, shall in nowise lose its reward. 



(Matt. 10:42.) The context shows that the "pernicious" 
words to which Jesus referred were words of wilful 
and malicious opposition spoken against manifest light. 
(Matt. 12:24,31,32.) He also affirmed that it would be more 
tolerable for Tyre, Sidon and Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, which 
had misimproved greater advantages of light and opportunity." 
-Matt. 11:20-24. 

In the very nature of things, we can see that the punishments 
of that age will be in proportion to past guilt. Every 
sin indulged, and every evil propensity cultivated, hardens 
the heart and makes the way back to purity and virtue more 
difficult. Consequently, sins wilfully indulged now, will require 
punishment and discipline in the age to come; and 
the more deeply the soul is dyed in willing sin, the more 
severe will be the measures required to correct it. As a 
wise parent would punish a wayward child, so Christ will 
punish the wicked for their good. 

His punishments will always be administered injustice, 
tempered with mercy, and relieved by his approval and reward 
to those who are rightly exercised thereby. And it 
will only be when punishments, instructions and encouragements 
fail; in short, when love and mercy have done all that 
wisdom can approve (which is all that could be asked), that 
any will meet the final punishment which his case demands— 
the Second Death. 

None of the world will meet that penalty until they 
have first had all the blessed opportunities of the age to 
come. And while this is true of the world, the same principle 
applies now to the consecrated children of God in this 
our judgment (trial) day. We now receive God's favors 
(through faith), while the world will receive them in the next 
age, viz., instruction, assistance, encouragement, discipline 
and punishment. "For what son is he whom the Father 
chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof 
all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons." Therefore, 
when we receive grievous chastisement, we should accept 
it as from a loving Father for our correction, not forgetting 
"the exhortation which speaketh unto us as unto 
children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 
-Heb. 12:4-13. 

How just and equal are God's ways! Read carefully the 
rules of the coming age— Jer. 31:29-34 and Ezek. 18:20-32. 

R2613 :page 112 

They prove to us, beyond the possibility of a doubt, the sincerity 

and reality of all his professions of love to men: "As 

I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 

of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and 

live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye 

die?"-Ezek. 33:11. 

All who in this life repent of sin, and, as the term repentance 
implies, begin and continue the work of reformation 



to the best of their ability, will form character which will 
be a benefit to them in the age to come; when awakened in 
the resurrection age, they will be to that extent advanced 
towards perfection, and their progress will be more rapid and 
easy; while with others it will be more slow, tedious and difficult. 
This is implied in the words of our Lord (John 5:29,30 
— Diaglott): "The hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; 
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life [those 
whose trial is past, and who were judged worthy of life, will 
be raised perfect— the faithful of past ages to perfect human 
life, the overcomers of the gospel age to perfect life as divine 
beings], and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection 
of judgment."— These are awakened to judgment— to receive 
a course of discipline and correction— as the necessary means 
for their perfecting, or, otherwise, their condemnation to the 
second death. 

The man who, in this life, by fraud and injustice, accumulated 
and hoarded great wealth, which was scattered 
to the winds when he was laid in the dust, will doubtless 
awake to lament his loss, and bewail his poverty and his 
utter inability under the new order of things to repeat unlawful 
measures to accumulate a fortune. With many it will 
be a severe chastisement and a bitter experience to overcome 
the propensities to avarice, selfishness, pride, ambition and 
idleness, fostered and pampered for years in the present life. 
Occasionally we see an illustration of this form of punishment 
now, when a man of great wealth suddenly loses all, 
and the haughty spirit of himself and family must fall. 

We are told (Dan. 12:2) that some shall awake to shame 
and age-lasting contempt. And who can doubt that, when 
every secret thing is brought into judgment (Eccl. 12: 14), 
and the dark side of many a character that now stands measurably 
approved among men is then made known, many a 
face will blush and hide itself in confusion? When the man 
who steals is required to refund the stolen property to its 
rightful owner, with the addition of twenty per cent, interest, 
and the man who deceives, falsely accuses or otherwise wrongs 
his neighbor, is required to acknowledge his crimes and so 
far as possible to repair damages, on peril of an eternal loss 
of life, will not this be retributive justice? Note the clear 
statement of this in God's typical dealings with Israel, whom 
he made to represent the world.— 1 Cor. 10:11; Lev. 6:1-7. 
See also "Tabernacle Shadows," page 99. 

As we are thus permitted to look into the perfect plan of 
God, how forcibly we are reminded of his word through the 
prophet Isaiah, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet." (Isa. 28:17.) We also see the 
wholesome influence of such discipline. Parents, in disciplining 
their children, realize the imperative necessity of making 
their punishments proportionate to the character of the 
offences; and so in God's government: great punishments 
following great offences are not greater than is necessary 
to establish justice and to effect great moral reforms. 

Seeing that the Lord will thus equitably adjust human 
affairs in his own due time, we can afford to endure hardness 



for the present, and resist evil with good, even at the cost of 
present disadvantage. Therefore, "Recompense to no man 
evil for evil." "Let this mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus our Lord."-Rom. 12:17-19; Phil. 2:5. 

The present order of things will not always continue: 
a time of reckoning is coming. The just Judge of all the 
earth says, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay;" and the Apostle 
Peter adds, "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly 
out of temptation and to reserve the unjust unto the day 
of judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9.) And, as we have 
seen, those punishments will be adapted to the nature of the 
offences, and the benevolent object in view— man's permanent 
establishment in righteousness. 

Other Scriptures corroborative of this view of future 
rewards and punishments are as follows: 2 Sam. 3:39; Matt. 16:27; 
1 Pet. 3:12; Psa. 19:1 1; 91:8; Prov. 11:18; Isa. 40:10; 
49:4; Matt. 5:12; 10:41,42; Luke 6:35; Rev. 22: 12; 
Rom. 14:11,12. 

LET HONESTY AND TRUTH PREVAIL. 



Having demonstrated that neither the Bible nor reason 
offers the slightest support to the doctrine that eternal torment 
is the penalty for sin, we note the fact that the various 
church creeds, and confessions, and hymn-books, and theological 
treatises, are its only supports; and that under the 
increasing light of our day, and the consequent emancipation 
of reason, belief in this horrible, fiendish doctrine of the 
dark ages is fast dying out. But alas! this is not because 
Christian people generally are zealous for the truth of God's 
Word and for his character, and willing to destroy their grim 
creed-idols. Ah no! they still bow before their admitted 
falsities; they still pledge themselves to their defense, and 
spend time and money for their support, though at heart 
ashamed of them, and privately denying them. 

The general influence of all this is, to cause the honest-hearted 
of the world to despise Christianity and the Bible; 
and to make hypocrites and semi-infidels of nominal Christians. 
Because the nominal church clings to this old blasphemy, 
and falsely presents its own error as the teaching of 
the Bible, the Word of God, though still nominally reverenced, 
is being practically repudiated. Thus the Bible, the 
great anchor of truth and liberty, is being cut loose from, 

R2614:page 112 

by the very ones who, if not deceived regarding its teachings, 
would be held and blessed by it. 

The general effect, not far distant, will be, first open infidelity, 
then anarchy. For much, very much of this, lukewarm 
Christians, both in pulpits and pews, who know or 
ought to know better, are responsible. Many such are willing 
to compromise the truth, to slander God's character, and 
to stultify and deceive themselves, for the sake of peace, or 



ease, or present earthly advantage. And any minister, who, 
by uttering a word for an unpopular truth, will risk the loss 
of his stipend and his reputation for being "established" in 
the bog of error, is considered a bold man, even though he 
ignominiously withhold his name from his published 
protests. 

If professed Christians would be honest with themselves 
and true to God, they would soon learn that "their fear 
toward God is taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) 
If all would decide to let God be true, though it should prove 
every man a liar (Rom. 3:4), and show all human creeds to 
be imperfect and misleading, there would be a great creed-smashing 
work done very shortly. Then the Bible would be 
studied and appreciated as never before; and its testimony 
that the wages of sin is death (extinction), would be recognized 
as a "just recompense of reward." 



We have given foregoing but a mere suggestion of the light now shining 
in "due season" for the "household of faith." We invite correspondence 
from all who "hunger and thirst after right." We have free tracts, and 
books to loan to the poor in spirit who are poor also in purse. See page 2. 



page 113 
VOL. XXI. APRIL 15, 1900. No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 115 

Self-Denial and Cross-Bearing the 

Conditions 116 

Christ the First to Rise from the Dead 119 

Awakening of the Dead not 

Resurrection 121 

The Volunteer Work 122 

A Kind Master, a Good Servant 124 

The Disappointed Prophet's Wise 
Course 125 

John More than a Prophet 127 

Faithful Co-Laborers Heard from 127 

Items: Memorial Celebration Reports 114 

Poems and Hymns of Dawn " 

Dawn IV in German, etc., etc " 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



MEMORIAL CELEBRATION REPORTS. 

WE trust that our dear Redeemer's death will be very generally 
celebrated by WATCH TOWER readers on the evening 
of April 12, and make special request for Postal Card reports 
from each little group— even the twos and threes who meet in 
His name. Please appoint one of your number to attend to this 
matter. Write as plainly as possible, state the number who 
participated and the measure of blessing enjoyed. Do not expect 
replies to these cards. 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

Our supply is temporarily exhausted, and it will be about 
a month before we can fill orders received now. 

DAWN IV. IN GERMAN. 

Our printers and binders have been so busy of late that the 
German translation of DAWN IV. "The Day of Vengeance" has 
been delayed far beyond our expectation. We ask the dear 
German friends who have waited for it so patiently to wait just 
a little longer. We are assured that we can commence filling 
orders by May 1 . 

FREE TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS. 

We were some time ago obliged to make it an office rule 
that no one could be entered as a free subscriber except upon 
his own request as stated in "Terms" above, except in the cases 
of those disabled, when the friend requesting it for them should 
state this fact and that they were requested to write. 

We are anxious that all interested poor should have the 
TOWER free, but experience proves the above rule to be a wise 
one. Let each feel that he receives the gift from the Lord as a 
part of God's provision for his own. 

ADDRESS TAGS NOT CHANGED. 

We are changing our method of addressing the TOWERS and 
the tags are no longer to be relied on. Henceforth we will 
acknowledge every remittance by postal card. It will be additional 
trouble and expense, but we trust will have other compensating 
advantages. 



R2614:page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE "SHAKING" of the ecclesiastical "heavens" 
continues. Dr. Hillis' denunciation of the 
Westminster Confession of Faith, which as a Presbyterian 
he has supported for many years, is about as 
strong as he could make it. He is credited with the 
following language in his discourse to the Plymouth 
Church, Brooklyn, N.Y., on Sunday, March 25th:— 

"The Confession of Faith says that certain men 
and angels are foreordained to everlasting death, being 
particularly and unchangeably designed, and their 
number is so certain and definite that it cannot be either 
increased or diminished, and every young man who 
enters the Presbyterian Church has to solemnly swear 
to believe and teach this frightful view. And every 



attempt to revise and expel that statement from the 
creed has been successfully combated by a majority 
that wishes to retain the doctrine. It would seem as 
if a man would prefer to be burned at the stake rather 
than hold or assert or charge such infinite cruelty upon 
the all-merciful and all-loving God. The day the 
scholastics wrote that chapter in the Confession of 
Faith they got the devil confused with God. 

"I would rather shake my fist in the face of the 
Eternal, and fling every vile epithet toward his stainless 
throne where eternal mercy sits with the world's atoning 
Savior, than lift my hand with that creed before 
God's throne and affirm that I taught or believed it." 

The matter is before the Chicago Presbytery which 
is divided in sentiment,— many of its members averring 
that they agree to Dr. Hillis' views of the subject. 
The gentleman proposes to resign his connection 
with Presbyterianism if the latter objects to his attacks 
upon it from the inside. The world looks on 
approvingly, and says, Bravo, Dr. Hillis! But to our 
view the gentleman has little to be proud of; for, 
granting that, as he says, he has held privately for 
years the views he now expresses publicly, it follows 
that for all those years he lived a lie before the whole 
world. And if for those years he kept silence because 
he was making a personal name and fame and following, 
which he has now attained, it follows that for all 
those years, according to the gentleman's own words 
quoted above, he was doing worse than "shaking his 
fist in the face of the Eternal,"— worse than to have 
"flung every vile epithet toward God's stainless throne 
where eternal mercy sits with the world's atoning 
Savior." 

What an astounding confession this is to be sent 
forth to the world! We are reminded of our Lord's 
words, "Out of thine own mouth I will judge thee!" 
And yet this side of the case strikes very few. Why? 
Because they are in a similar plight, having been for 
years directly or indirectly upholding this same creed 
and thus to the extent of their influence (either as 
ministers and officers or else as common members of 
churches avowing these creeds, they too have been thus 
blaspheming the Eternal and his stainless throne. 
Other ministers in Presbyterian churches look with 
envy at Dr. Hillis' freedom and wish that the time 
might soon come that they would have sufficient individual 
influence and prestige to stand alone, that 
they too might declare their independence and cease 
their blasphemy against the divine character, which 
causes uneasiness, notwithstanding long usage to it 
and notwithstanding the fact that "others do the 
same." Added to this is now another fear, that the 
tide of public sentiment is on the turn;— that the pews, 
if they knew as much as the pulpits respecting such 
matters, would be much more honest;— and that the 
risk of jumping out too soon as "reformers," and thus 



losing prestige and possibly bread and butter, may be 
offset soon by the reverse risk of not jumping soon 
enough to get glory as a "reformer" and on the contrary 
being covered with odium as those who have 
deceived the people as long as possible. 

R2614 :page 116 

Surely it would have been much more to Dr. 
Hillis' credit to have first resigned all relationship to 
Presbyterianism and then in a very humble manner to 
have confessed to Plymouth Church his shortcomings 
of the past and his resolution henceforth to preach the 
truth, or at least his convictions respecting it. 



Rev. Dr. Donehoo, of Pittsburg, the very next 
Sunday (April 1st) took a similar stand against the 
Westminster Confession, which, when ordained, he 
solemnly vowed that he believed and would teach. 
Yet, while still posing as a Presbyterian and doing 
violence to his oath of office, he confessed in the following 
language, quoted in the daily press, that he has 
for the many years of his Presbyterian membership 
and ministry been acting a lie— he confesses he "never 
could believe" what he professed. We quote:— 

"The question suggested to me by the text is the 
following, 'Are men foreordained to be damned?' It 
is about the bluntest, harshest, most unreasonable one 
that an unprejudiced reader of the Bible could have 
presented for his consideration. I am sorry to say 
that it is one that has been present in my thoughts 
from my earliest recollection. I have heard it discussed 
in the pulpit, have read many works on the 
subject, and have often gravely considered it in private 
conversation with brethren, tho I have never for one 
instant had any doubts on the subject so far as I am 
concerned. Whatever the Westminster divines may 
have believed on the subject, their language as now 
understood expresses in unmistakable phrase that such 
was their belief. Thus they declare: 'By the decree 
of God, for the manifestation of his glory, some men 
and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life, and 
others are foreordained to everlasting death, and their 
number is so certain and definite, that it cannot be 
either increased or diminished. 

"I never could believe such a thing, and I pray 
to God to preserve me from ever either unwittingly 
endorsing or so much as entertaining such an insane 
thought in my heart. Nor would I refer to this at all 
were it not just now published all over the land that 
the great Presbyterian Church was about to drag a 
faithful minister of the gospel to trial for protesting 
against the idea that any man is foreordained of God 
to be damned to all eternity. If such a sifting process 



as that just now hinted at was to be fearlessly put in 
force throughout the church, and every man who 
preaches and prays every Sabbath day of his life the 
very opposite of this horrible dogma, whether he has 
the brains or the courage to admit it or not, there 
would be such a depletion in the ranks of the church 
as would throw St. Bartholomew in the shade." 

The gentleman frankly avows that he would have 
kept quiet still longer, and have continued to tacitly 
endorse the slander against God had it not been his 
fear that a hunt for "heretics" might be started in 
Presbyterian circles. He hopes that a sufficient number 
of Presbyterian ministers will growl to deter the 
others from enforcing the laws and rules of the denomination. 
Yet strange to say, the men who stay inside 
the denomination and denounce it, and declare their 
perfidy in respect to its teachings and their unfaithfulness 
to God's character and Word, are honored; while 
honest men who refuse thus to stultify themselves and to 
blaspheme God's holy name for bread and "honor one 
of another" are disesteemed. After all then the chief 
fault is with the people;— the preachers merely debase 
themselves to supply the popular demand. It is time 
for all who have any moral honesty to show it. "Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins and that ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 



R2615 :page 116 
SELF-DENIAL AND CROSS-BEARING CONDITIONS. 



"Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me 
[be my follower], let him deny himself, and take up his cross." 
-Matt. 16:24.- 

GENERALLY the thought attached to this 

passage in the minds of Christian people is that 

the Lord is here laying down the terms and conditions 

upon which eternal torment may be escaped. 

This result of false teaching, received from earliest infancy, 

thus casts a false shadow upon very many of 

the utterances of our Lord and the apostles. To the 

Jew, however, who had no thought in his mind of 

eternal torment for anybody, the above utterance 

would have no such significance. The disciples, to 

whom it was addressed, received it exactly for what 

it says. To understand it as they did let us take their 

standpoint: As Jews they shared the nation's hopes, 

based upon the Abrahamic promise, viz., that in due 

time God proposed to bless all nations, and that Israel 

was to be his instrumentality through which the 

blessings would flow. We are to remember that based 



upon this hope all Israel was in expectation of a Messiah 
whose first work it would be to organize Israel 
in some sense of the word, and then, as its great Head 
and guide, bring to pass the blessed conditions. 

The disciples knew that Jesus claimed to be this 
great Messiah, and they had left all to follow him, 
in order that they might have a share with him in 
his Kingdom,— according to his promise, a very honorable 
share in it, a seat in his throne. When, therefore, 
he addressed them on this subject in the above 
words nothing could have been further from their 
thoughts than that he should mean that only those who 
would conform to these strict rules would escape an 
eternity of torture: on the contrary, their understanding 
would be that all who would not conform to these 
rules, and be close followers of Jesus' example, would 
fail to share with him in the Kingdom glories and 
honors— fail to be associated with him as joint-heirs 
of the Kingdom. They certainly expected that his 
Kingdom, when organized, would bless all nations, 
and if it would bless all other nations assuredly it 
would bless also the Jewish nation, out of which the 
Master was proposing to select his joint-heirs. From 

R2615 :page 117 

this standpoint our Lord's words are reasonable, and 
from no other standpoint. 

It would be thoroughly unreasonable every way 
to suppose that the Lord laid down the hard and fast 
condition that everyone who would not become his 
follower and a cross-bearer to the full extent of self-denial, 
even of parents and children if need be, would 
be tormented on this account, or even destroyed. In 
fact, we know that the same great Teacher declared, 
"No man can come unto me except the Father which 
sent me draw him," and we see most evidently that 
but a small proportion of the nation was at that time 
drawn to Jesus by the Father through the word of 
grace. We see that the great majority were blinded. 
How evident, then, it is that our Lord had no reference 
to the blinded ones who did not become his disciples, 
but intended his remarks exclusively for the 
class addressed, whose eyes had been opened and 
whose ears had been unstopped, and who had become 
his followers by a consecration. Note the Master's 
words, "Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your 
ears, for they hear;"— here is the suggestion that the 
majority of the Jews did not see and did not hear, 
and hence had no call to be followers of Jesus in the 
same special sense; the majority being not even drawn 
of the Father, not being in a condition of heart to be 
drawn by the truth. 

Note how our Lord refers to this matter, and 
speaks of the Jewish leaders, saying that they were 
blind guides, leading the blind people, and all about 



to "fall into the ditch." (Matt. 15:14.) This falling 
into the ditch seems to those who are deluded by the 
eternal torment theory, to be but another suggestion 
that all of the Jewish nation, both leaders and people, 
were fast hastening to "hell," to torment. But on the 
contrary, the Scriptures show clearly that the ditch 
to which they were hastening was the great time of 
trouble which came upon their nation after our Lord's 
crucifixion, and which culminated with the utter destruction 
of their city by the army of Titus in the 
year 70 A. D.— since which time they have been nationally 
disintegrated and destroyed. 

That the apostles did not understand that all who 
did not follow with them in the narrow way of self-sacrifice, 
self-denial, cross-bearing, were to be tormented, 
is testified by the Apostle Peter who, speaking under 
the inspiration of the holy spirit, declared to these 
same Jews that they had crucified Messiah, and then 
he adds, "But I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did 
also your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

This blind ignorance is referred to also by the 
Apostle Paul: in discussing the matter in his Epistle 
to the Romans he pointed out that Israel was blinded, 
and did stumble and fall into the ditch, and did not 
attain the great prize which it was seeking, and that 
the elect only obtained that prize. He points us to 
the elect "remnant" selected from the nation before 
its complete disintegration, and informs us that this 
remnant, being less than the number which God had 
predetermined, the elect Church, is to be completed 
during this Gospel age by the selection of the remainder 
from amongst the Gentiles to be fellow-heirs 
with the Israelites in the same promise made to Abraham. 
These are denominated "spiritual Israel," and 
the Apostle points out that this change in the divine 
operation was foreknown to the Lord, and was a part 
of his plan, as revealed through the prophets— that 
the Gentiles also should be fellow-heirs of the same 
promise.— Rom. 11:7-12. 

The Apostle proceeds to show that the blindness 
will continue upon fleshly Israel until the Gospel 
Church is completed, and that then blindness will be 
turned from them, and they shall see; and God's favor 
shall come upon them, and they will be amongst the 
first to be blessed under the new order of things following 
the glorification of the elect Church. 

With these thoughts in our minds, putting ourselves 
exactly in the place of the apostles, we are much 
better prepared to understand the meaning of the Master's 
words, "If any man will be my follower he must 
deny himself and take up his cross." The Apostle 
points us to the same thought, saying that it is only 
if we suffer with him that we shall reign with him; 
if we be dead with him, that we shall live with him. 
The reference is exclusively to those on the "narrow 
way," and does not at all refer to the world of mankind. 



The verses following, a part of the same discourse, 
declare that whosoever would save his life shall 
lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life for the Lord's 
sake shall find it; this also is exclusively applicable to 
those who had had their eyes opened, and had become 
his followers, and is not at all applicable to others. 

All who become Jesus' followers first take two 
steps, viz., justification and consecration, or sanctification. 
Justification is imputed to them as the result 
of faith in Christ as their Redeemer, and its object is 
to place fallen sinful human beings on such a reckonedly 
perfect plane or standing before God as would 
permit them to present their bodies living sacrifices, 
"holy and acceptable to God" through Christ. Consecration, 
self-surrender, sanctification, called in our 
text self-denial, consists in the giving up of our wills 
to the will of the Lord: and our wills controlling this 
implies our all. 

This class, having received their share of the ransom, 
(justification) and having used it exchanging its 
hopes of restitution for the heavenly hopes, "heavenly 
calling," spiritual prosperity and prospective joint-heirship 
with Christ, have no longer any earthly rights 
or hopes: hence such must either gain the spiritual life 
they have started out for or must lose all life. And 
the terms or conditions upon which the heavenly life 
is to be attained are the sacrifice of the earthly life and 
its interests. Therefore, as here stated, in respect to 
this class, whoever of them saves his earthly life (refusing 
to sacrifice it, etc.) after having made the consecration, 
loses it entirely— loses all hope of a future 
life. And on the other hand, those of this class who 
are now faithful in laying down the present life for the 
Lord's sake shall find life eternal under the glorious 
conditions of the Kingdom. "If we be dead with him, 
we shall also live with him."— 2 Tim. 2:11,12. 

The succeeding verse (26) is a part of the same 
discourse, not to people in general, but applicable to 
the disciples, the followers and cross-bearers only, the 
little flock. It reads: "What is a man profited if he 
shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul (being, 
existence), or what shall a man give in exchange 

R2615 :page 118 

for his soul (his future existence)?" We are to remember 
that only one offer of life eternal has yet been 
made to mankind; and this was the offer that Jesus 
was making to his followers, and that has since been 
made throughout this Gospel age to whoever had ears 
to hear and a will to walk in the narrow way. There 
is no offer of eternal life to the world yet, altho the 
Scriptures clearly show us that there is to be an offer 
of eternal life under other conditions during the Millennial 
age; but none can either accept or reject those 
conditions yet, for they are not offered to any. 



Those now invited to eternal life under its most 
glorious conditions of "glory, honor, immortality," 
and joint-heirship with the Redeemer in the Kingdom 
are exhorted by our Lord to appreciate highly the 
value of eternal life; and it is implied that anyone who 
will at all consider the matter will readily acknowledge 
that to give all that he has of earthly life and its 
vanities in exchange for life eternal would be to get that 
great boon at a very small price— at a great bargain! 
We see men who, as death draws near, are willing to 
give their all to retain their hold a little longer on the 
present life: how much more should we be willing to 
lay down our lives voluntary sacrifices, in daily self-denials, 

R2616 :page 118 

in sharing the sufferings of Christ in this present 
time, that we may thereby attain, according to 
God's good promise in Christ, the glorious and eternal 
life promised to the overcomers. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES CROSS-BEARING? 

But now we come back to the original proposition 
of our text, and inquire particularly respecting the 
declared terms of discipleship, What do they signify, 
and how do they apply to us individually in our daily 
lives? What is it for us to deny ourselves? It signifies 
that having consecrated ourselves to the Lord 
we should have no wills of our own; self should be 
ignored, or, as the Apostle Paul expresses it, "Ye are 
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God." "Reckon 
ye yourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto 
God." Self-denial, then, means to ignore self-will, self-gratification: 
and this includes all the earthly ambitions 
and desires, the sinful, and no less those that are 
laudable and proper. We pledge ourselves at the 
very beginning that we are not following our own inclinations 
and our own wills, but are to be wholly subject 
to the will of our Head, the Lord Jesus, if we 
may be in turn counted in as members in particular of 
his body, the elect Church. 

Very graciously, the Lord vails from our sight at 
the beginning of the way some of the trials of the flesh 
and conflicts between the mind of the flesh and the 
new mind, which this full consecration must involve 
if we press along the line toward the mark which he 
has set for us, as the standard of character. Could we 
see all that is implied from the very beginning of the 
race we would be disheartened no doubt, but as we 
grow in grace, and become strong in the Lord and in 
the power of his might, we grow also in knowledge 
and in love toward the Lord and toward all who are in 
fellowship with him, and thus it becomes daily easier 
for us, as we sing, 

"...the pathway smooths 



Since first we learned to love it." 

As a result, by and by the trials which came at 
first seem to be as nothing, but other trials come instead, 
as we discern more distinctly, more clearly, the 
good, the acceptable, the perfect will of God. Thus 
our trial condition progresses, and what is required of 
us is that step by step we shall be faithful to what 
we see to be the Lord's will, and shall seek to the 
best of our ability to submit ourselves thereto. This 
is self-denial,— forsaking all else to be Jesus' disciples. 

Cross-bearing is closely related to self-denial, and 
yet a distinction between them may be noted. Self-denial 
relates more particularly to passive obedience 
and endurance for the Lord's sake; cross-bearing relates 
more particularly to activities in the Lord's service, 
which we find to be contrary to our natural inclinations. 
Faithfulness in self-denial means courage 
and zeal; cross-bearing means victory, overcoming. 
Our self-denials may be victories gained in our own 
hearts, of which others may know nothing, and of 
which they should know nothing, if we desire to have 
the fulness of the Lord's blessing, for we are to make 
sure that we do not deny ourselves to be seen of men, 
but merely for the Lord's approval. Our cross-bearings, 
however, may be seen, to some extent at least, by 
those who are in close contact with us, and especially 
by those who are walking in the same "narrow way." 

And how appropriate it is that all cross-bearers 
should recognize each other, and be able to sympathize 
with one another, and give an encouraging word, 
a sympathizing look or a helping hand, as opportunity 
may offer. As for others, we cannot expect sympathy 
from them, for from their standpoint we are counted 
fools (Acts 26:24; 1 Cor. 1:18; 2:14; 3:18), unwise, following 
an unwise course, bringing our difficulties upon 
ourselves, because we insist on following an ideal Pattern, 
the pattern of our dear Redeemer, instead of following 
the pattern of churchianity and the world. Such, 
of course, have only sneers for the faithful, and often 
no doubt think of them as they speak of them, as being 
hypocrites. This indeed is a part of the cross-bearing, 
especially when those who deride and who 
sneer are those whom we love and whose esteem we 
would enjoy, if we could have it in conjunction with 
the Master's "Well done, good and faithful servant." 

Look, for instance, at our Lord Jesus, and the 
cross which he bore— not the literal cross of wood 
which he bore to Calvary, amid shame and jeers, but 
the cross-bearing which he practiced continually 
throughout the three and a half years of his ministry 
from the time of his consecration at Jordan. Note how 
faithfulness to the truth, in testifying respecting his 
mission, the Kingdom that he was establishing, and 
the terms and conditions of membership in it, being 
misunderstood by the chief priests, scribes and Pharisees, 
led to opposition continually, so that they not 



only maligned his name, but in their hatred sought his 
life and finally obtained it. Note that these were not 
worldly people, as that word is generally understood, 
but members of the leading denominations of his day: 
and that the so-called holiness people of that day were 
his most bitter assailants. He could indeed have fallen 
into line with the Pharisees or with the Sadducees, and 
have been considered "respectable," and have had a 
large following, but fidelity to the truth would not permit 
him to do this, but forced him to take a stand independent 
of all sects and parties, and this brought 

R2616 :page 119 

against him the wrath of all of them, and was his continual 
and daily cross-bearing, that had to be borne, if 
he would "overcome" and be granted association with 
the Father in the Kingdom. And may not all of his 
faithful followers expect similar experiences, under 
similar conditions now? We think so; we know so; 
they have such experiences. 

The Apostle mentions some of these crosses, and 
declares that the endurance of them are marks of his 
faithfulness as a servant of the Lord: "In much patience, 
in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, 
in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, 
in fastings," by dishonor, by evil report, as deceivers 
and yet true, as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as 
poor, yet making many rich, as having nothing, yet 
possessing all things. (2 Cor. 6:4-10.) How much 
our Master knew of being counted a deceiver, while 
yet he was the true one, of being called Beelzebub, 
while really the Prince of light! What a cross it must 
have been to endure such slanderous misrepresentations, 
and contradictions of sinners against himself; and 
how faithfully he bore the cross. And shall not all of 
his followers expect to similarly share this cross with 
him, and be misunderstood, misrepresented, misjudged, 
by those who are more or less blinded by the 
Adversary! Such dishonor, such evil reports, are 
amongst the things which our Lord specifically declared 
would be a part of our cross-bearing when he 
said, "Blessed are ye when men shall revile and persecute 
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely 
for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad (in all 
such cross-bearings), for great is your reward in 
heaven." 

In a word, our Lord calls upon his disciples to 
follow him, in direct opposition to the world-current. 
He declares that the disciple must not expect to be 
above his Lord in being spared such experiences, but 
promises great rewards at the end of the journey— life 
eternal, with exceeding glory. 

The awfulness of the teaching of the creeds of 
Christendom respecting the fate of the world in general 
is only grasped when we begin to seriously consider the 



narrowness of the way in which all of the Lord's true 
followers are called to walk in his footsteps. Surely, if 
all except such faithful saints, an extremely "little 
flock," are to be eternally tormented, it would mean 
that there are to be many members of every family on 
earth consigned to that awful and unending agony. 
How absurd is the proposition, how unreasonable, how 
unscriptural, when the Scriptures are rightly 
understood! 

But how reasonable is the proper interpretation of 
our text, how reasonable its application to those who 
have been drawn of the Father to the Son, and who 
then have accepted of the Son and his great sacrifice 
for sin, and who have considered it a reasonable service 
to present their bodies living sacrifices, and have consecrated 
their all to him, that they might have fellowship 
in his sufferings, and ultimate fellowship also in 
his glory. These can see readily that the Kingdom 
honor and glory to which they are called, are blessings 
so great, honors so profound, and their works as kings 
and priests and judges in the Millennial age so particular, 
that all of these testings of faith, patience, love 
and obedience are wholly reasonable to them. 

All such we exhort, especially at this particular 
season of the commemoration of our dear Redeemer's 
death, that they catch not merely at the outward form 
of self-denial, practiced by nominal Christendom during 
the Lenten season, but that whatever of outward 
self-denial they may practice they may learn the full 
meaning of self-consecration and immolation which our 
Lord's words signify: and that they be not content 
with the wearing of a cross as an ornament, but grasp 
fully and clearly the purport of the Master's words respecting 
the true cross-bearing, that in due time they 
may also attain to the crown-bearing promised as a reward 
to the faithful. Let us at this season of the year 
renew our covenant of sacrifice with the Lord, determined, 
in the words of the Apostle, that we will more 
zealously than ever— Lay aside every weight, and 
every besetting sin, and run with patience the race set 
before us in the Gospel, looking unto Jesus, in whose 
footsteps we seek to tread.— Heb. 12:1. 



R2617 :page 119 

CHRIST THE FIRST TO RISE FROM THE DEAD. 

-MARK 5:22-24,35-43. -APRIL 15.- 

"He is risen, as he said."— Matt. 28:6. 

THE selection of the narrative of the awakening 
of the daughter of Jairus as an Easter lesson 
was no doubt under the common but mistaken 



supposition that the miracle performed upon this child 
was similar to the miracle of our Lord's resurrection, 
which Easter Sunday generally celebrates. We will 
examine the lesson on its own merits, and then see 
that the Scriptures distinctly and pointedly distinguish 
between the two miracles— and that the miracle performed 
upon Jairus' daughter is nowhere designated a 
resurrection, nor was it such in fact. 

Jairus was evidently a man of considerable influence 
in his community, for to be a ruler of the synagogue 
meant, in the custom of that time, that he was 
also a member of the local Sanhedrin, the court which 
tried certain classes of offenders, preserved general order, 
convened the assembly, etc. The rulers of the 
synagogue had its affairs in charge also, and invited 
its readers and speakers, managed the schools in connection 
with it, etc. As a man of high station in the 
city, he no doubt was acquainted with the nobleman of 
the same city (Capernaum), whose son Jesus had 
healed, as recorded in John 4:46-53. His knowledge 
of that case no doubt helped to increase his own faith 
in the Lord's power so remarkably manifested in the 
circumstances of this lesson. 

It was while Jesus was at the house of Matthew 
(Levi, the publican— see lesson of March 18), enjoying 
the banquet which Matthew had intended should bring 
his publican friends in contact with the Master, and 
probably toward the conclusion of the banquet, that 
Jairus arrived on the scene to beseech our Lord for the 
recovery of his daughter. In the account as given by 
Matthew (9:18) the ruler is represented as saying that 

R2617 :page 120 

his daughter was already dead, while in the account 

before us the implication is that altho she was in an 

extreme condition life still remained. The probability 

is that at the time Jairus left his child she was in an extremely 

critical condition, and that he surmised that 

by the time he was talking with the Lord she was 

quite probably dead— (and such was the case and the 

servants already enroute to notify Jairus). Quite possibly 

Jairus mentioned the matter from this standpoint: 

She was at the point of death when I left her; she is no 

doubt dead now, but come and lay thy hands on her 

that she may be healed and live. It was a wonderful 

exhibition of faith, and one which our Lord evidently 

fully appreciated, for he did not hesitate to go with 

him. 

It was during this journey from the home of Matthew 
to the home of Jairus, a great throng of people 
accompanying him, that the poor woman who had an 
issue of blood twelve years, and had spent all that she 
had and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, 
conceived the thought that if she could but touch the 
hem of Jesus' garment she should be cured— and by 



the exercise of her faith in this manner was healed. We 
can imagine the feelings of Jairus in consequence of 
this delay; while it added to his faith in the power of 
Jesus, it at the same time tested his faith in respect to 
the recovery of his child. The test became more severe, 
because just at this juncture messengers arrived 
from his wife, saying that the child was dead, and that 
it would therefore be unnecessary to trouble the great 
Teacher. 

Similar are the Lord's providential dealings with 
many of his people: he gives us a ground for faith, and 
then, as we exercise that faith and act in harmony with 
it, he gives fresh corroboration; meanwhile testing it, 
by permitting various difficulties, contrary suggestions, 
doubts, fears, etc.— not only such as would arise 
in our minds, but such as would be brought to us 
through others, sometimes those nearest and dearest. 
Yet our experiences have been that in all such trials of 
faith the Lord has been ready to speak peace, comfort 
and full assurance to our hearts, if we would but listen 
to his words. So it was with Jairus. When the servants 
arrived, and said, Hope is gone, submit to the 
inevitable; Jesus also spoke a word, saying, "Be not 
afraid; only believe." O, how much there is in faith! 
How necessary God causes that it shall be during this 
present age. He desires that His people shall "walk 
by faith." "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God," and the Apostle assures us that "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even your faith." Indeed, 
in many respects faith (not credulity) is the 
prime essential of an "overcomer." No one can be an 
overcomer without it; with it anyone can be an "overcomer," 
God's grace in Christ making full provision 
for all such. Divine promises and blessing are 
to the faith-full only— both as respects the present and 
the eternal life. 

Jesus when he had come to Jairus' house, permitted 
only Peter, James and John to accompany him 
as witnesses of the power of God. The favor manifested 
toward these three apostles on so many occasions 
is not to be esteemed as simply a selfish partiality, 
but rather as an indication that these three who were 
specially zealous amongst the apostles were further 
advanced in spiritual things, and best able to appreciate 
the privileges granted them. Their selection was 
but another manifestation of what our Lord called attention 
to in one of his parables as being the divine 
principle of government, viz., that "to him that hath 
shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly"— 
to him that hath used, and profited by divine favor 
most faithfully, shall proportionately more and larger 
favors be granted; because he more than others has by 
his faithfulness become capable of enjoying and appreciating 
and profiting by additional favors. The Lord 
evidently loves fervency (warmth) of spirit or disposition. 
No doubt he appreciates some who are naturally 



cold and phlegmatic, but just as evidently he appreciates 
still more those who have a keener interest, a 
warmer love, and more intense manifestations. Noting 
our Lord's appreciation of zeal should lead all who are 
His followers to-day to strive after greater fervency 
of spirit, greater zeal and energy in running the race 
set before us in the Gospel— greater interest in the 
Master's cause in all its branches. 

The journey both ways had consumed considerable 
time, and the preparations for the burial were far 
advanced at the time of our Lord's arrival, for it was 
the Jewish custom to have a speedy burial after death. 
The hired mourners (whom Matthew designates "minstrels") 
were already there, and the usual unseemly tumult 
of the time was in progress. Our Lord rebuked 
the mourners and spoke of the maid as sleeping, just 
as he similarly said of Lazarus, "Our friend Lazarus 
sleepeth; I go that I may awake him." This aroused 
the laugh of scorn, his hearers not appreciating what 
he meant, even as the disciples did not appreciate the 
word "sleep," when used in connection with Lazarus, 
until our Lord said plainly, "Lazarus is dead." 

The use of the word "sleep" for death is very 
frequent in the Scriptures, both Old and New Testaments. 
In the Old Testament the patriarchs are said 
to "sleep with their fathers," and this was said alike 
of both good and bad, kings and prophets and common 
people. In the New Testament the Apostle 
speaks of those that "sleep in Jesus," for whom we are 
to sorrow not as others who have no hope, because 
we believe in the resurrection of the dead. In the 
case of Stephen it is said that he "fell asleep," and the 
Apostle in speaking of the closing of the Gospel age 
declared that some of the Church would not thus sleep, 
saying, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be 
changed." (1 Kings 2:10; Acts 7:60; 1 Thes. 4:14; 
1 Cor. 15:51). Dr. Lightfoot calls attention to the fact 
that the Jewish theological writings, the Talmud, contain 
the expression "when he slept," hundreds of 
times, as signifying the time of death; and our word 
cemetery means "sleeping place." Dr. Trench, the 
noted scholar, says of this word sleep, "Thereby the 
reality of death is not denied, but only the fact implicitly 
assumed that death will be followed by a resurrection, 
as sleep is (followed) by an awakening." 

Death would not have been even figuratively 
called sleep, except for the provision for a resurrection, 
nor would it have been appropriate had no awakening 
of the dead been intended. And altho this awakening 
could not take place without a redemption, and altho 
the redemption price securing the awakening was not 
paid until Calvary, nevertheless all of God's people 

R2617 :page 121 

who had faith in his promise made to Abraham ("In 



thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed") 
realized that what God had promised he would surely 
fulfil, and that since millions of the families of the earth 
had gone down into death prior to the promise, and 
before the coming of the Seed of Abraham, therefore 
the fulfillment of that promise signified a general 
awakening from the sleep of death for all mankind— 
in order that all might have the opportunity of being 
blessed by the glorious Seed of Abraham. 

It was from this standpoint that our Lord spoke 
and acted; he was already, since his baptism at Jordan, 
in process of paying the ransom— his entire life 
was consecrated and had been accepted of the Father, 
altho the sacrifice had not yet been finished, and was 
not completed until on Calvary he cried in his dying 
moment, "It is finished." As a result of the finishing 
of the ransom there, our Lord declared that in due 
time the prison-house of death would be opened and 
that all the sleeping prisoners would come forth; he 
declared, "All that are in their graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of Man, and come forth;" they that 
have done well (those now on trial, and approved by 
the Lord as overcomers) unto the resurrection of life, 
and they that have done ill (those who have not escaped 

R2618 :page 121 

the condemnation, nor been approved of God) 

unto a resurrection by judgment-trial.— John 5:28,29. 

That judgment trial will be their blessed opportunity 
of coming to a knowledge of the truth respecting 
the divine character and plan, and if they will of 
coming into harmony with it, and by the development 
of character during the Millennium reaching full perfection 
of restitution at its close. Meantime, they 
sleep— "sleep in Jesus," in the sense that a hope of 
awakening in the resurrection morning centers in 
Jesus by divine arrangement, through the atonement 
sacrifice which by the grace of God, he gave a ransom 
for all.— 1 Tim. 2:6. 

Thus we see that the future life held out before us 
in the Scriptures is a resurrection hope. In harmony 
with this the Apostle declared, "Of the hope and resurrection 
of the dead am I called in question." (Acts 23:6), 
and again it is declared that his constant theme 
in preaching was "Jesus and the resurrection." (Acts 17:18.) 
There is no hope of a future life without a resurrection, 
and there is no hope of a resurrection except 
in Jesus— that he died for our sins, and thus paid 
the death penalty which was against us, and thus permitted 
the wages of sin, death, to become merely a 
temporary "sleep," from which he will awaken mankind, 
that they may be blessed under all the great and 
wonderful privileges of His Kingdom during the Millennial 
age, otherwise in Scripture called the day of 
judgment, or trial for the world, as this present Gospel 



age is the day of trial for the Church. 

When ready, in the presence of his three chosen 
disciples and the father and mother of the maiden, 
Jesus took her by the hand, saying, "Talitha cumi." 
These words are in the Aramaic language spoken by 
the common people of that time. "Talitha, in the ordinary 
dialect of the people, is a word of endearment 
to a young maiden, so that the words are equivalent 
to 'Rise, my child.'"— Alford. 

AWAKENING OF THE DEAD NOT RESURRECTION. 



The maid awakened to life and consciousness. 
She did not come back from heaven or from hell, but 
merely awakened out of the sleep of death, and renewed 
the experiences of life as before. Such an 
awakening from sleep— such a restoration of the life 
forces that had been temporarily suspended, is of the 
nature of a resurrection, but is not a resurrection. We 
are to remember that the maiden was not alive before 
—that perfect life has not been enjoyed by any member 
of Adam's race since father Adam's fall into disobedience 
and under the divine sentence of death. As the 
Apostle declares, "In Adam all die," and again, 
"Death passed upon all," and this maiden was no exception 
to the rule. Our Lord, in speaking on the 
subject, implied that none have life in any sense of the 
word, except those who accept him, and they only in a 
reckoned sense by faith. His words were, "Let the 
dead bury their dead." "He that hath the Son hath 
life." As the maiden was therefore legally dead, without 
perfect life, and without the right to it, before she 
fell asleep, so likewise, when she awakened, in answer 
to our Lord's command, she awakened merely to that 
death condition in which she previously was. 

To have resurrected her would have meant to 
have lifted her completely out of death in every sense 
of the word, out of mental, moral and physical degradation, 
up to the grand heights of perfection of mind 
and body, as represented in the person of father Adam, 
and our Lord did nothing of this kind. He merely 
awakened her, leaving her upon the same plane of 
death on which she had been born, and had thus far 
lived for twelve years. The maiden will still have her 
opportunity of sharing in the general "resurrection by 
judgments" or restitution during the Millennial age— 
unless at some subsequent time she accepted the Gospel 
of the Lord Jesus, and became one of his followers, 
a member of the Church of this Gospel age; in which 
event she would, if faithful, be accounted worthy of a 
part in the chief or first resurrection to glory, honor 
and immortality. But the point we here make is 
merely that this lesson does not treat of her resurrection, 
but of her awakening. 



In harmony with this is the plain statement of the 
Scriptures that our Lord Jesus himself, in his resurrection, 
was "the first fruits of them that slept." (1 Cor. 15:20.) 
Again, the Apostle makes the same point 
very emphatic in his discourse to Agrippa, saying that 
all of his preaching was in harmony with the statements 
of Moses and the prophets: "That Christ should 
suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise 
from the dead."— Acts 26:23. 

These plain statements of Scripture cannot be ignored 
with impunity by those who desire to be 
taught of God, and to rid themselves of erroneous 
theories and speculations respecting the word resurrection. 
Our Lord's resurrection was indeed the first, 
and hence the others were not resurrections at all. Our 
Lord was raised up— clear up— all the way up— out of 
death— into the full perfection of life. It was not 
necessary that he should be raised to the perfection of 
human nature again, for indeed it was the human nature 
of Jesus that was sacrificed on our behalf— one 

R2618 :page 122 

sacrifice forever— which could never be taken back or 
rescinded— otherwise it would have meant the repeal 
of man's redemption— the undoing of the at-one-ment 
work. 

Rather, we are to remember that when our Lord 
Jesus made his consecration at baptism he was "begotten 
of the spirit," a spirit being— and that which 
was begotten of the spirit was in due time "born of 
the spirit," a spirit being— and referring to this spirit 
birth, his resurrection, we read that he was "the first-born 
from the dead," "the first-born among many 
brethren." (Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:18.) These are additional 
proof texts to the effect that neither Lazarus nor 
Jairus' daughter, nor the son of the widow of Nain, 
nor the young man whom the Apostle Paul awakened, 
nor Dorcas, whom Peter awakened, nor the child of 
the Shunnamite woman whom Elisha awakened, were 
"born from the dead" in any sense of the word, either 
on the fleshly or on the spiritual plane. 

Let us, then, in thinking of our dear Redeemer's 
resurrection, seek more and more to grasp its greatness, 
and to realize that nothing of the kind ever occurred 
before, and that as he was the first-born from 
the dead, so his "brethren," the Church, are to come 
next in order. Let us remember also that his resurrection 
to spirit nature is quite a different resurrection 
from what the world of mankind may ever hope to 
share— theirs being a restitution resurrection to human 
conditions, human perfection and life. This higher chief 
or first resurrection which our Lord experienced, is 
promised as a special reward to his faithful Church 
and to no others. It is this that the Apostle calls the 
resurrection of the dead, which he describes in 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 



Our great endeavor, therefore, as followers 
in the footsteps of Jesus, should be the same that was 
before the mind of the great Apostle, when he said, 
"That I may know the power of his resurrection (the 
first resurrection, to spiritual conditions, glory, honor 
and immortality), and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death, if by any 
means I might attain unto the (special, chief) resurrection 
of the dead."-Phil. 3:9-15. 



R2618 :page 122 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 



SINCE the sending forth of the double number 

of our journal last issue, the "Volunteer" enlistments 

have increased wonderfully. The dear 

friends of the truth everywhere seem to think that if 

that issue is to be the "ammunition" used by the Volunteers 

the results will be momentous; hence many 

are anxious to enlist in the service which promises 

nothing of earthly fame or reward, but large appreciation 

by the Captain of our salvation, and large rewards 

in the world to come. 

There are probably as many as a hundred colored 
brethren on the Watch Tower lists, some of them very 
clear in the truth, and very earnest in its service, financially 
and otherwise. We have received letters from 
several of these, who had intended engaging in the 
Volunteer work, expressing surprise that in the call 
for Volunteers in the March 1st issue we restricted 
the inquiry to white Protestant churches. They rightly 
realized that we have not the slightest of race prejudice, 
and that we love the colored brethren with just the 
same warmth of heart that we love the white, and they 
queried therefore why such a distinction should be 
made in the call. The reason is that so far as we are 
able to judge, colored people have less education than 
whites— many of them quite insufficient to permit them 
to profit by such reading as we have to give forth. Our 
conclusion therefore is based upon the supposition that 
reading matter distributed to a colored congregation 
would more than half of it be utterly wasted, and a 
very small percentage indeed likely to yield good results. 
We advise, therefore, that where the Watch 
Tower literature is introduced to colored people it be 
not by promiscuous circulation, but only to those who 
give evidence of some ear for the truth. 

We avoid, so far as possible, putting the pearls of 
present truth into the hands of the vicious and depraved, 
whites as well as blacks. Wherever we have 
reason to believe that people love sin rather than 



righteousness, we have no desire to remove from their 
minds any of the shackles which ignorance and superstition 
have put upon them; rather, we would leave 

R2619 :page 122 

them bound until, in the Millennial age, when these 
shackles shall all be removed, they will be under the 
strong hand of a strong governor, who will recompense 
every iniquity as well as every effort toward 
righteousness. 

Similarly, the exclusion of Roman Catholic 
churches was not intended as any slight upon the people 
connected with them, for whom we have only the 
greatest good will and best wishes. Nor did it indicate 
that we thought none of the Roman Catholics 
amenable to the truth, for, on the contrary, there are 
quite a number of very zealous friends of the truth who 
were reared in Catholicism; indeed, only last Sunday 
(April 1st) at our meeting in the Bible House Chapel, 
four Roman Catholics made public profession of faith 
in the Redeemer and of full consecration to him, and 
symbolized it in water immersion. We excluded Roman 
Catholic churches from the Volunteer service because 
the vast majority of their attendants are either 
too ignorant or too bigoted to read and think for 
themselves. True, much of this would apply also to 
Protestants; but the percentage of hopefuls amongst 
the latter is so much greater as to justify, we think, the 
enormous expense involved in this circulation of free 
reading matter at the churches throughout this 
country. 



The Volunteer service is open to all of the Lord's 
dear people, brethren and sisters, white and colored, 
who have a desire thus to serve the great Captain of 
our salvation, and to help deliver their "brethren" from 
the bondage of Babylon into the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free from sectarianism, superstition 
and every yoke of bondage. Nor do we desire to 
place this service as a yoke or burden upon any, but as 
the word indicates, it is only for "Volunteers." We 
believe that the Lord would not have any conscriptions 
or drafts connected with his service. As to whether or 
not this is a way in which you can serve the Lord's 

R2619 :page 123 

cause is not for us but for you to decide. We merely 
give you our opinion, that this is one of the best means 
of serving the truth— preaching the Gospel of the 
Kingdom— breaking the chains of error that are upon 
the "brethren"— honoring the name and character of 
our heavenly Father, and extolling the great redemption 



accomplished by Jesus our Saviour. It is a "harvest" 
work, in that it is gathering to the Lord his true 
people,— gathering them out of the various sects— not 
into another sect, but into heart-union with the Lord 
and with all who are at-one with him through oneness 
of spirit, engendered by love of the truth. 

We are expecting great results from the Volunteer 
service this year, and those who engage in it to 
any degree will, we believe, look back with great pleasure 
to their share in it. But regardless of how much 
blessing may come to others by this service, we are 
convinced that great blessings are coming to the 
Lord's people, through the self-denial and cross-bearing 
which this Volunteer service implies. The bringing 
of our hearts into such a condition of devotion to 
the Master means a spiritual blessing and a character-development 
which surely will be great aids in the attainment 
of the Kingdom. However, to his own master 
each servant stands or falls, and we are to remember 
not to judge or offend one another, but rather to 
assist each other. 

In harmony with this we are quite willing to cooperate 
with all the Lord's dear people in whichever of 
the various methods of serving the truth they may decide 
to be the most appropriate and best suited to their 
circumstances, conditions, zeal, etc. We will therefore 
not restrict this "ammunition" to the Volunteer work 
at the churches, but will supply it freely to others, for 
use amongst their friends, or in any manner that they 
may be able to use it. For instance, some have already 
sent us in numerous addresses of persons whom 
they have reason to believe might be amenable to the 
influence of the truth, and others have gotten extras 
for loaning amongst their friends and neighbors. While 
these may not be strictly counted in amongst the Volunteers, 
we may consider them a kind of sharpshooters 
and "guerillas." 

Those who wish us to mail samples to their 
friends direct from our office should write the addresses 
on wrappers of about the size we use in mailing the 
Watch Tower (twelve by eight inches— the address to 
be written lengthwise of the sheet, and about one and 
a half inches from the top), and these addressed wrappers 
should be mailed to us, a postal card accompanying 
them in explanation. The harvest is great, the 
laborers are few comparatively, and the wages promised 
by the Master are enormous— "glory, honor and 
immortality" to the faithful. 



Your success, and the kind of a reception you receive 
when circulating the truth, will in many instances 
depend largely upon your own manner. It is an old 
saying that "Like begets like," and if you go forth 
with your hearts full of love for the dear "brethren" 



whom you seek to serve, and if previous to starting you 
go on your knees to the Lord to ask his blessing upon 
yourselves, as his servants, and upon your effort in his 
service, praying for wisdom, grace and a fulness of his 
spirit of love, your manner will not be bold and blatant; 
but kind, courteous, humble, yet withal courageous, 
for you are there as a brother on the business of the 
Elder Brother, the King, and have nothing whatever 
to be ashamed of. 

Your mission is both honorable and laudable. It is 
an appeal, not to the passions and prejudices of the 
people, but to their intellects and their hearts. This 
kind of preaching is as honorable as that done from 
the platform; yea, much more honorable, for many 
ministers are confessing in public from time to time, 
and to their shame, that for years they have been 
preaching, contrary to their consciences, a God-dishonoring, 
inconsistent, unreasonable and unscriptural 
message. They have been charging good round salaries 
for this falsification and defamation, while you, on the 
contrary, as a true minister of the Lord and the truth, 
not only serve to others "meat in due season" from the 
Master's table, but do it with good conscience, and 
without earthly reward or any hope of name or fame. 

One dear brother, whose letter appears in this issue, 
had the "Dawn" in his possession, but was too prejudiced 
to study it, until he witnessed a "Volunteer distribution" 
at a church he attended, and saw amongst 
the Volunteers one whom he recognized as the head 
of a large mercantile business. He said to himself at 
once, "There is something real and tangible about the 
faith of these Christian people, and I must study the 
literature to find the basis of such self-denial and cross-bearing. 
He did investigate, and as a result is now a 
Volunteer himself. He is a man of college education, 
good natural ability, fills a fine position, and is not 
ashamed of the Lord, nor of the word of his grace, 
which has established his own heart and given him a 
faith and a hope beyond all compare. His present aspirations 
are, to be humble and faithful until death, and 
then to be a sharer, a joint-heir with the Lord in his 
Millennial Kingdom, which shall bless the world. 

In addition to meekness and love, manifested in 
look, in word and in act, we advise the dear Volunteers 
to keep a reasonable distance away from church edifices 
whose congregations they seek to serve. A reasonable 
distance will, of course, depend somewhat 
upon circumstances. A quarter or a half block would 
not be too distant, if thereby the people could be well 
served. Of course, no one should take offence at a 
gratuitous distribution of spiritual food directly at the 
church door; yet experience shows that some do take 
offence at this, and feel as did the Pharisees of old respecting 
the Lord's message, when they asked, "Are 
we blind also?" It is well to avoid arousing prejudice. 
Our ammunition is not intended to wound, to hurt, to 



kill, but to do good, to comfort, to inspire with new 
Christian life and hope. 



We have decided to discontinue the general Volunteer 
circulation of the "Bible versus Evolution" 
pamphlet, and to use this Volunteer number everywhere 
instead. Consequently all the new recruits to 
this Volunteer service will be supplied with the new 
ammunition, and the various companies may get together 
at once and, through one of their number, appointed 
as secretary or lieutenant, communicate with 
us, informing us respecting the number of Protestant 
white churches, and so far as they may be able to 
judge, the average attendance at each, and the number 

R2619 :page 124 

of Volunteers with their names. The Captain-General 
of our forces is the Lord Jesus, under whose banner 
alone we are enrolled, and whose cause alone we 
serve. 

"From victory unto victory 
His army shall he lead, 
Till every foe is vanquished, 
And Christ is Lord indeed." 



R2620 : page 124 

A KIND MASTER, A GOOD SERVANT. 

--LUKE 7:1-10.-APRIL 22.- 

"Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 
pitieth them that fear him."— Psalm 103:13. 

MASTERS and servants in the olden times occupied 

a much closer relationship to each 

other than they do today— a relationship 

which took on more of paternal sentiment. The 

change has been brought about gradually, and is not 

the result of great men of today having less heart than 

great men of the olden times, nor of employees being 

less faithful than employees of olden times: it is rather 

the result of changed conditions— the result of greater 

individuality and independence, which leads the employee 

to prefer to sell his time and energy on a strictly 

commercial basis rather than on a paternal basis. 

Nevertheless, the general influence is unfavorable in 

many respects: first, because men of great mental power 

and influence are to some extent under present arrangements 

cut off from fellowship and sympathy with 

their employees, and altho the class distinctions are 



not less marked than in the past, nor even as much 
so, yet class rivalry and animosity is possibly greater 
than ever. 

The employer, under present conditions, feels no 
responsibility for the employee, since he has made a 
bargain with him for so much money per day, without 
additional responsibilities, and the employee feels that 
having obtained the wage bargained for, and having 
used it according to his own will, he has no further 
claim upon his employer in case of sickness or other 
adversity. However, the system has its good features 
as well as its bad ones, for it should cultivate independence, 
self-reliance and prudence; nevertheless, all discern 
that this division between the interests of masters 
and servants stands closely related to the great time of 
trouble which now impends. 

The lesson of the healing of the centurion's servant 
at Capernaum strikingly illustrates the affectionate 
interest that prevailed between some good masters 
and their good servants in the past. True, we do not 
have any record that this servant was a good one, yet 
the inference is here, because the centurion himself was 
evidently an orderly man, and such men usually seek 
for and obtain orderly servants. Furthermore, in his 
conversation with our Lord he declares that he was 
accustomed to having his servants do what he bade 
them. --Vs. 8. 

The centurion himself was, of course, a Roman— 
not a Jew. He was, therefore, debarred in a general 
way from the Lord's blessings, which he declared on 
another occasion were for the children of the Kingdom 
(Israelites) only, and not for strangers. No doubt because 
he realized himself as outside Judaism— an alien 
and a stranger, and foreigner from the covenants and 
blessings of God bestowed upon Israel. (Eph. 2:12), 
that he obtained the co-operation of the leading Jews 
of the city, that they would favor his cause with the 
Lord, and intercede that his petition might be granted. 

We notice the good deeds of this centurion. He 
evidently respected the religion of the Jews, and had 
used his wealth in the building of a synagogue, the 
ruins of which are supposed to have been found recently. 
Of these ruins Edersheim says, "The remains 
now, after eighteen centuries, in their richness of elaborate 
carvings of cornices and tablets, of capitals and 
niches, show with what liberal hand he had dealt his 
votive offerings." It is presumed that this miracle preceded 
the awakening of Jairus' daughter, and it is not 
unreasonable to suppose that Jairus himself was one 
of the elders of the Jews who came to Jesus in the interest 
of the centurion; and this to some extent helps to 
account for his great faith in our Lord's power to revive 
his daughter, even tho dead. 

Our Lord seems to have readily granted the centurion's 
request; and the fact that it was not presented 
personally is presumed not to signify any lack of respect, 



but the very reverse, a realization on his part 
that Jews were averse to having any dealings with 
Gentiles, except along strictly business lines. His further 
modesty and meekness were manifest in the fact 
that before Jesus had reached his house he sent friends 
(not servants) to hinder Jesus from defiling himself by 
coming into a Gentile's house. For altho he was a 
man of influence and power he realized the barrier between 
himself and the Jews, according to which the 
Pharisees would have considered that they defiled 
themselves by entering his house. He accordingly 
suggested that our Lord would merely speak the 
word, and that he had fullest confidence that the word 
could be spoken as well outside as inside the house- 
that one possessing such power as the Lord Jesus 
manifested had agencies at his command which would 
not require him to personally see and touch the servant 
in order to heal him, even as the centurion himself 
was accustomed to perform various matters 
through the instrumentality of his servants. 

This was a wonderful illustration, both of meekness 
and of faith, and it was appreciated by our Lord 
accordingly. There is a lesson in it for all of the Lord's 
people, to the effect that the more we exercise faith 
in the Lord along reasonable lines, in harmony with 
the teachings of his Word, the more he will be pleased 
with us. This same thing was illustrated in the case of 
Thomas, who, being absent at the time of our Lord's 
first appearance to the eleven, declared that nothing 
would satisfy him respecting the Lord's resurrection 
except the putting of his fingers into the nail-prints of 
his hands. Our Lord, while granting him the demonstration 
which he asked, intimated that he would 
have had a greater blessing if he could have exercised 
a greater faith, saying, "(More) blessed are they that 
have not seen, and yet have believed." 

Let all of the Lord's people remember this, and 

R2620 : page 125 

instead of doubting the Lord's willingness to perform 
what he has promised, and requiring signs and further 
evidences and assurances, let us rather rest content 
that he who has so graciously done for us in the past 
more than we could have asked or thought is equally 
faithful today, and will fulfill to us all the good promises 
of his Word. The more heartily we shall accept 
his promises, the more fully we shall trust to his 
gracious providences, the more peace of heart we shall 
have ourselves, and the more the Lord will delight 
himself in us as his servants and brethren, and the 
more he will be pleased to favor us and to use us. 

Our Lord's remark, "I have not found so great 
faith, no, not in Israel," was a grand tribute of approval 
for the Gentile centurion. It distinctly indicates 
that the fact that the Lord's favor which for over 



eighteen hundred years had been confined to Israel 
was not merely because the Israelites were alone 
worthy, nor because in them alone was found such 
faith as that on account of which father Abraham was 
blessed, and the blessing pronounced on his children. 
But altho the Lord found greater faith in the centurion 
than amongst others in Israel, nevertheless he could 
not and did not invite the centurion to become one of 
his disciples, because "the gifts and callings of God are 
not things to be repented of," and the divine favor to 
Israelites must and did continue down to the full end 
of the "seventy weeks" of favor promised through 
Daniel the prophet— altho the national favor ceased 
three and a half years sooner, in the midst of the seventieth 
week, five days before our Lord's crucifixion, 
when he said of that nation, "Your house is left unto 
you desolate; ye shall see me no more until that day." 
-Matt. 23:38; Dan. 9:24. 

It is certainly within the range of possibility that 
this centurion, whose good works and alms were so 
highly commended by the Jews, and whose faith was 
so highly spoken of by our Lord, might have been removed 
by Roman authority from Capernaum to 
Caesarea, another fortress, and that he may have been 
the centurion named Cornelius, the first Gentile accepted 
to the privileges and favors of the Gospel 
Church, at the expiration of the "seventy weeks" of favor 
confined to the Israelites.— Acts 10:1-35. 

One lesson connected with this subject which 
should specially commend itself to any of the Lord's 
people who are masters or employers is the lesson of 
kindness for servants. If a Gentile would be so careful 
for the interests of his servant, and thus bestir and 
trouble himself much to secure his release from pain, 
much more should every true Christian not only feel 
a kindliness for those who are of the household of 
faith, but also be disposed to do good unto all men as 
they may have opportunity. We may be sure that all 
such evidences of interest in fellow-creatures, all such 
evidences of the spirit of love and kindness, are pleasing 
in the Lord's sight; and not only so, but that every 
time we exercise ourselves along such lines we deepen 
them and strengthen, confirm and establish character 
along the lines of love and mercy. This is one of the 
ways in which we are to develop ourselves more and 
more as copies of God's dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 



R2620 : page 125 
THE DISAPPOINTED PROPHET'S WISE COURSE. 
-LUKE 7:18-28.-APRIL 29.- 
"He hath done all things well."— Mark 7:37. 



WHILE Jesus was performing many miracles, 
making numerous disciples, and meeting with 
comparatively little opposition, things were 
going very differently with his cousin, John the Baptiser. 
Yet this was only in accordance with what John 
himself had prophesied, saying, "He must increase, but 
I must decrease." John was in prison, about 120 miles 

R2621 : page 125 

from where Jesus was laboring so successfully. To be 

shut up in a dark dungeon of the kind usual at that 

time, and to have our Lord proceeding with his work, 

and raising no voice of protest on his behalf, and exercising 

none of his mighty power for his deliverance, 

probably seemed very strange to John— especially in 

view of his expectations respecting the work of the 

Messiah— that he would be a great earthly general and 

king, in harmony with the general Jewish 

expectations. 

We see how readily John might have permitted 
doubts and fears to enter his mind. He might have 
said, This whole matter is a fraud, and Jesus and I have 
been deceiving ourselves. He might have lost all faith 
in God's providential dealings in the past and all heart 
and hope for the present and for the future; but notwithstanding 
the great disappointment he felt, his faith 
continued its firm hold on the Lord. This is indicated 
in his sending of his disciples to Jesus, to make inquiry, 
and also in the character of the inquiry. He does not 
say, Is this whole matter a farce, and are we deluded? 
but on the contrary his question was a sound one, and 
expresses the conviction that thus far the Lord has 
been leading, and that the only doubt in the prophet's 
mind was whether or not, as he was the forerunner of 
Jesus, Jesus in turn, greater than he, might be the forerunner 
of some one else still greater and yet to come. 
And strictly speaking this was exactly the case; for 
Jesus in the flesh was indeed the forerunner and preparer 
of the way before the still greater glorified 
Christ of the second advent, who will accomplish the 
great and wonderful things foretold by all the holy 
prophets since the world began.— Acts 3:21-23. 

Our Lord, it will be noticed, did not answer 
John's question directly— he did not say that there was 
not another coming and still greater work than that 
which he was performing, but he did give John to understand 
distinctly that the work he was then doing 
was the very work which had been foretold in the 
prophets, and the proper thing to be done at that time. 
While John's messengers were with Jesus a number 
of miracles were performed in their sight, and Jesus 
sent them back to John with instructions that they bear 
witness to him of the work of the Lord progressing in 
his hands, and to say to John that while the opportunities 



to stumble at Jesus, his work and his words, were 
many, and while many would stumble at these, as the 
prophet had declared (Isa. 8:14,) yet a special blessing 
would rest upon all who would not stumble, but whose 

R2621 : page 126 

faith in the Lord would continue, despite various disappointments 

of expectation respecting his work and 

their fulfillments— through misapprehension of the 

lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the divine 

plan, which, as the heavens are higher than the 

earth, were higher than human conception could have 

foreseen. For instance, what Jew could have thought 

for a moment of the still higher than Jewish expectations 

of the Kingdom— of the spiritual Kingdom-class 

to be selected first before the establishment of the 

earthly kingdom, and to be sharers with Messiah 

in his glory, honor and immortality? 

All of the Lord's faithful servants need to remember 
the same lessons which were thus forcefully impressed 
upon John: they need to remember that when 
sometimes matters turn out very differently with 
themselves than what they had expected, when they 
receive injuries, reproaches and oppression, as the rewards 
of faithfulness to duty and to truth, it does not 
mean that God has forgotten them, nor that they were 
misled in their previous service to the Lord; nor does 
it mean that the Lord has changed his plan; nor that 
he is careless or indifferent respecting their condition. 
True, their first thought should be whether or not 
present unfavorable conditions are in the nature of 
chastisements or the results of any misdoings on their 
part, or failures to serve the Lord in his own way, but 
if they find their course to be harmonious with the divine 
will and Word they should at once rest their faith 
upon the Lord, and conclude that God knows better 
than they how to manage his own work. Then while 
thankful to be used in that work for a time they should 
nevertheless be pleased, if it were the Lord's will, to be 
set aside for a time— perhaps for the good of others, 
or perhaps for their own training in the school of experience, 
and in the learning of lessons of patience and 
of faith. 

But such a resting in the Lord, such a centering 
of life in him, can be enjoyed only by those who have 
made considerable progress, who have run a considerable 
distance in the way of the Lord, and who have 
already been exercised under the Lord's providences, 
and have learned many lessons in his school. This, 
however, is the condition which all of the Lord's true 
followers are to strive to attain, as the only one thoroughly 
pleasing to the Lord. The proper course of all 
God's servants when perplexed is the one followed by 
John, namely, to go to the Lord with the perplexity— 
not doubtingly, but inquiringly— and be set at rest by 



his Word. We may not be able to hear the Lord's 
words with our own ears, but we can receive it second 
hand as did John,— through the testimonies of the 
Apostles and prophets, by whose writings God has 
provided in advance replies to all proper queries. 

The question arises, was John imprisoned on account 
of officiousness— on account of trying to mind 
Herod's business? Or was he imprisoned because of 
his faithfulness in the discharge of that duty? Was it 
right or was it wrong for him to reprove the king, 
and to say to him that it was not lawful for him to 
take as his wife his brother Philip's wife? There is no 
question that Herod was in the wrong, and that John's 
expression on the subject was a correct one, and that 
Herod was living in adultery, but the question is, Was 
this any of John's business? Did he need to meddle 
with the king's affairs, and thus get himself into 
trouble? And if it was John's duty to reprove Herod 
on this subject, was it not the duty of our Lord Jesus 
to have done the same, and in addition to have uttered 
a protest against the imprisonment of John, and in 
general to have raised a great hubbub over the injustice 
being done by the wicked ruler? And if John 
was right in this matter was our Lord Jesus wrong in 
not following the same course? Or if Jesus was right 
in not following John's course in reproving Herod, 
does it prove that John erred in giving the reproof? 

We answer that our Lord's conduct is certainly 
to be considered as above reproach, since "in him was 
no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth;" but 
this does not prove guile and sin on John's part in 
following a different course. We are to remember 
that in many respects John and his ministry differed 
widely from our Lord and his ministry. For instance, 
the uncouth skin-girdle which John wore was very 
different from the seamless robe which the Lord 
wore; and the Scriptures call attention to the fact that 
John lived a very abstemious life, "neither eating nor 
drinking" ordinary food, but practicing a continual 
fasting or self-denial as respects these comforts, while 
our Lord Jesus came "both eating and drinking," attended 
wedding feasts, and banquets made in his honor. 
The lesson is that these grand characters each fulfilled 
his own mission, according to the divine arrangement, 
but that they had different missions. John's mission 
was pre-eminently that of a reprover and reformer, 
and we are to understand that as a prophet he was 
supernaturally guided in respect to the various features 
of the course which he took. Our Lord's mission, on 
the contrary, was a different one; he was gathering to 
himself those whom John's ministry served to arouse 
to righteousness and to zeal to know and do the Lord's 
will. 

We who are called to be the "body" of Christ and 
to follow him, may learn a lesson in this as respects 
our proper course: we are not sent forth as John was, 



to dwell in the wilderness, living and dressing uncouthly, 
and to criticise and denounce everything and 
everybody. Some of the Lord's dear people fail to 
notice that such commissions are special and very rare 
and sometimes in following the wrong copy, undesignedly 
bring reproach upon the Lord's cause. We 
are to be copies of God's dear Son, our Lord, and not 
to be copies of John the Baptiser. We are not to stir 
up strife by trying to mind other people's business, nor 
to seek to govern all the affairs of this world, reproving 
emperors, kings, governors, etc., but to the contrary 
of this are exhorted by the Apostle to remember 
that what God sees fit to permit we can see fit to 
endure. 

Even tho we find many things which we cannot 
commend or indorse, we may equally find ourselves 
able to avoid any special denunciation of them— especially 
of things which have no bearing whatever upon 
the proper understanding and fulfilling of the Lord's 
Word. The Apostle points out our proper position 
saying, "As much as lieth in you live peaceably with 
all men." And our Lord emphasized the same 
thought, saying "Blessed are the peacemakers; they 
shall be called the children of God." 

Some of the holiest of the Lord's people err on 
this subject in their own families, and needlessly arouse 
prejudice and opposition, and make their homes unhappy, 

R2621 : page 127 

by continually finding fault with things which 

tho not up to the standard of saintliness and cross-bearing, 

are nevertheless not immoral or wicked even 

in tendency. Parents and guardians are surely to 

guard against all tendencies toward immorality, etc., 

but to find fault with those they love merely because 

they are only nominal Christians and have the spirit of 

worldliness, is certainly unwise. Their general life of 

peace and joy in the holy spirit is the very best reproof 

of worldliness they can give and the best recommendation 

of the glorious gospel they profess. This 

is the epistle that will be read, the light that will reprove 

darkness. In other words, we must not expect 

from nor try to force upon the unconsecrated the details 

of our own self-denials. We must wait until they 

shall see full consecration to be their "reasonable service" 

R2622 : page 127 

and present their bodies living sacrifices to God. 
Pastors and teachers, however, should seek to keep 
continually before the Lord's consecrated flock the 
high Scripture standard, realizing that many influences 
are continually at work to lower the standard of holiness 
and devotion. 



JOHN MORE THAN A PROPHET. 



The multitude who stood about must have heard 
the message which John's disciples brought to Jesus, 
and no doubt queried within themselves, if not audibly, 
Is John losing faith in Jesus as the Messiah? If John 
is a prophet himself, should he not be informed by 
God on this subject, without sending to inquire of 
Jesus? Does not this, in connection with the fact that 
John did no miracles, prove that John was not a 
prophet, but merely some sort of a reformer, possibly 
self-appointed? Our Lord seems to have detected 
such a questioning, and hence, after John's disciples 
were gone, so that his words could not be construed as 
a sop of flattery to hold John's confidence, he delivered 
quite a eulogy upon his faithful forerunner, which we 
paraphrase thus:— What did you expect in John— a 
weak, pliable character, easily swayed by every wind 
of doctrine and fancy, as a reed is easily swayed by 
the wind? Those who get such an impression respecting 
his character are deceiving themselves. On the 
contrary, he is a prophet, yea, more than a prophet- 
he is a special ambassador and messenger of God at 
this present time, to do an introductory work related 
to the Kingdom which I am now preaching. He is 
referred to by Malachi the prophet (3:1). Indeed, I 
declare to you that there has never arisen a greater 
prophet than John, and yet I say to you that the least 
one in the Kingdom-class is greater than he; for he 
does not belong to the Kingdom-class at all, but to the 
previous dispensation— "the house of servants." "The 
law and the prophets were until John" (and he is the 
last of the prophets), and since then the Kingdom of 
heaven is preached, that now whosoever will of this 
divinely favored nation may press his way and gain 
an entrance into it and become a son of God.— 
John 12:1. 

Note in the text the clearness of our Lord's 
words respecting the distinction between the new institution 
which he was founding and the old institution 
founded by Moses, and which was then coming to an 
end, giving place to the new. The Apostle shows that 
the call of us Gentiles during this Gospel age to a joint 
heirship in the Kingdom as members of the Kingdom-class 
is because those of the Jews ready to receive the 
Kingdom favor upon the Lord's terms were fewer 
than the pre-determined number. Our call is to fill the 
places of those "natural branches" of the Abrahamic 
stock, by being grafted into and made partakers of the 
original root of divine favor— the Abrahamic promise 
—to be members of the seed of Abraham, in which as 
a Kingdom-class all the families of earth shall be 
blessed with certain favors of knowledge and opportunity.— 
Compare Rom. 11:1-33; Gal. 3:16,29. 



How highly we who belong to the new dispensation 
should value its privileges and opportunities, 
and seek to "make our calling and our election sure." 
(2 Pet. 1:4-11.) If those who were called with an 
earthly calling to be a "house of servants" rendered 
but a reasonable service when they engaged in the 
Lord's work zealously, as did John the Baptist, and 
have been faithful, how much more zeal and energy 
ought we to put forth who have been favored so much 
more highly! "What manner of persons ought we to 
be, in all holy conversation and godliness!" Let us 
remember that this "high calling," this "heavenly calling," 
to joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom, 
is a very special and a very limited call, that it will 
soon end, and that so far as the divine revelation 
shows, it will never be repeated. In view of these 
things let us lay aside every weight, and run with 
patience the race set before us in the gospel, looking 
unto Jesus, the author, until he shall have become the 
finisher, of our faith.— Heb. 12:1. 



R2605 : page 127 

FAITHFUL CO-LABORERS HEARD FROM. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just been reading 
again in the TOWER of March 1 st the article entitled 
"Mark the Perfect Man," etc., and want you 
to know how much I have enjoyed it and profited by 
it. After thanking the Giver of every good and perfect 
gift I thank you, and continually pray that the 
favor of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you in all your 
work, and that you may ever be defended from the 
assaults of the adversary. Putting myself for a moment 
in your place, I was able to see that you would 
rejoice to know that the household were appreciating 
the things "new and old," and I wanted by this little 
note to help "hold up" your hands. Please do not 
trouble to acknowledge this, but believe me, 

Yours in the Lord, ELLIOT H. THOMSON,-Wash. 

page 127 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel like echoing 
Sister Graham's "Thank you" for the spiritual food 
which my hungry soul has found. Truly the WATCH 
TOWER is a welcome visitor to me. Just so sure as I 
am particularly downhearted about something in the 
"way" of a Christian "walk" just so sure do I find 
something in the next WATCH TOWER which is a 
spiritual help to me; a something in fact which shows 
me something about my poor unworthy self from a 
standpoint which I had not before seen myself. For 
instance, I have just been reading the essentials of the 



perfect man and find just what I needed in my present 
discouraged mood. Especially so in the third and 
fourth paragraphs in the "Sons of God all Peacemakers," 
on page 71, and in the last paragraph of the 

page 128 

same item that refers to combativeness: I feel that 

it just means me. I feel so very anxious sometimes 

that my dear husband would become a follower of 

Christ that I fear I do more harm than good talking 

about it all the time, but a peaceful feeling has come 

to me since reading this last TOWER which has encouraged 

me more than I can express. I could tell of 

many times in the past in which I have been helped 

and encouraged just the same, and oh! when I realize 

how much I am helped, and yet know how unworthy 

I am, I wonder why God has given me such privileges 

and withheld them from others, who, it seems to me, 

would have profited so much by them. 

I have in the past week been thoroughly discouraged 
because it seemed to me after all the "light" God 
has given me I am no better than many others who 
make no pretence to Christianity, but I feel encouraged 
now to take a "fresh start" and to pray more 
earnestly in secret not "push your religion" on any 
one. Then, too, Satan had been trying to make me 
think because I had failings all my trying had been 
vain, but since reading my welcome WATCH TOWER I 
am still encouraged to go on trying and trusting. 

Your grateful sister in Christ, 

MRS. ALLEN SENCERBEAUX,-Michigan. 

R2605 : page 128 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have the pleasure 
at this time of writing to you, and I assure you that 
it is a pleasure indeed. You are burdened no doubt 
with letters from the friends of the faith, but your 
kind patience seems so prominent in your writings that I 
am quite sure you will appreciate a letter, even from me. 

The faith in the coming Kingdom has grown at 
this place under my care until we have a few— a little 
band of followers of the Lord— who, I trust, are presenting 
themselves living sacrifices unto him who 
bought them. The work is necessarily slow, and the 
path not very smooth so far as this world is concerned. 
We meet with a good many obstacles, as so many have 
been prejudiced by the blind that are leading them; 
still we are in hopes that some will see the light even 
in such darkness as here prevails. 

No one knows our weaknesses and feeble attempts 
to do God's will as the Father himself. We feel that 
we need someone to cheer us up and to give us courage 
to press forward in the cause as a preacher of the 
gospel of peace. 



I thought it might be proper to mention that we 
have great desires for another "Pilgrim" visit. We 
hope that one is headed this way, and can stop with 
us for a few days. All profited so much by the visit 
of Brother Draper in November, and our love and 
prayers have followed him all these days. As the 
clouds grow dark upon this benighted world may God's 
dear ones— for he knows who are his— be faithful to 
their calling and "show forth the praises of him who 
hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous 
light," is the prayer of one who is the least to be called 
a son. Yours in His service, E. L. BROWN,— Ind. Ter. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish I could tell the 
two dear sisters who arranged the Index how much I 
appreciate it. It is exactly what I have needed. It 
certainly required a good deal of patient work to produce 
it and I hope all of the TOWER readers will appreciate 
it. 

How much I would like to be at Allegheny at the 
great Memorial and enjoy the sacred season with you 
all. Not that I would be willing to be absent from 
Scranton at that time, but the remembrance of five 
years ago when I was there and the rich blessings I 
received at that time makes me long for one more such 
precious season. O what a blessed five years it has 
been! Every day has been full of a consciousness of the 
dear Lord's favor, and tho I cannot say that I have 
always done the very best I might have done, still it 
has been one continual effort to follow our blessed 
Leader and Guide on the narrow way. All of the 
time I have been conscious of his tender love, and his 
favors have been more numerous than the hairs of my 
head. And you, Brother Russell, you have been a 
true and faithful under-shepherd and kind and loving 
pastor to us all and I hope that all have had a keen 
appreciation of this. Some I know have, for many 
times have I heard prayers go up from consecrated 
hearts for you. 

Brothers Woodworth and Hodges are both growing 
young men, and are indeed getting to be "able 
ministers of the Word." They are capable of standing 
for its defence anywhere. Hoping this may find 
you all well and happy at Allegheny, I send greetings 
to the Church there in the name of the little company 
at Scranton. Lovingly your brother in Christ, 

HAYDEN SAMSON-Pennsylvania. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

KIND SIRS: -Coming out of our little chapel last 
Lord's Day night I was handed a little book, "The 
Bible vs. the Evolution Theory." After careful reading 
I was wonderfully blessed and thank God it was thrown 
in my way as I was hungry for such truths. I am an 
old lady in a home of faith and prayer and cannot buy 
such things. I was so happy after careful reading to 



find on the back of the little book that you would contribute 

a paper to any of the Lord's aged who could 

not buy the same. I am so anxious to read something 

edited by the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN, for I 

scarcely expect to be able to get hold of the three volumes 

of that wonderful message and will be so thankful 

for anything you can send me free. Perhaps 

through me it will reach some one and do great good. 

God will bless the beautiful truths sent out from your 

house. Anything that one of his aged saints can do 

to assist will be done by 

MRS. CARRIE McBRIDE,-St. Louis. 

page 128 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am so much impressed 
with the last issue of the WATCH TOWER that 
I wish to distribute a number of copies among my 
brethren in the Presbyterian church here, of which I 
am a member. It has opened my eyes to the delusion 
into which we have been drilled from infancy. I am 
free to confess that had I understood the Bible as you 
explain it and as I now know to be correct I should never 
have joined myself to any such God-defaming doctrine. 

There are a few honest, earnest, pious ones in the 
congregation who, I believe, would be glad to have 
their eyes opened. Our minister, whom I want to believe 
to be an honest, earnest Christian, seems to be 
utterly blind, and afraid of the truth, for I gave him 
a copy of THE PLAN OF THE AGES and after waiting 
two weeks I asked him what he thought of it. His 
reply was "Can't say I have read it!" 

With the prayer that God will richly bless you 
and your work, I am, Respectfully yours, 

R. WILSON McGUIRE,-Arkansas. 



page 129 

VOL. XXI. MAY 1, 1900. No. 9. 
CONTENTS. 

The Memorial Supper 131 

A Few Sample Reports 132 

Poem— Only a Few More Years 134 

Knowledge Increases Responsibilities 134 

Come! Weary and Heavy-laden 136 

Two Types of Sinners 138 

The Parable of the Sower 140 

The Message of the Kingdom 141 

News From the "British Branch" 142 

Questions and Answers 142 

About Magnetic— Hypnotic 
Cures, etc 142 

Who is Born of God? 143 

How Will the Dead Hear? 144 

Joining Trade Unions 144 

Items: Back Issues of the Tower, etc 130 

page 130 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



DO NOT FORGET THAT IT IS UNSAFE TO MAIL MONEY. 
SEND P.O. OR EXPRESS ORDER OR DRAFT. 



DAWN IV. IN GERMAN. 

We are glad to announce this edition now ready. Advance 
orders are being filled as rapidly as possible. We thank our 
German brethren for the patience they have so generously 
exercised. 

BACK ISSUES OF THE WATCH TOWER. 



We have many inquiries for back volumes of our Journal. 
We have made up as many sets nearly complete as possible— 
about 150 sets as follows:— 

Eight issues of 1891; seventeen of '92; nineteen of '93; 
twenty-two of '94; twenty-four of '95; twenty-four of '96; twenty 
of '97; twenty-three of '98; eighteen of '99. 

So long as these sets last we shall be pleased to supply them 
at the regular rate— 50 cents a dozen— any year, but no less 
than the complete set for any year. 

THE VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 

We are sending it out as rapidly as possible, but the field is 
a wide one and all have not yet been supplied. Besides, new 
"Volunteers" are from day to day coming to see that this is a 
very special opportunity for serving the King's cause. If your 
first lot is insufficient let us have "Order No. 2 for Ammunition" 
by the time you are sure what will be necessary to completely 
supply your district. 



R2622:page 131 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

EACH year seems to add to the interest of the 
Lord's people in the celebration of the great 
event which lies at the foundation of all our 
Christian hopes— the celebration of the death of 
"Christ, our Passover." Each year the matter seems 
to be more clearly grasped by a larger number, and 
correspondingly the solemnity and holy joy proper to 
the occasion seems to be the more intense, and the 
overflowing blessing to be more pronounced. 

Many of the little companies of the Lord's people 
who celebrated on the evening of April 12th have 
responded to our request for information respecting 
the numbers participating, and the measure of the 
Lord's Spirit and blessing prevailing. From these 
reports we judge that the number participating this 
year was considerably more than last year. Though we 
have not heard from nearly so many, the totals are 
larger. We believe, too, from the letters that the 
meaning of the institution was very deeply appreciated, 
not only as marking the great sacrifice of our 
Lord Jesus, but also as marking the consecration of 
his people to be one with him in his sacrifice. 

The Allegheny Church had a most blessed season, 
about 290 participating. We first reviewed the general 
meaning of the Passover, as it was instituted with 
the Jews, tracing the relationship between the typical 
Passover Lamb and Christ the Lamb of God, our 
Passover, and saw in the first-born of Israel passed 
over in that night a type of the Church of the First-born, 



which God is passing over during this Gospel 
night. We saw that subsequently these first-born ones 
became the leaders of Israel as a whole, and their 
deliverers from Egyptian bondage, and we saw that 
the anti-type of that deliverance will be the ultimate 
deliverance of all who love God and who desire to 
serve him, from the bondage of the world and of sin 
and of Satan, the antitype of Pharaoh, and that this 
ultimate deliverance would be during the Millennial 
age, when "the Church of the First-born" ones will 
be associated with Christ in the Millennial Kingdom. 

Next we saw how that the Jews had celebrated the 
type for over sixteen centuries, with no knowledge of 
the antitype, and yet that in God's due time Christ, 
the antitypical Lamb, was slain on the very same day 
of the month that the typical Lamb was slain; and 
that on the very same day in which he and his disciples 
met as Jews to celebrate the typical Lamb and 
the typical passing over, our Lord instituted a new 
memorial, which should not look back to the type, 
but to himself, as the antitype. We noted also the 
appropriateness of the emblems which Jesus chose 
to represent his flesh and his blood; we saw that unleavened 
bread most beautifully illustrated the purity, 
the sinlessness, of our dear Redeemer, and that the 
cup, the fruit of the vine, represented his sufferings— 
not sufferings that were grievous, but joyous, endured 
willingly, gladly, on our behalf, and we rejoiced in 
these things. 

We considered how we were to feed upon the Lord 
in our hearts while using the bread emblematically— 
that we could feed upon his flesh in the sense of calling 
to mind the fact that only through his sacrifice could 
we have life, only by his becoming our substitute 
in death could we, as a race, be set free from the 
condemnation that was upon us through Father 
Adam's transgression. We considered the fruit of 
the vine, the symbol of our Lord's blood, as the sealing 
of the New Covenant under which God, through 
Christ, could be merciful toward our imperfections, 
accepting our intentions, even though the weaknesses 
of the flesh might sometimes hinder us from attaining 
all the desired results. 

Then we viewed the matter from the other standpoint 
—the secondary one mentioned by the Apostle 
in 1 Cor. 10:16,17, viz., that the entire Church is one 
loaf, and that it is the duty and the privilege of all 
who have become members of the one loaf, the one 
body of Christ, to be broken in the service of the 
Head and in the service of each other, that thus we 
might have fellowship with Christ in his sufferings 
and ultimately be sharers in his glory. We saw that 
the cup of blessing with which we bless is indeed our 
communion or fellowship in the blood [sufferings] 
of Christ, our mingling of our lives with his life, our 
joining with him in "filling up that which is behind of 



the afflictions of Christ." We sought to enter into the 

R2622 : page 132 

very deep meaning of the beautiful symbol, and to 
have it in our hearts a power of God, leading us to 
keener appreciation of our dear Saviour, and to a 
keener devotion as his disciples, to walk in his 
footsteps. 

Then, after a prayer of thanksgiving to God for 
the living Bread that came down from heaven— for 
Jesus, who was not a condemned member of the human 
family, but a specially provided one, suitable to 
be our Saviour, our Bread, our Life-giver, and for all 
the blessing which we have through his great sacrifice, 
we partook of the bread. After this we gave 
thanks for the cup, acknowledging that we have no 
righteousness of our own, even though all the past 
were forgiven, and that we could not hope to stand 
before God acceptably or to have any dealings with 

R2623 : page 132 

him except under the gracious provisions of the New 
Covenant, sealed with the precious blood of Christ. 
We gave thanks also that by God's grace we have 
been called to fellowship with Jesus, and told the Lord 
of our hopes that by his grace we might run our course 
with faithfulness and eventually be received to joint-heirship 
with our Master in his glory when we are 
partakers with him of the joys of the Kingdom. 

The simple but impressive memorial being ended, 
it was requested that in order that the solemnity of 
the hour might abide with us, to our mutual comfort 
and joy, we should part on that evening without entering 
into any conversation likely to attract our minds 
from the precious things which filled them, but rather 
might, for the hours following, remember the severe 
trials of the disciples, and the dear Master's trials, and 
seek to enter into close sympathy with his faithfulness, 
and to be all the more on guard against the 
wiles of the Adversary, which seem to be so potent 
at this season of the year. Then singing the first hymn 
we were dismissed. 

An incident which added to our blessing in connection 
with this service was the fact that our dear 
Brother Horace A. Randle, who for about twenty 
years has been a missionary in China, was with us, 
and took part in the service with evident pleasure to 
himself and profit to us all. Bro. Randle wrote us 
in January last that he was about to start on his long 
journey of 16,000 miles, with the desire and intention 
to reach Allegheny in time for this Memorial service. 
He arrived just the day before, and was very 
warmly welcomed by us all. He addressed us on 
Easter Sunday, amongst other good things telling us 



of his great joy in the harvest truth, and of his intense 
desire to make known the grace of God to all the 
Lord's dear people, and of some efforts he had already 
put forth, and some of the fruitage which the Lord 
had permitted him to see amongst the missionaries 
of his acquaintance. Yet with regret he told us of how 
few of the missionaries seem to have any interest in 
these matters, and how the majority of the responses 
he received were in the nature of scoffings. We hope 
that our dear brother will put his address into writing 
that we may lay it before the larger Church some time 
in the near future. 

We have received reports, all of them excellent, 
from 280 celebrations— from every State of the Union 
and from Canada. A few of these were from solitary 
individuals, who had no opportunity of meeting with 
others, but to whom the Lord granted much blessing, 
compensating them for their loneliness otherwise. It 
may be interesting that we give the numbers participating 
at some of the gatherings reported, as 
follows:— 

Baltimore, Md., 20; Brantford, Ont., 29; New 
York, 18; Poughkeepsie, N.Y., 16; Washington City, 
23; Scranton, Pa., 28; Boston, Mass., 97; Philadelphia, 
Pa., 55; Toronto, Ont., 37; Tiffin, O., 22; Sippo, O., 
19; Youngstown, O., 25; Cleveland, O., 38; Columbus, 
O., 27; Canton, O., 22; Toledo, O., 28; Wheeling, W.Va.. 
16; Dayton, O., 16; Indianapolis, Ind., 34; Chicago, 
111., 70; Saginaw, Mich., 18; St. Paul and Minneapolis, 
Minn., 23; Weatherford, Tex., 24; St. Louis, 
Mo., 55; Omaha, Neb., 19; Council Bluffs, la., 16; 
Vanetia, Tex., 16; Los Angeles, Cal., 61; Allegheny, 
290. 

We are not foolish enough to think that these 
figures give any occasion for boasting, for the total 
amounts to only a few over 2,600, and we have every 
reason to suppose that we have heard from two-thirds 
of those who celebrated: foreign reports will come 
later. However, we have every reason to believe that 
these numbers represent people who not only profess 
Christ, but who also are seeking daily to live the 
Christ-life. Moreover, they are full of the Jubilee 
music, and having heard the joyful sound they are all 
repeating it far and near. Consequently we expect 
a much larger showing next year, as others of the 
Lord's truth-hungry, famished household are found 
and fed with things new and old now supplied us by 
our Lord. 

Boston reports the largest number of immersions 
preceding the Memorial, viz., 23. 

page 132 

A FEW SAMPLE REPORTS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with positive 



pleasure I can say that sectarian bondage has no more 
power over me. Meditation upon this subject has 
occupied my thoughts for several years past. I have 
been deliberate and slow to act, weighing the subject 
on every side, lest too hasty a decision should have a 
reacting effect filled with hopeless regret. Indeed, I 
did not take the step until after much earnest prayer. 
Since that time the conviction has been growing stronger 
that no child of God can make a mistake by stepping 
away from modern churchianity, for instead of 
such an act being a step away from God, it is making 
a long stride towards God. 

Last evening it was my privilege to partake of 
the Memorial Supper, tho it was taken alone. I am 
rejoicing in the fact that my God counts me worthy 
to do my share to fill up that which is behind of the 
sufferings of Christ. 

I could distribute a few of the WATCH TOWERS 
that are prepared for distribution, should you think 
best to send them. 

Yours in the hope of the gospel, 

MRS. A. AXTELL,-New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last evening ten of 
us met to commemorate our dear Master's great ransom-sacrifice 
on our behalf, and to renew our covenant 

page 133 

with the Father. It was a glad, yet solemn time. 
Gladness for the great privilege of a "participation 
of the same loaf" and in the "same cup" and for the 
joy to know of all the blessings that will soon come 
to "all the families of the earth;" it was a solemn time 
as we realized to some extent the price with which we 
were bought, and the meaning of the covenant which 
we had made. Prayer was offered by each one present, 
and we felt that we had the witness of the spirit. 

We were not quite so many in number as last year, 
owing to three being at another little gathering, one 
detained by sickness, and one, we fully believe, to have 
"gone home" during the past year. Truly it will be 
a glad time when we all get "home," for we do not 
feel at home here. All the brothers and sisters send 
you love and greetings in the Lord. 

Your brother, in the bonds of love, 

W. E. VAN AMBURGH,-S. Dakota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Memorial Supper 
was celebrated in our home— participated in by four 
who met in His name. The Prince of Peace was with 
us and his presence and power was manifest, not to 
the natural eye or ear, but in holy communion with 
him. Bro. Barker from Boston served the little company 
for the first time. Bro. Heald and wife were 
also sharers of a rich blessing. I did not so much at 



the time realize or appreciate his precious presence as 

afterward, when left alone in sweet meditation and 

communion. His blessed word and promises became 

spirit and life to me, increasing faith and love, until 

I fell at his feet in wonder and worship, that I, so unlike 

my blessed Redeemer, so unworthy of such love 

and grace, be allowed even to share some little suffering 

for his sake. How could it be? Only that "we 

have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency 

of the power may be of God, and not of us;"— 

we, indeed, the clay in the hands of the potter, yielding 

wholly to his touch. Thus in all things I will 

answer, not only unrepiningly, but gladly, "Father, 

not my will, but thine." I thank God for his divine 

love, as it makes me, as a humble child, for good conscience 

toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. 

I thank God for the many helps he has provided 
and is providing. MILLENNIAL DAWN and the WATCH 
TOWER have been and are such rich food to assist us 
in the knowledge and truth of God, and am only sorry 
that I cannot induce more to eat the food they contain. 

Yours in Christ— Christ the hope of glory, 

A. M. BLANCHARD, -Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am addressing you 
a few lines to inform you of the blessed time we had at 
the Passover Supper on Thursday evening, when thirty-seven 
dear ones met to remember our dear Lord's 
death and to renew their vows of consecration. I may 
say this is just one-half more than we had at the Memorial 
Supper of 1899. 

In our lessons of last Sunday and on Thursday 
afternoon we studied the trials and sufferings of our 
Lord and Master, in the garden of Gethsemane, during 
the various trials before the High Priests, before 
Pilate and Herod, and his finishing the work upon the 
cross. All seemed much interested and touched; all 
seemed thoroughly imbued with the responsibility and 
necessity of a more thorough consecration in the future, 
to the Lord's service, and love, harmony and zeal 
seemed to pervade, as also at the Lord's Supper in the 
evening. 

All seemed to realize the deep solemnity of the 
occasion and there was apparent but one heart, one 
mind and one thought in desiring to energize for the 
crown of immortality and every heart seemed overflowing 
with love to our blessed Redeemer, and our 
prayer is that we may be permitted to "die daily" in 
his cause and to his honor and glory. We ask your 
prayers, dear brother, and the prayers of all the dear 
ones in Allegheny, that we may be kept bound together 
in love, harmony and peace, with our Heavenly 
Father, our loving Master and each other during the 
coming year. 

Your servant in the Lord Jesus, 

EBENEZER STOVEL-Canada. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I thought I would 
send you a little report of our Thursday evening 
(Memorial Supper) meeting. On the eighth of the 
month I gave a talk to the friends on both sides on the 
subject, "Christ our passover," and the import of the 
bread and wine. I did this because I intended to visit 
Elgin on the 12th, which I did. They told me that 
they were specially in need of help for that occasion, 
and urgently requested me to be with them. Bros. 
Christensen and Sims took charge of the South Side 
meeting and Bros. Johnson and Petersen the West 
Side one. The friends of both sides say they had 
splendid meetings;— attendance at both meetings was 
about 70. The attendance at Elgin was 15. We had a 
glorious time there. I presume you had a splendid 
time in Allegheny on Thursday night. With best 
wishes and much Christian love, I remain as ever, 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

M. L. McPHAIL,-Chicago. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Concerning the Memorial 
Supper there were twelve participants, Bro. 
Brown having gone to Plymouth to conduct the memorial 
services there, and two sisters being prevented 
by sickness from meeting with us. No doubt Bro. 
Watts will advise you of our meeting, but lest he 
should not, I give you the details. We first sang hymn 
23, "Blest be the tie that binds," which is so appropriate. 
As we repeated the words I was filled with a 
sense of the solemnity of the hymn— the tie which binds 
us to Christ, not only here, but all over the world. 
Then we had prayer, in which several joined. Bro. 
Watts then read quite a few texts appropriate to the 
occasion, with comments. He dwelt particularly upon 
the sacrificial feature— that our partaking of the cup 
symbolized our willingness to suffer, even to death, 
with him, that we may be raised with him. As there 
were five present who had never partaken of the memorial 
with us before, Bro. Watts explained the symbols 
particularly. We then sang the 122nd hymn and 
partook of the unleavened bread and grape juice, the 
broken body of our dear Lord and his shed blood, renewing 
our covenant to be broken with him, to die with 
him. We then sang hymn No. 1 and dispersed quietly. 
My heart is filled with joy and gratitude that I am 
permitted to share in these spiritual blessings. 

May God bless and keep you near to him, and 
also your co-laborers! And in this thought I am sure 

page 134 

all the Church here would join, did they know of my 
writing to you. 
Sincerely yours in Him, 

FRANCES C. SHORE-Michigan. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Friends numbering 
ninety-seven in all gathered last evening to commemorate 
the death of our dear Savior and Redeemer, 
our now present Lord. Our gathering was held 
in our usual place of worship and seated in nearly 
a circle, three to four rows deep about the Lord's 
table. We meditated on the events of that greatest 
scene in the world's history, listened to the lesson 
brought us by the Lord's faithful servant, our leader, 
and prayed for the similar gatherings, larger than ours, 
and the twos and threes scattered about throughout 
the world. Thanks were then offered for His body 
broken for us, of which we all then partook in symbol, 
and likewise concerning His shed blood. The 23 who 
were immersed the Sunday previous, thus symbolizing 
their consecration, were with us (except five from 
Lynn), and this added to the impressiveness of the 
service, calling vividly to our minds the remembrance 
of our own baptism and promise of obedience, even 
unto death, and causing us to have a desire to be more 
watchful and more faithful. 

Yours in behalf of the Church at Boston, with 
cordial Christian greetings, 

H. L. ALBEE,-Massachussetts. 

R2630 : page 134 

ONLY A FEW MORE YEARS. 

-FRANCES C. SHORE.- 

Only a few more years to learn our part, 
Just a few more miles the race to run; 

So gather courage fresh, O fainting heart! 
O weary "feet," thy journey soon is done. 

Only a few more months, but full of toil, 
For in the "field" are hungry souls to feed, 

Then struggle on O weary, burdened one! 

For thou shalt find a strength in time of need. 

Only a few more days to fill with love- 
Love for all God's creatures, friend and foe, 

Love which shall cover every human fault, 
And bring a balm for every earthly woe. 

Only a few more hours, we know, for some, 
Who in this life have fought a goodly fight; 

Henceforth for them remains a glorious crown, 
A rest within the radius of God's light. 

Only a few more days of willing sacrifice, 
Of patient standing when our work is done; 

Soon in His radiant presence we'll rejoice, 
And praise him in our everlasting home. 



R2623 : page 134 

KNOWLEDGE INCREASES RESPONSIBILITIES. 

-MATT. 11:20-30.~MAY6.~ 

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." 

OUR LORD would seem to have been somewhat 

disappointed at the result of his ministry, 

especially in Capernaum, where he had resided 

a considerable time, and our lesson opens with 

a warning to the people of Capernaum, Chorazin and 

Bethsaida, that having been favored with many mighty 

works and many evidences of Jesus' Messiahship, and 

that the Kingdom was being offered to them, etc., they 

would be held correspondingly responsible. As Capernaum 

had been greatly blessed, highly exalted, or, 

figuratively, "exalted up to heaven" in its privileges 

and opportunities, the result to it would be greater 

degradation, and eventually it would be brought low 

into the dust— destroyed, "brought down to hell," in 

the text, signifying brought down to hades, the death-state. 

And surely this was fulfilled in the trouble 

which came upon the Jews, and which destroyed their 

nationality, as a result of their having failed to accept 

the Messiah and the Kingdom which he offered to 

establish. 

But though our Lord was disappointed that he 
was so generally rejected, he cannot have expected 
that he would be widely welcomed by the people. He 
must have known, as he elsewhere describes to his 
disciples, quoting from the prophecies, that he would 
be rejected by Israel, and that the Kingdom offer 
would pass by them. As a matter of fact his rejection 
on their part incidentally permitted the sending of the 
gracious call to the Kingdom honors to believers 
among the Gentiles, and thus we are favored at the 
present time. 

The contrast which the Master draws between 
Bethsaida and Chorazin and Tyre and Sidon is a 
strong one. The latter two were flourishing Gentile 
cities, yet, as was common in such, very full of wickedness 
and immorality, so that evidently their names 
were synonymous for that which was unholy, licentious, 
unclean. So then, for our Lord to say that if his 
mighty works had been done in those unholy cities 
they would have repented long ago in sack-cloth and 
ashes, that is, with deep contrition, was to say that 
the people of Bethsaida and Chorazin were in very 
much worse condition of heart than those Gentiles: 
further from such a condition as God could bless. 



From this we may gather that God takes a different 
standpoint of viewing such matters from that taken 
by the majority of people. He does not merely say, 
Is this a moral or an immoral city? Are these people 
decent or indecent? The question which the Lord 
would examine rather would be, What is the heart 
attitude of this people or that people, this individual 
or that individual? What is he aiming, striving, for? 
—how would he be effected thereby if granted clearer 
light respecting the divine will? Hence, if we look 
at ourselves, and find that we are not immoral, not 
coarse, sensual, brutish, but more refined than many 
others, this is well; it is what we should be in view 
of our favors, privileges and mercies; but we are to 

R2623 : page 135 

remember that we might still be very far short of what 

would be pleasing to the Lord, and that if God should 

favor us with certain privileges and blessings and opportunities, 

and we were to reject them, our attitude 

in his sight might be worse than that of the immoral. 

Turning to Capernaum, most favored of all, our 
Lord contrasts her with Sodom, whose wickedness 
was very great, so that it brought upon her a fierce 
destruction from the Lord. Capernaum is clearly told 
that from the Lord's standpoint of view her people 
were more wicked, less worthy of divine favor, more 
worthy of punishment, than the people of Sodom. 
This was a severe arraignment, and yet, we can see, 
a just one, for the poor Sodomites, walking in the 
way of sin, ignorance of God, etc., gradually went 
down and down, according to the course of fallen nature, 
while the people of Capernaum had much advantage 
every way as Jews, whom the Lord had 
blessed with a knowledge of himself, and to whom 
now, finally, he had sent Messiah, and whose miracles 
they had seen repeatedly, and with whose beautiful 
character and teaching they had been brought much 
in contact through his considerable residence in their 
midst. 

In view of these privileges and mercies, their rejection 
of Messiah and failure to grasp their opportunities 
branded them, so to speak, as being inferior 
to the Sodomites, in appreciation of righteousness and 
truth; for our Lord declares that the Sodomites would 
not have met the end they did had they had similar 
privileges and mercies bestowed upon them. 

The question naturally arises, Why did not our 
Lord grant the Sodomites as good an opportunity as 
he granted the people of Capernaum, and why did 
he not grant the people of Tyre and Sidon, who were 
still living, as favorable an opportunity as he granted 

R2624 : page 135 



to the people of Chorazin and Bethsaida? We answer, 

that none of these people were granted a trial 

for eternal life. The Sodomites did not have such a 

trial; the people of Tyre and Sidon had no trial of 

any kind; nor did the people of Palestine have a trial 

for life eternal. The trial which they did have was 

a trial respecting their love for the Lord and for 

righteousness, and of their readiness to be his people 

and supporters of his Kingdom. The result of the 

trial showed that they were not sufficiently in love 

with righteousness to appreciate the Lord's Kingdom, 

nor to become its friends and servants; and in consequence 

of this their city and their land, and they as 

a people were rejected by the Lord from being his 

agencies in connection with the establishment of his 

Kingdom. 

That no individual trial for eternal life had yet 
come to any of these people is evident from several 
facts: (1) that the whole world was under condemnation 
through Adam's transgression; (2) that no one 
could be relieved from that condemnation, so as to 
have a fresh individual trial for life, until the ransom 
price was paid, and it was not yet finished; (3) this 
is further implied by our Lord's statement (verse 24) 
that there would be a day of judgment future— a day 
of testing, a day of trial, a day to see who would be 
worthy of eternal life and who unworthy. (Acts 17:31.) 
In that judgment day, the Millennial age, all are to 
have a chance for everlasting life; for the granting of 
this very chance to all of Adam's race was the very 
object of our Redeemer's death. Meantime, the people 
of Bethsaida, Chorazin and Capernaum, having 
rejected the Lord and having been rejected by him, 
he nevertheless found some there, and has been selecting 
others since, of a special class, which he is 
calling to joint-heirship with himself in that Millennial 
Kingdom, under whose beneficent reign of righteousness 
a full and impartial judgment or trial for life 
shall be granted to all. He would have his hearers 
understand, however, that in that future trial time the 
people of Tyre and Sidon and Sodom would be treated 
with more consideration and allowance than those 
who, having many more privileges, had hardened their 
hearts against what they did see and know. "It shall 
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of 
judgment than for thee," Capernaum. 

How scathing was the rebuke of these words, that 
the people of Sodom, notorious for their wickedness, 
licentiousness, etc., should find more favor, more tolerance, 
at the Lord's hand, when he should begin the 
work of judging mankind, than themselves, who had 
been God's favored people, but who had not appreciated 
his favors, and had done despite unto his goodness! 
But if any infer from this that the people of 
Capernaum, when they shall be on trial for life during 
the Millennial age, will be unkindly treated, it 



would be a great mistake; because the declaration of 
the Lord's Word distinctly is that the world shall be 
"judged in righteousness"— not in wrath, malice, not 
with a desire to do them injury, but with a desire to 
do them every good possible— hence it will be "tolerable" 
for the people of Capernaum in that day— very 
tolerable— it will be a grand and blessed opportunity 
for them to come to a full, clear knowledge of the 
Lord; but it will be still more tolerable for the people 
of Sodom and Gomorrah, because their sins, although 
greater in some respects, were less heinous in the 
sight of God— they were less against character, more 
sins of ignorance. 

We may assume, therefore, that during the Millennial 
age disciplines such people as those of Tyre 
and Sidon and those of Sodom, who had never known 
God to any degree, who had never known his laws, 
will be in a condition of heart much more readily 
amenable to the influences and requirements of that 
time than will be some others— the people of Chorazin, 
Bethsaida and Capernaum, who having known more 
respecting God had misused the opportunities of the 
present life— who broke down their characters instead 
of building them. 

And these are merely ensamples, for we know 
that all those that are in the graves shall hear the 
voice of the Son of Man, and come forth— "they that 
have done good [the saints, the overcomers] unto the 
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil [all 
mankind outside of the saints] unto the resurrection 
of judgment."— John 5:28,29. 

We can readily see, in harmony with our Lord's 
declaration in this lesson, that many who in the present 
life have no knowledge and no opportunity may 
be nothing disadvantaged thereby in that judgment 
time, but on the contrary may be more susceptible to 
the good influences of the Kingdom and its laws than 
some others will be who have had contact with the 

R2624 : page 136 

light to some extent in the present life, but who have 
refused it. What a blessed promise is this one, of a 
future judgment or trial! How much it means to 
the whole groaning creation, that God, who let the 
sentence of Adam fall on all without giving them an 
individual trial, has provided a redemption for all from 
that first sentence, and has provided that each member 
of the race shall individually have a trial, a judgment, 
in due time, at the hands of him who died for 
all. And then, how favorable the conditions are to 
be, under which that trial will be granted! Satan is 
to be bound, and the earth is to be filled with the 
knowledge of the Lord and his goodness and his gracious 
arrangements on behalf of his fallen creatures, 
whom he desires shall not perish, but, if they will, 



have eternal life through Christ. 

However, as our Lord distinctly intimates (v. 5), 
these things respecting the coming judgment and the 
blessed opportunities which shall be accorded to every 
member of Adam's race, are hidden from the majority 
—especially do they seem to be hidden from 
the worldly-wise and prudent, who instead of accepting 
so gracious a plan, are rather inclined to teach the 
people that the poor Sodomites went to eternal torment 
without ever having had a chance, and with no 
prospect of ever having a chance in the future, although 
our Lord declares that if they had had as good 
an opportunity as the people of Capernaum they would 
have repented with a deep contrition. The wise and 
prudent are inclined to tell us also that the people of 
Tyre and Sidon, although not favored with our Lord's 
blessing, are also to be considered doomed to eternal 
torment, though they would have repented had they 
had as good an opportunity as the people of Palestine; 
and finally they tell us that these people of Palestine, 
having rejected our Lord, must necessarily be 
sufferers of eternal torment, and not merely losers of 
the Kingdom. They fail to see; they are blind to 
the truth— blinded by the traditions of their religious 
teachers— as the Jews were. 

Then, to add to their confusion, they begin to attempt 
to apply the Lord's words respecting a day of 
judgment, and of course interpret it to mean a day 
of damnation, instead of a day of trial. They fail to 
note that their claim is that the Sodomites were already 
in hell, suffering torments of the severest form 
for nearly two thousand years, at the time our Lord 
uttered these words. Do they think that the Sodomites 
could suffer any more after the day of judgment 
than they describe them as suffering now? What do 
they understand by the words "day of judgment," anyway? 
Evidently they have no proper conception of 
the meaning of the words. They see that our Lord referred 
it to a future time, and they are hopelessly confused 
and thoroughly unable to give any reasonable 
explanation of the matter, either in harmony with 
God's character or in harmony with their own 
wretched and God-dishonoring theories.— See DAWN, 
Vol. I, p. 137. 

How comforting are our Lord's words, that these 
things are revealed, nevertheless, to some— to babes, 
to those who are not great, not wise, according to 
the course of this world; to those who are of humble 
mind, ready to be taught of the Lord, instead of wishing 
to teach the Lord. This great blessing, dearly beloved, 
is ours, and let us be very careful that we maintain 
the attitude of childlikeness and simplicity, that 
we may continue to be taught of God, and to "know 
the things that are freely given unto us of God." 
Let us rejoice in them and use them, and let the light 
shine out to others. The explanation of the fact that 



the divine plan is hidden from the great majority of 
the learned, the doctors of divinity, etc., is that so 
it has pleased the Father to let "the wise be taken in 
their own craftiness," and to reveal his purposes to 
those of an humble mind. "Even so, Father, for so it 
seemed good in thy sight." (1 Cor. 3:19.) The Father 
drew to the Son at the first advent, not the doctors of 
the law, the scribes and the notables, but certain "Israelites 
indeed," in whom was no guile, though they 
were but an humble few. And the same class has 
received the blessing all down the age. 

The Master realized that his special instructions 
must be toward those whom the Father had given 
unto him, rather than toward the unready and unwilling 
ones who would not receive his testimony because 
not in a proper condition of heart to appreciate. 
To his faithful disciples, therefore, and to all of the 
same class since, he declared that all things he possessed 
he had received of the Father; he claimed nothing 
of himself; and further, he asserted that no one 
knew him truly, fully, intimately, but the Father, and 
that no man knew the Father except himself, the Son, 
and he to whom the Son revealed him. The average 
reader gets very little meaning out of this passage at 
first. The Christian who has been making progress 
for years, growing in grace and in the knowledge of 

R2625 : page 136 

the Lord, can appreciate it much better. He realizes 
that while he had some knowledge about Jesus and 
about the Father at first, from the very inception of his 
Christian experience, yet it was a different matter to 
come to know the Father and to know the Son in the 
intimate sense, in the sense of becoming well acquainted 
with them, knowing their mind as one knows 
the mind, the heart, of an intimate friend. It is a 
privilege to receive such an acquaintance. It is not to 
be had by everybody; it requires seeking for and 
knocking for, and such seeking and knocking implies 
an earnest desire to have an intimate fellowship and 
communion. Such a growth in grace should be earnestly 
sought by all of the Lord's true followers who 
seek to be his joint heirs in the Kingdom; for without 
it they cannot make progress. In proportion as 
we know the Father and know the Son we will love 
them and seek more and more to do those things 
which are pleasing in their sight. 

COME! WEARY AND HEAVY-LADEN. 



Still addressing the same class, and implying that 
there were some present of the right disposition who 
had not yet become his disciples, our Lord appealed 



to his hearers individually, "Come unto me, all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest." The difficulty with most of the people would 
seem to have been that they were neither weary nor 
heavy laden, but on the contrary pretty well self-contented. 
We cannot suppose that physical weariness 

R2625 : page 137 

and physical burdens was the thought before our 

Lord's mind, but rather the heart-burden and sin-weariness, 

which all true Israelites must have felt, if 

they were honest with themselves. 

We are to remember that they were under the 
Law Covenant, that its requirements were very exacting, 
and that it made no allowance for weaknesses, 
imperfections, errors, etc.; consequently, all of those 
Jews should have felt themselves continually condemned 
in striving to carry the burden of the Law 
of Sinai. Not that the law was an unjust one or impossible 
to be kept by a perfect man, but because all 
being imperfect and fallen they were unable to keep 
the Law Covenant. So we may suppose that amongst 
the Jews at that time, while the majority were professing 
to be holy, law-keepers, who did no sin, there 
were some who honestly admitted to themselves and 
to others that they did not, could not, keep the Law 
perfectly, and who therefore felt burdened and wearied 
with their fruitless endeavors. Such felt their need of 
a burden-bearer, such felt their soul-sickness and need 
of the good Physician, and to such Jesus addressed 
himself, inviting them to come to him and receive 
rest, relief. 

This coming to Christ for rest is the first step 
toward a Christian life; it is justification, the acceptance 
of him as the satisfaction for our sins; and from 
the time we thus accept him, as the Apostle declares, 
we have joy and peace through believing. (Rom. 5:1; 
15:13.) But having been thus received and blessed, 
there is something more for us to do, viz., to learn 
that there is another burden and another yoke which 
we should take upon us voluntarily. 

A yoke is a symbol of servitude, and so our Lord 
implies that those who are set free (either from the 
yoke of the Law Covenant, as were the believing 
Jews, or from the yoke of Satan, as were the believing 
Gentiles) should become his servants, should take 
his yoke, should learn to do his will. A yoke generally 
is arranged for two, and our Lord speaks of it as 
his yoke, by which we are to understand that he also 
is a servant; having come to do the Father's will, and 
having put on the yoke of servitude, he invites us to 
become true yoke-fellows with himself in the doing 
of the Father's will, co-laborers together with Christ 
in the great work of the world's deliverance from sin 
and death. 



The secret of the ability to wear this yoke, and to 
have companionship with Christ in his service, and 
to have as a result a great blessing in our own hearts, 
a rest unto our souls, lies, he explains, in our learning 
to be meek and lowly of heart as he was. It will be 
impossible for those who are proud, haughty, self-willed, 
ambitious, worldly-wise, etc., to labor in the 
same yoke with Jesus, or to find the true rest of soul 
which we properly seek. But if we are meek, teachable, 
humble-minded, ready to know and to do the 
Lord's will at any cost, then indeed we shall find rest 
to our soul's satisfaction— the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding will rule in our hearts. 

We notice a difference between the two rests of vs. 28 and 29. 
Of the first it is said that the Lord will 
give it to him who comes to him in faith; of the 
second, it is said that he finds this rest to his soul 
through becoming a yoke-fellow with Jesus. And so 
it is: there are two blessings; the first blessing is that 
of justification— the joy of having our sins forgiven, 
realizing ourselves no longer strangers and foreigners 
from our heavenly Father, but brought nigh by the 
blood of Christ; the second is the joy which comes 
more gradually, a fruitage, a grace, a development in 
the heart, the growing and abiding peace and joy of 
the holy spirit. This second blessing, however, is attained 
by very few; the majority of nominal Christians 
know nothing of it; and yet it is the very object 
of the calling of this Gospel age, and those who fail to 
come to the Lord and to take his yoke, and to learn 
of him, to become thus "copies of God's dear Son," 
will fail utterly of the special purpose and call of this 
Gospel age, and will have neither part nor lot in the 
Kingdom. The blessing of justification by faith is 
merely to fit and prepare us to take the yoke and to 
become a co-laborer with the Lord in the Father's 
service. 

This yoke which Jesus invites us to come under 
with him is a very formidable affair from the standpoint 
of the world: to them it seems to be a most unreasonable 
yoke, a most terrible burden— to consecrate 
life, time, means, everything to the service of 
God; but from the standpoint of those who have come 
unto Jesus, and to whom he has spoken peace and 
rest through justification, the matter is very different. 
To such it must seem a "reasonable service," that since 
the Lord has graciously redeemed our lives and our 
all, we should use what remains of that life to his praise 
and glory; and after we have fastened the yoke upon 
ourselves we find that it is an easy one, and that with 
it any burden, any duty, any trial, any difficulty, any 
vexation of spirit, any burden of any kind that could 
come to us, would be light indeed, because of this 
yoke. 

Why? Because those who wear this yoke have 
the assurances of the divine Word, that all things are 



working together for good to them; that the heavier 
the burden that may be attached the greater will be 
the blessing and the reward by and by; the more 
severe the experiences during the present time, the 
brighter shall be the glory, and the brighter shall be 
their character and the more sure shall they be of 
being fitted and polished for the heavenly Kingdom. 
From this standpoint every burden is light, because 
our yoke is appreciated, and is so easy, so reasonable; 
and additionally it is so light because the Lord is 
with us in this yoke. He is the great Burden-bearer, 
and will not suffer us to be tempted nor to be pressed 
with more of the burdens of life than we should probably 
be able to endure. He is watching out for the 
interests of all those who take his yoke upon them. 
Their burdens are his burdens, their trials are his trials, 
their interests are his interests; yea, all things shall 
work for good to them because they love him. 

Let us remember, however, that the Lord takes 
no slaves in this way; he does not fasten the yoke 
upon any; he merely invites us to come, and then to 
fasten his yoke upon ourselves, to make a full consecration 
of ourselves to him and to his service. 



R2625 : page 138 

TWO TYPES OF SINNERS. 

--LUKE 7:36-50.~MAY 13.- 

"Thy faith hath saved thee." 

SIMON was a very common name amongst 

the Jews, and hence it is not so remarkable 

that there were two Simons at whose homes 

Jesus was entertained. It is a little peculiar, however, 

that there are so many features of similarity connected 

with the two entertainments— that at both of them 

our Lord's feet were anointed, etc. (Compare Matt. 26:6-13.) 

It is supposed that about a year and a half 

elapsed between the two events, that recorded by Matthew 

being just prior to our Lord's death, "anointing 

for my burial." 

In this lesson we see Simon, a Pharisee, evidently 
considerably impressed with our Lord's character and 
teachings, and more favorably inclined toward him 
than the majority. He thought it would be pleasant 
to invite Jesus to dinner, thus to honor him, and possibly 
have a little notoriety himself in connection with 
the noted Nazarene. 

When our Lord accepted the invitation and attended 
the dinner Simon treated him kindly and politely, 
but did not go to any extreme of politeness in his 
entertainment; perhaps thinking of him as not being 



R2626 : page 138 

used to special attentions, but rather as being a companion 
of fishermen and common people generally. 
Simon therefore did not salute him with a kiss on his 
arrival, as was usual with honored guests, for that 
would have seemed like bestowing too much honor 
upon an ordinary person whom he, as a Pharisee, was 
not yet prepared to fully endorse; nor did he send the 
servant to take off the Master's sandals and to wash 
his feet, according to the custom of the best entertainers 
of that time. He may have said to himself, 
This man and his disciples are not used to being entertained 
in such style, and my servants would recognize 
themselves as being on a par at least with any of 
these men except the Teacher himself. Without, 
therefore, going to the extremes of polite entertaining, 
the Pharisee had nevertheless cordially welcomed 
the Lord to his table, feeling no doubt that in doing 
this he was honoring the Lord, and not sufficiently 
realizing that he was the one who was being honored, 
in the privilege of entertaining so noble a guest. How 
will Simon regard the matter when, in the resurrection 
time (during the Millennium), he ascertains that 
his guest was "the Only Begotten of the Father, full 
of grace and truth"? 

The Apostle urges upon us all, "Be not forgetful 
to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained 
angels [God's messengers] unawares." The 
Lord wishes his people to be generous with such 
things as they have (but not to be vaingloriously extravagant), 
hence it is written again, "There is that scattereth 
and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth 
more than is meet [proper] and it tendeth to poverty." 
It is a part of our present lesson to learn of our own 
mean selfishness, which all have inherited through the 
fall, and gradually, under the instruction of the Lord's 
Word, to get the victory over this and become more 
generous— more like our Father in Heaven. 

Let us be specially generous and hospitable toward 
the "brethren," who really represent the Lord 
himself; not only as "ambassadors for God," but also 
as "members of the body of Christ." 

The "woman of the city" mentioned, was evidently 
a common character, widely known to the people 
of the city, though she might not be known to Jesus 
and the disciples, who were not residents. Whatever 
the woman's previous life may have been, she had 
experienced deep contrition of heart, and a desire to 
live a better life. She had heard about Jesus, the great 
Teacher, and that unlike the Pharisees he did not disdain 
to speak with and to encourage fallen ones and 
to help them up again. She felt that she would like 
to go to the Lord in prayer for forgiveness, and would 
like to make a fresh start in life, to seek thereafter to 



live more consistently. She knew not how to approach 
the matter; she knew not what to say respecting herself; 
she would merely take a little offering in her 
hand, and while he was reclining at dinner, after the 
custom of that time, and while his feet would be easily 
accessible to her, she would venture to anoint them 
with the fine ointment which she had brought with 
her. Saying not a word, her heart too full of utterance, 
she reached the Master's feet, and there her tears 
trickled over them. By her tears he should know, 
more eloquently than she could voice her sentiments 
in words, what were the true longings of her heart for 
forgiveness and for reconciliation. 

How merciful and considerate of our needs, is 
the Lord's provision that when we come penitently to 
his feet for forgiveness we are not required to approach 
him through another, nor to formulate our 
petition in some exact form of language— he can read 
our hearts and accepts our tears and even our humblest 
efforts to make amends and to serve the "members 
of his body." And even though he may delay the 
message of forgiveness it is but to let the roots of 
penitence and faith sink deeper in our hearts. 

Jesus for a time seemed to heed her not, and she 
may have questioned whether or not he was misunderstanding 
her motives and her prayer, but the fullness 
of her heart found vent in still more tears, and 
tenderly she wiped his feet and anointed them with 
the ointment. The Pharisee, meantime, was saying 
within himself: Now it is most fortunate that I invited 
Jesus to dinner to-day, and it is fortunate that 
this woman came in; it affords a proof, a test, respecting 
the ability of Jesus to read the hearts of those 
about him. If he were a prophet, if he were specially 
empowered and enlightened of God, he would have 
known the character of this woman; but he evidently 
does not know her character, and therefore is permitting 
her to anoint his feet, and this seems to be a proof 
that he is not a prophet. 

But Jesus, fully conscious of all that was going 
on, and with a clear knowledge of the heart of the 
poor woman at his feet, and of the self-satisfied 
Pharisee who entertained him, was planning a way by 
which he might do good to both of them— a way by 
which he might set before all present a great truth. 
Therefore he put a parable to Simon, saying that a 
certain creditor had two debtors, the one owing a 
large amount, the other a small amount, and when 
they were totally unable to pay he cheerfully and 
promptly forgave them both. Then our Lord pointed 
his lesson on this little parable, by enquiring which of 

R2626 : page 139 

the two forgiven ones would be most appreciative of 
the creditor's leniency? Simon, who had not as yet 



caught the import of the parable, promptly answered 
that the one who had the largest debt forgiven would 
undoubtedly be the one who would be most appreciative, 
and our Lord approved this answer. Then directing 
attention to the woman, he reminded Simon 
that although he had been kind in inviting him to 
dinner, and although he appreciated his attentions, 
nevertheless the still greater attentions of the woman, 
and the still greater marks of respect which she had 
showed, were evidences that while they both loved, 
the woman loved the more; and the intimation clearly 
is that the greater love was developed by a greater 
realization of sin and a greater desire to be relieved 
from it. 

Of course, in one sense of the word, all are sinners, 
all have come short of the glory of God, and are 
hopeless without forgiveness; yet the Pharisee occupied 
a different position from the woman, because 
under the Jewish Law Covenant he was already occupying 
a standpoint of typical justification, and was 
seeking to maintain that standing by living a life of 
strict regard for the divine Law. On the other hand, 
the woman, although under the same Covenant, by 
living an abandoned life in open violation of the Law, 
had lost her interest in the national typical justification, 
and was therefore in a much larger sense of the 
word a sinner. Simon knew very well that while 
he was trying to keep the Law he was not keeping it 
perfectly, but infracted it in various ways from time 
to time, and yet he was not wilfully an infractor of 
the Law, as was the woman; hence in this sense of 
the word there was the wide difference between great 
sin and less sin; yet both needed the Saviour, and if 
the Pharisee had realized the truth of the matter he 
needed the Saviour just as much as did the woman; 
for the Law Covenant could not give him everlasting 
life— to attain that he must admit his sin and accept 
forgiveness and salvation from sin and its penalty, 
death, as a gift from the Saviour who honored him 
by consenting to be his guest. 

Then Jesus turned to the woman and said to her, 
"Thy sins are forgiven." What words those must have 
been to her! Her prayer was answered— a prayer, 
which had arisen in her heart, and which had expressed 
itself through tears and ointment, had been 
heard, and she was forgiven and all the past treated 
as forever blotted out. How thankful she must have 
felt! Poor Simon, however, so far as we know, did 
not come to the point of saying, Lord, I also am a sinner, 
and even though I have loved less than this woman 
I also need to be forgiven, and I pray for the 
forgiveness of my sins, that I may be counted one of 
your followers. No; the very fact that he had a religious 
standing in the nominal Church, and had made 
a profession of holiness, seems to have stood in his 
way, and to have hindered him from accepting the 



grace of God and the forgiveness of sins. And so it 

is right along. How frequently do we see that people 

who have been living moral lives, evidently seeking 

to walk in paths of righteousness, are much less prepared 

to accept forgiveness through the Lord Jesus 

Christ than are some others who have been living 

more carelessly and who awaken to a realization of 

their undone condition, and go to the Lord more contritely 

and more earnestly, and exercise a greater faith, 

and feel for him consequently a greater love! 

There is no intimation, however, that because of 
his failure to ask forgiveness, and to become a follower 
of Jesus, Simon was condemned to "hell," etc.; 
quite to the contrary, he simply followed the course of 
his nation (blinded by prejudice and false traditions 
of men). Their rejection of Jesus lost to them the 
privileges of joint-heirship in Christ's Kingdom, and 
led to their national rejection from God's favor until 
the opening of the Millennial age. Then, as the Apostle 
clearly shows, their blindness shall be removed and 
they shall be blest with a much clearer knowledge of 
the truth. Then the Lord will "pour upon them the 
spirit of prayer and supplication, and they shall look 
upon him whom they pierced, and shall mourn because 
of him." Then when they weep as did the woman 
with the ointment, God, through the glorified 
Christ, will have mercy on them and forgive their 
sins. Then their trial for everlasting life will begin. ~ 
SeeRom. 11:25-32; Zech. 12:10. 

R2627 : page 139 

The other guests at the table were particularly 
struck with our Lord's declaration that the woman's 
sins were forgiven her. Not recognizing the speaker 
to be the Messiah, the Son of God, they questioned 
the propriety of such words, but this was one reason 
why our Lord uttered the words; it was one of his 
unostentatious methods of calling attention to the 
fact that he was the Messiah, and that as such, and 
in view of the work which he was yet to do all power 
to forgive sins was in his hands. 

Then he said to the woman, "Thy faith hath saved 
thee: go in peace." He wished her to know that it 
was not her tears that had brought the forgiveness; 
that it was not the value of the ointment that had 
moved him to forgive her, but that the thing which 
was pleasing in his sight, and on account of which 
her sins were forgiven, was her faith. She not only 
realized her own sinful condition, but she had realized 
that this great Teacher had the power to forgive 
her and to restore her, and she had trusted, and acted 
upon this, and our Lord wished her to realize that 
the reward she had received was because of exercise of 
this faith. And so we may realize in respect to all of 
the Lord's favors in the case of each one of his people. 



When we come unto the Lord, with tears of penitence, 

we are to know that they do not prevail; and 

if we present gifts we are to know that they do not 

prevail, and that the tears and the offerings could 

avail us nothing except as we present to the Lord 

our faith, accepting him as the one who has power 

to forgive sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 

And not only is this necessary at the beginning 

of the Christian way, but similarly faith is necessary 

all the journey through. If we do not continue in 

faith we cannot progress. "According to thy faith be 

it unto thee," would seem to be the Lord's method 

of dealing with all who are his disciples, from first 

to last of their Christian walk and experience. 

The center of the lesson, then, is abiding faith 
in the Lord: faith when he seems not to notice us; 
faith when things seem to be going prosperously with 
us in our spiritual affairs and in our temporal affairs; 

R2627 : page 140 

and faith equally strong when the currents and forces 

seem all to be against us. The victory that overcometh 

the world is the faith that in all conditions is able 

to look up to the Lord with absolute confidence in 

his goodness and faithfulness, and to realize that according 

to his promise eventually all things will work 

together for good to us because we are his people.— 

1 John 5:5; Rom. 8:29. 



R2627 : page 140 

THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER. 

MATT. 13:1-8,18-23. -MAY 20. 

"The seed is the word of God."— Luke 8:11. 

JESUS and his disciples had just returned to 
Capernaum, his home, from a tour of Galilee, 
and the multitudes, many of whom had heard 
him before and witnessed his miracles, gathered about 
him as he sat on the beach of Lake Galilee, assuredly 
expecting that they would hear some gracious words 
from his lips. And the Master never seemed weary 
of presenting his message, although frequently, as in 
this case, the mass of his hearers understood but dimly 
his parables. There was a fishing-boat lying near, 
quite possibly owned by some of his friends or relatives, 
and evidently with the owner's consent Jesus 
used the boat as his pulpit, speaking to the multitude 
which lined the beach, which at this point is said to 
rise rapidly, and which therefore would give the general 
effect of an amphitheatre. A traveler once made 



an experiment, to see how well the voice would carry 
under such circumstances, at this spot, and says, "It 
was remarkable how distinctly every word was heard, 
though our voices were not raised, even at three hundred 
yards off; and it was very easy to comprehend 
how, in this clear air, a preacher sitting in a boat could 
address a vast multitude sitting upon the shore." 

The Master had no difficulty in finding a topic. 
Quite possibly his eye rested on a seed-sower, and 
as a result we have this parable, designed to show 
that there are different classes of hearers, and that it 
is not merely the eloquence or force or truthfulness 
of the message that determines the result, but chiefly 
the attitude of the heart that hears; hence the importance 
of the injunction, "Take heed how ye hear"— 
see that your heart is in a right condition to receive 
the truth, if you would expect a benefit from it; do 
not expect that the mere hearing of the truth will 
profit you, irrespective of your own character 
conditions. 

The good seed of the parable is the Word of 
God, the truth, even as false teaching, human philosophies 
and doctrines of devils, are not wheat-seed but 
tare-seed; our Lord is not showing in this parable 
what will be the result of sowing good or bad seed, 
but merely that the good seed can accomplish its work 
only in certain classes of hearts. 

The class of heart that is like the "wayside," solid 
and compact with selfishness, not open and generous, 
is very unfavorable ground for the truth; nothing need 
be expected from such ground. The sower will let as 
little as possible fall on such, but whatever does fall 
upon it the Adversary will soon take away. "Wayside" 
hearers are not necessarily bad people, in the 
sense of grossly wicked, but they are bad in the sense 
of being unsuited to the Lord's present work and call. 
They will need to have the furrow run through them 
again and again, that troubles of various kinds may 
make them more generous, more open, more ready 
for the message. But in many instances the Lord will 
not run the plowshare of truth through such soil in 
this present age; rather, he will leave it for the Millennial 
age, when he will be dealing, not only with 
these hearts that were partially prepared and which have 
become unsuitable, but when also he will have a work 
to do with the great masses of mankind, which, like 
the virgin forests and prairies of earth, are yet uncleared, 
unplowed and unbroken. The great time of 
trouble at the beginning of the Millennial age will be 
a time, we believe, in which the Lord will run the plowshare 
of truth in every direction throughout the 
world, as it is written, "The plowman shall follow 
close after the reaper." (Amos 9:13.) And, "When 
the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness" 
(Isa. 26:9), and thus be prepared for the new sowing 



time of the new age, under circumstances more favorable 
in some respects than the present, though less 
favorable in other respects. 

Another class upon which the same good truth 
falls at the present time is one that has a good appearance 
upon the surface— fine soil, etc., but underneath, 
and but a few inches from the surface, is rock. The 
soil on the surface is but a veneer to hide the rock; 
it has the appearance of depth of character, sympathy 
and love, but this is merely a deception. Civilized 
customs have popularized at least an outward imitation 
of the graces of the holy spirit, and appearances 
of good heartedness, but down below in the real heart 
and intention is selfishness, that would merely follow 
the ways of righteousness because of popularity or 
because of some hoped-for gain, but thoroughly unable 
to appreciate self-sacrifice for anything or anybody. 
This class of shallow characters sometimes receives 
the truth with avidity, with joy, and seems to 
contain some of the truth's most enthusiastic followers; 
but this is merely for a little while, because of 
novelty or pride to show off, and not from love 
of the truth. The selfishness which is the substratum 
of their character will not permit them to endure hardness 
for the truth's sake. Consequently, as soon as 
they find that with the truth always goes something 
of persecution and tribulation they are surprised, thoroughly 
disheartened, and all their interest speedily 
dies out. This class has no hope for the Kingdom 
either. They are not of the kind that the sower expects 
will yield a crop to maturity in the present 
harvest. 

The third class of hearers favored by the truth in 
this present time is referred to by our Lord as "thorny 
ground." This does not mean poor ground, for the 
thorns are to be found in the very best of ground, 
especially the thorns of Palestine, to which our Lord 
undoubtedly had reference. Of these Prof. Thomson 

R2627 :page 141 

says, "These thorns are not briar bushes or brambles, 
but are an after-growth of a variety of thistles, which 
come up quickly in every wheat-field of Palestine." 
We may say, then, that every Christian who receives 
the wheat or word of God into a good and honest 
heart during this Gospel age is in danger of having it 
choked with the thorns, and of thus becoming one of 
the class referred to in the parable, a class that was 
favored, that had every advantage, but which brought 
forth no crop worth gathering, because the thorns 
took possession of it to such an extent as to choke 
out the wheat-seed. 

We have heard Christian people describe the 
thorns which threaten the good seed in the hearts of 
God's people to be theaters, card-playing, carousals, 



etc., etc., but this is a great mistake; the hearts that 
are beset with such things are probably not good 
ground in any sense of the word, and probably have 
never received the good seed. But how reasonable is 
the interpretation which our Lord himself gives— the 

R2628 : page 141 

thorns are the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 

of riches— just exactly what every Christian realizes. 

The cares of this life are not gross immoralities, but 

the home duties, family cares, business cares, etc. The 

deceitfulness of riches is not merely the baneful influence 

which is exercised upon those who possess 

riches, but especially it represents the snares, the difficulties, 

the entanglements, the misleadings of efforts 

to become rich. How many Christian people can testify 

that their spirituality, their love for the Lord and 

for the truth and for the Kingdom have been choked 

in great measure by wealth-coveting and wealth-seeking ! 

How many can testify that the cares of this life 

have crowded out their fellowship with the Lord, and 

the power of his word in their hearts, and how as a 

result their lives are barren, unfruitful of anything in 

the way of character development, service of God and 

for the "brethren" and others. 

What can such as realize that thorns are growing 
in their hearts and choking the Word of the Lord 
do to get rid of them? How can they overcome this 
difficulty of permitting the cares of this life to absorb 
their time, their talents, their influence? How can 
they get rid of the false allurements and attractions 
of riches? How can they become fruitful toward God 
in good works, in riches of grace in their hearts and 
characters, in riches of the knowledge of the divine 
Word and plan? 

It is a difficult matter to get rid of these thorns, 
if they spring up and get well under way after we have 
received the wheat, and it will probably be a slow 
and tedious business to root them out; and one in 
which we could not hope at all for success by ourselves, 
unaided. All such must go to the Lord himself 
for the aid which he alone can give, and the 
method and process by which the Lord will assist them 
will be in the transforming of their minds so that they 
will mind not earthly things but heavenly things, set 
their affections on things above, not on things beneath, 
set their affections upon true riches of the divine 
nature and high calling, instead of on earthly 
riches, which are but transitory and unsatisfactory, 
even if attained. -Matt. 6:19-21. 

And the way to effect this transforming of the 
mind, this uprooting of the thorns, is to draw time 
and attention away from the earthly things in a compulsory 
manner, limiting the time that we will give 
to earthly things, and devoting more and more time 



to spiritual interests in our own hearts and in the 
hearts of our families and friends. This will mean 
more time for the study and practice of the truth; 
and as the truth comes in it will be found to be the 
sanctifying power of God which alone can uproot the 
cares of this life, the deceitfulness of riches, and keep 
our hearts in the right attitude to bear much fruit to 
our Master's praise. 

The "good ground" hearers are those whose 
hearts are in good condition, ready for the word of 
the Lord, plowed and furrowed by experiences. This 
class, free from thorns, is ready to bring forth an 
abundant harvest, and yet even of this class all may 
not yield the same amount of fruitage to our Master's 
sowing, for he represents that some will bring forth 
thirty, some sixty and some an hundred fold. He 
does not speak slightingly of those which bring forth 
but the thirty fold, but leaves it to us to discern that 
those who bring forth the hundred fold are the most 
pleasing in his sight. We have much to do with this 
matter of the amount of fruitage which we yield to the 
Lord; it will be measured by the degree of our zeal, 
our love for him; consequently the class bringing 
forth the hundred fold represents those Christians who 
love the Lord the most fervently, whose hearts are 
warmest for him, his truth and his people. The Apostle 
Paul was undoubtedly one of this hundred-fold class, 
the Apostle Peter was another, and no doubt there 
have been many in humble positions unknown to 
fame, whose love for the Lord, and zeal for his cause 
have been counted to them as hundredfold return for 
every seed of truth they received. Let us each with 
more and more care seek to bring forth much fruit, 
and as one means to this end to keep down the thorns 
and everything that would choke or hinder the influence 
of the truth in our hearts, in our daily lives, 
and in our words. Let us cultivate the seed and not 
the thorns. 

THE MESSAGE OF THE KINGDOM. 

Luke says, "The seed is the Word of God"; Matthew 
says, "The word of the Kingdom." Our Lord 
no doubt used both expressions— the good seed is 
God's word or message of the Kingdom. Indeed, 
the message of the Kingdom may be said to be the 
only message God has yet given to mankind as a 
message of hope. He intimated the Kingdom to 
Abraham when he promised him that in his seed all 
the families of the earth should be blessed; the intimation 
was that Abraham's seed should be blessed by 
being granted Kingdom powers which should prove 
a blessing to the world at large. Israel, at the time of 
this parable, was hoping to attain this very promise. 

All the promises through the prophets pertain to 
the Kingdom, the time when it shall be established, 



the blessings which shall flow from it to the uttermost 
parts of the earth, when all shall know the Lord, 
from the least to the greatest, when righteousness shall 
flourish throughout the world, and when sin and sinners 
and Satan himself will be subjected to the powers 
of righteousness, in the hands of the Messiah. At 

R2628 : page 142 

the time of the utterance of this parable the seed, word 
or message of the Kingdom had taken on a special 
form, viz., an invitation to some to become joint-heirs 
with the Messiah, the heir of the Kingdom. 

Whoever has never heard anything about the 
Kingdom has never heard anything about the gospel, 
for it is the "gospel of the Kingdom," as our Lord 
declared. Hence we see that much of the preaching 
of eternal torment and other things falsely called 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, are delusions which are 
not of God, not his word, not the good seed that would 
bring forth the good fruit. The false messages have 
brought forth "tares" in abundance. This good seed 
of the Kingdom it is that rightly received into a 
good heart cannot be easily choked with earthly hopes 
or ambitions— for the Kingdom hope is above all, 
grand, pre-eminent, soul-satisfying. The Kingdom 
hope is as an anchor to the soul, and does not permit 
the cares of this life to seem large and to crush it out. 
On the contrary, to honest hearts which have received 
the good seed of the Kingdom the cares of this life 
are merely incidental trials which are to be overcome, 
that thereby character may be formed, much fruit 
brought forth, to the Lord's praise, and a share in 
the Kingdom attained. "He that hath this hope in 
him purifieth himself," and bringeth forth much fruit. 



R2628 : page 142 

NEWS FROM THE "BRITISH BRANCH." 

You will all be glad to learn of the safe arrival of 
Brother Henninges and wife at their destination. A "pilgrim" 
trip to the principal centers of interest was made 
while word was sent to the home office respecting 
the British postal laws, etc., bearing on the work proposed 
to be done there. Much interest was found at 
various points and the friends of the truth, we may 
well hope, were edified and enthused. 

We were surprised and rather disappointed to find 
that British postal laws are much less favorable than 
our own. However, the Lord pointed out to us (we 
believe) a manner of adapting our work to the laws as 
they stand which we doubt not will accomplish a great 
work there this year. At all events we have resolved 



to try it for the remainder of this year at least (D.V.) 
and accordingly an office will be opened at once and 
soon as possible the address will appear in the WATCH 
TOWER. We have prepared over four tons of reading matter 
for shipment, part of which has probably already 
reached London, and the remainder is now on the ocean. 

The following from London will be interesting:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You did not overestimate 
the matter which in your last you termed a 
"pleasant surprise" for British brethren. Bro. Henninges' 
visit to us is indeed a joyful privilege and to 
hear him set forth things "new and old" is a pleasure 
that words cannot describe. We certainly feel that 
there is scope for much work on the lines that our 
brother has come over to adopt, if the way be made 
plain to him by the Lord. 

Of course it is not for us to urge or push this matter 
unduly, however much we feel it would gratify us, 
but this we can offer, that if the Lord makes plain the 
way to you and him our sympathies can then take 
practical form. These are my personal feelings, but 
I know I am only voicing those of many of our dear 
brethren here. It would have done your heart good 
to have seen the little gatherings of glad faces at the 
last four or five meetings; to feel the warm, sympathetic 
hand-grasps and the cheery, honest words of 
encouragement and the earnest God-speeds given to 
our dear Bro. Henninges and his dear wife. Not but 
that we always have joy in meeting together and great 
joy indeed, but this joy seems a super-added one— a 
joy abounding. 

We give thanks to our Lord that he has made you 
such a channel of blessing to us, and we pray that our 

R2629 : page 142 

eyes and hearts may be anointed and that we may be 
given that discerning spirit which discriminates between 
that which harmonizes with and that which 
militates against our Father's revealed plan. So with 
the boldness and assurance born of sad experience we 
can confidently approach our Father's throne with 
requests according to his will. 

If there are any suggestions from you to us as to 
how we may aid in this present scheme for additionally 
helping our English brethren we shall be glad to 
hear from you. In the meantime we are one with 
you in this gospel of the Kingdom, in unity of spirit, 
in the bond of love and in righteousness of life. 

Yours in our present Lord, 

BRO. AND SISTER GUARD. 



R2629 : page 142 



QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 
ABOUT MAGNETIC-HYPNOTIC CURES, ETC. 



Question.— The world is full of aches and pains, 
disease, and naturally we look about us for relief. 
You have already expressed your judgment that the 
cures effected by Christian Scientists and Spiritualists 
are probably produced by improper spiritual influences, 
altho exercised to some extent at least in harmony 
with natural laws. I desire now to inquire respecting 
cures by hypnotism, and still other cures by 
so-called magnetic healers. What shall we think of 
these, and will it be proper for the Lord's consecrated 
people to avail themselves of such means for attaining 
health? 

Answer.— We feel suspicious of magnetic and 
mental healing. In our judgment they in many instances 
are allied with or related to hypnotism; yet it 
is particularly difficult to draw the line here, because 
we all know that there is such a thing as a legitimate 
mental influence which we all exercise upon one another, 
favorably or unfavorably. We know, for instance, 
that hope and faith, love and joy, are healing 

R2629 : page 143 

and helpful influences, and that doubt and despair, 

anger and malice, are injurious influences, whether exercised 

by our own minds upon our own bodies, or upon 

others. In this proper sense of the word every child 

of God possessing the spirit of love, the spirit of a 

sound mind, is a mental healer, and a heart healer, a 

wound healer; wherever he or she may be, the influence 

will be uplifting, comforting, strengthening to 

good impulses. If therefore the Lord's consecrated 

ones visit the sick, their presence should be a refreshment, 

comforting, cheering and helpful, and so much 

the more if they carry in their hearts and communicate 

with their lips the exceeding great and precious promises 

of our Father's Word. With this much of mental 

healing we are most thoroughly in accord. 

But Christian Science, Mind Healing and Magnetic 
Healing, running upon this same line, seem to 
us to carry it to an extreme— in the case of Christian 
Science to the extreme of lying to oneself and believing 
the lie, and thus gradually becoming a liar, self-deceived 
and deceiving others in respect to all of life's 
affairs. We cannot believe that any course so opposed 
to that which the Scriptures mark out can be of 
God, nor can we believe that the cures it at times effects 
are either natural or of God; we can only suppose, 
therefore, that the Adversary favors this lying 
and deceiving process to the intent that he may beguile 



the mind through further lies and deceptions far 
from God and the truth. 

Magnetic Healing is more on the order of hypnotic 
healing; that is to say, the magnetic healer gains 
a control over the mind of his subject which is somewhat 
akin to the control gained by mesmerists and 
hypnotists, and akin to the spirit control of spiritualism 
over its mediums. We can have no sympathy with 
anything of this kind, for even if we were satisfied 
that the power of control was merely a human power 
and not a Satanic one (and we are not satisfied of this), 
we cannot feel that it is right for one human being to 
subject his mind, his will, to another, when the evidences 
prove that every such subjection decreases his 
will power and places the subject more and more in 
the position of a slave or machine, subject to the influence 
or control of others— breaking down his 
personality. 

The Lord's people are admonished to make such 
a submission of their minds to the Lord, and no one 
else; and we are confident that the Lord will take no 
advantage of us under such conditions, to rob us of any 
good quality. On the whole, then, we urge all of the 
Lord's people to be on guard against mind healers, 
magnetic healers, etc., especially where, as in the case 
of Christian Science, the mind is to be given up to believe 
a lie, or in the case of hypnotism, it is to be given 
up or subjected entirely to another. Our minds are 
our greatest possession, and are to be given only to 
the Lord and to each other as directed by the Word of 
the Lord; and if we cannot have health without violating 
these principles, we can afford to be without the 
health for the few more days that remain under the 
present conditions, knowing that by and by, if faithful 
to the Lord, we shall have the perfect resurrection 
bodies promised. 

WHO IS BORN OF GOD? 



Question.— In 1 John 5:1 we read, "Whosoever 
believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God." Does 
this signify that we are begotten of the spirit at the 
same moment that we are justified through faith? 

Answer.— No; the Apostle, in the words quoted, 
is not attempting to give the complete philosophy of 
salvation, that being given in other parts of his own 
testimony, and that of the other apostles. He is discussing 
the condition of a believer who has not only 
been justified through faith, but who, continuing to be 
a believer, is acting upon that faith and the Lord's call 
which comes to the justified, and who, in harmony with 
that justification and call, has presented himself a living 
sacrifice to the Lord, and has been begotten of 
the Holy Spirit. He is still a believer, must always 



continue to be a believer, must always continue to 
maintain his faith, which is the foundation of his 
reckoned new nature in Christ. 

The word here rendered "born" should be rendered 
"begotten;" it is the same word in the Greek as 
the word rendered "begotten" following it in the same 
verse. 

Numerous Scriptures show us that our condition 
as sinners is such that we cannot be begotten of God 
through his holy spirit until after we have been justified 
through faith. As sinners we were "children of wrath 
even as others," and were "called to repentance" (but 
not called to the "high calling"): as repentant sinners 
we are pointed to the Lord Jesus as the Way, the Truth 
and the Life, by whom alone we can return to harmony 
with the Father. When we accept Christ as our Savior 
and his sacrifice as our ransom price we are justified 
by faith— reckonedly perfected— and have peace 
with God, and realize that we are no longer children 
of wrath, aliens, strangers and foreigners, being 
brought nigh by the blood of Christ. Our justification, 
however, is not our begetting to new nature, but, as the 
Word itself signifies, a making right of our old natures 
—a compensating on our Lord's part for the 
weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh which are 
ours through the fall, so that we are reckoned as tho 
we were perfect men— like father Adam before he 
sinned. 

It is to such justified or reckonedly perfect men 
and women that the Lord sends the "high calling" of 
this Gospel age— a call to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus, a call to suffer with him for righteousness' sake 
in this present time, with a promise of sharing with him 
glory, honor and immortality in the future, of being 
joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom which is to bring 
restitution blessings to all mankind. 

The call of this Gospel age is to find the "Royal 
Priesthood," of which our Lord Jesus is the Head or 
Chief Priest, and all his faithful ones the under priests. 
The work of this priesthood is especially future— during 
the Millennial age the instruction, guidance and 
teaching of the world of mankind. The call to this 
priesthood includes two things: (1) A call in the present 
time to faithfulness even unto sacrifice, and none 
can be in this priesthood except he offers up himself a 
willing sacrifice in the divine service. (2) It includes the 

R2629 : page 144 

glorification that shall follow the exaltation of the 
sacrificers. 

The thing which each is to sacrifice is himself, his 
will, his life, his all (Heb. 8:3; Rom. 12:1); but God 
cannot accept to his holy altar any blemished sacrifice, 
and hence he has not invited sinners to sacrifice themselves 
—for they are all blemished. None but our Lord 



Jesus, therefore, could be actually acceptable as a sin-offering 

on Jehovah's altar; hence the provision is that 

his church, called to present their bodies living sacrifices, 

and to thus have fellowship in Christ's sufferings, 

and by and by in his glory, must first be "justified 

freely from all things" by the merit of Christ's sacrifice, 

before they could be accepted as sacrificers "holy 

and acceptable to God" or in any degree come within 

the limitations of the high calling. 

Altho the Apostle, in the verse you quote, does 
not particularize the three steps of (1) knowledge, (2) 
faith and (3) consecration, he nevertheless implies 
them, as will be noticed from the context: vss. 3 and 4 
tell us that the class the Apostle refers to are overcomers 
of the world, and that they seek to keep God's 

R2630 : page 144 

commandments, and do so willingly, not feeling them 
"grievous." Thus we see that he is speaking only of 
the consecrated class; and since we know that there 
were none righteous,— no, not one,— of all of Adam's 
race, and since we know also that the unrighteous 
could not be accepted as joint-sacrificers with Christ, 
we know assuredly that the Apostle John had in mind 
a class of consecrated and spirit-begotten ones, who 
previously had been prepared by a knowledge of 
Christ and by a faith in him unto justification. 

That "new creature" represented by the new mind 
which is now begotten of the holy spirit when the 
justified believer reaches that point where he sacrifices 
the human will and presents himself unreservedly to the 
Lord, is merely "begotten." The present life is the 
formative period during which there is no independent 
life, but merely the reckoned one of our "mother," the 
Abrahamic Covenant. (Gal. 4:23-31.) Our birth will be 
in the First Resurrection, when we shall be "born from 
the dead." Then we shall have life and our mother 
covenant will be dead, having borne the promised seed 
that shall bless all nations. Compare Col. 1:18; 
Rev. 1:5. 

HOW WILL THE DEAD HEAR? 



Question.— What is implied by the expression, 
"The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and 
they that hear shall live"?— John 5:25. 

Answer.— The Greek text seems to be in full harmony 
with the English, and neither can be understood 
logically and in harmony with other Scriptures, except 
by understanding this to mean that the dead of mankind 
shall be awakened to such a condition as will permit 
them to hear, comprehend, understand, tho they 
will still be dead from the divine standpoint— dead in 



trespasses and sins— dead in the sense of being still under 

divine sentence of death. Then after hearing, comprehending 

if they respond to the hearing, if they obey 

the voice, the command, the instruction, of that day 

of judgment, they shall eventually attain to perfection 

of life— being raised to the living point gradually by 

the processes of restitution or resurrection, by 

(through) judgments, during the Millennium. 

The fact is simply this, that a fall took place, a 
fall from a certain standing or condition of perfection 
and life and a redemption was provided at Calvary, on 
account of which there may be extended to all who 
fell an opportunity to rise again. The rising, be it never 
so insignificant in its beginning, must go on to completion 
—until the subject shall have been raised out of 
death into life. This raising up is necessarily up to the 
point or condition from which the fall occurred, and 
anything short of that would not be in the proper sense 
of the word a raising out of death and to perfection of 
life. 

When considering the word anastasis it is proper 
that we should interpret it along this line, which is its 
only true and logical meaning, and if it were in any 
place used in a less comprehensive sense, it would evidently 
be the exceptional use of it, and should not militate 
against its full meaning. 

But let us look for a moment at the resurrection 
of the just ones and the resurrection of unjust ones. 
There will be no question as to the resurrection of just 
ones, that to them anastasis means a perfect raising up 
to perfect conditions in the First Resurrection. Likewise, 
we claim, is its meaning in respect to unjust ones. 
It does not say that all of the unjust ones will be raised 
up, and other Scriptures show that this will not be the 
case, but that only such of the unjust ones as will conform 
themselves to the laws of the Kingdom will thus 
be raised up, and that others will fall back when but 
partly raised up and suffer Second Death;— those who 
refuse to hear (obey) their Lord in that day. Compare 
Acts 3:23. 

JOINING TRADE UNIONS. 



Question.— Can I consistently join a Trade Union? 
I prefer to be free, but am threatened with loss of employment 
unless Ijoin one. 

Answer.— The Lord's injunctions are specifically 
along the lines of religion, and hence our separateness 
from unions should be specially along this line. A 
trade union has nothing of a religious worship connected 
with it, as have the churches and some of the 
secret orders. Of course, as those who are free indeed 
in Christ, we would prefer not to incur any obligation 
except to the Lord, but if obliged to join a Trade 



Union to obtain employment, I think you would do 
right to join one. I would, however, state to them that 
I preferred not to join them (not for the sake of the 
dues, being quite willing to pay my share of maintaining 
the proper price of labor), but from a desire to be 
free, lest at some time the Union might wish to dictate 
to my conscience what would not agree with it. 
I would therefore give them notice at once that I 
would be obedient to the demands of the Union so far 
as my conscience agreed, and that only. 



page 145 
VOL. XXI. MAY 15, 1900. No. 10. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 147 

A Zionist's View of Jesus 147 

Methodism More Democratic 148 

"With a Lie in Its Right Hand" 148 

Progress of the Truth in China 150 

Parables of the Kingdom 151 

The Wheat and the Tares 152 

The Parable of the Mustard Seed 153 

The Parable of the Leaven 154 

The Harvest Plenteous— The Laborers 

Few 154 

A Wicked Woman and a Weak Man 156 

Faithful Co-Laborers Heard From 159 

Congratulations— British 146 

The Volunteer Service 146 

page 146 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2632 : page 146 

CONGRATULATIONS TO BRITISH FRIENDS. 

We have pleasure in announcing to the friends in England, 
Ireland, Scotland and Wales that our London branch office is 
open at the address given above. It is or will shortly be well 
stocked with DAWNS, booklets, tracts and WATCH TOWERS. This 
will greatly convenience you all, we are sure, not only saving 
time but also postage, and permitting you to use domestic instead 
of foreign Money Orders. 

Volunteer orders will be filled from there also and we hope 
to hear as a consequence of many fresh enlistments in this branch 
of the service. 

Any who feel disposed to enter the Colporteur work in 
Great Britain are invited to write there for full instructions how 
to work, where to work, terms, etc., etc. 

Friends there desirous of visits from "Pilgrims" to hold 
public and parlor meetings in Great Britain are also invited to 
write. Address all such letters to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 

131 Gipsy Lane, Forest Gate, London E., England. 

THE VOLUNTEER SERVICE. 

This work is now nobly started and just in time, we trust, 
to see it well accomplished before July, when so many church 
attendants are apt to absent themselves for the summer. The 
brethren and sisters engaging in this service seem to be profiting 
by it spiritually themselves and it is difficult to conceive of 
any other form of preaching present truth that could be more 
effective. The fact that this matter is handed out by Christian 
gentlemen and ladies adds to the weight and force of the matter 
circulated. The results cannot be even approximated this 
side the vail. 

Order more "ammunition" as you find you will need it. 
We have a good supply now. But be careful, please, not to 
order more than you will faithfully and promptly use— for it is 
expensive. Letters on this subject should have the word "Volunteer" 
at the head, and "Order No. 2" or "Order No. 3" as 
the case may be. Initial orders should invariably be made out 
along the line mentioned in March 1st TOWER. 



R2630 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A ZIONIST LEADER'S VIEW OF JESUS. 



DR. MAX NORDAU, a widely known Hebrew 
leader, not long since in reply to a question 
concerning his view of Jesus, wrote the following:— 

"The picture of Jesus as we have it given by the 
synoptic gospels is a vague outline and is a typical and 
ideal Jewish character. He observed the law; he 
taught the morality of Hillel— love thy neighbor as 
thyself— he constantly occupied himself with matters 
of eternity; he felt himself in spiritual communion 
with God; he despised that which was mortal in 
his being and all the accidental things of this life 
on earth. All these are characteristic peculiarities of 
the best Jews of the time of the Roman supremacy, 
especially of the Essenes. And as to his origin and 
ethical physiognomy, there, too, the language of Jesus 
was throughout Jewish. For all of his parables, 
parallels can be found in greater or less abundance in 
the Talmud. His prayer, the most beautiful that a 
believer ever formulated, is the quintessence of Jewish 
ideas concerning the relations between man and his 
Creator. The Sermon on the Mount is the substance 
of rabbinical ethics; its figures and comparisons are 
common among the rabbis. 

"Jesus is soul of our soul, as he is flesh of our flesh, 
and who, then, could think of excluding him from the 
people of Israel? St. Peter will continue to be the 
only Jew who will say of this descendant of David: I 
know not the man! If the Jews have not to the present 
time paid that tribute of public honor to the exalted 
moral beauty of the character of Jesus, the ground 
for this is to be sought in the fact that those who tormented 
them did so in his name. The Jews concluded 
what the Master was from the doings of the disciples. 
This was a wrong, but it was pardonable on the part 

R2631 :page 147 

of those who were eternally the objects of the never-ending 

hatred of so-called Christians. But every time 

that a Jew went back to the original sources concerning 

Jesus and learned to study Christ without regard 

to his followers, he was compelled to exclaim in amazement: 

Without accepting his Messianic claims, this 

man is of us! He honors our race and we claim him 

as our own, as we also claim the synoptic gospels as 

examples of genuine Jewish literature. 

"And the revision of this trial? This had been 
done long since. The most learned specialists in the 
department of Jewish legal procedure have proved 
beyond the shadow of a doubt that the trial of Jesus, 
as tradition reports it, could never have taken place 
before a Jewish court of law. If Jesus was condemned 



to death, it was done by the Roman judge, and no Jew, 
faithful to his law, had the least thing to do with it. 

"Jesus would never have been condemned to death 
on the cross before a Jewish court, as this method of 
punishing criminals was not allowed by the Jewish 
law; and it never could have taken place on a Friday, 
the evening before the Passover, as the law stringently 
forbade any execution on that day. If the Jews had 
condemned Jesus after the manner reported by tradition, 
then they would have committed a series of 
crimes, each of which would have been severely punished 
by the Jewish law. It is accordingly certain 
that the whole story of the trial of Jesus can be nothing 
but an act of vengeance intended to punish the 
Jews for not having recognized the divine mission of 
Christ." 

This is interesting as showing the change that has 
come over the people who cried, "His blood be upon 
us and upon our children!" The Doctor's expression 
is falling into line with the Prophet's declaration of 
what must soon be the attitude of the Jews as a people, 
viz., "They shall look on him whom they have 
pierced, and shall mourn for him as one mourneth for 
an exceptional son." 

Undoubtedly the best reading matter for the Jew 
is the New Testament, whose simple Gospel narrative 
and whose masterful Pauline arguments refer him 
freely to the Old Testament and show prophecy and fulfilment, 
type and antitype. However, we are not to 
expect Israel's blindness to fully depart before the divinely 

R2631 :page 148 

appointed time;— when the elect Gospel Church 
shall have been completed and glorified. Nor are we 
then to expect their blessing and enlightenment except 
through the great trouble in which they will share 
with all others, and out of which they shall be saved 
and blest by the glorified spiritual Israel.— 
Rom. 11:25-27,31. 

METHODISM MORE DEMOCRATIC. 



The basis of the Methodist Episcopal Church is 
hierarchical, exclusive, all power and authority being 
vested in the hands of the "clergy." But for some 
years public sentiment has been growing in favor of a 
more democratic arrangement, culminating in a demand 
that the "laity" be granted equal representation and 
voice with the ministers and bishops in the regulation 
of the M.E. Church's affairs. 

The ministers were loth to part with any measure 
of their "authority" and power, but finding the 
"laity" persistent they have with as good grace as possible 



finally yielded the point, as the following dispatch 
from the General Conference at Chicago shows:— 

"CHICAGO, May 2. -The pulpit and the pew will 
hereafter share equally in the highest governmental 
body of the Methodist Episcopal church. Without a 
dissenting vote the General Conference, which opened 
at the Auditorium to-day, ratified the action of the 
annual conferences in extending equal representation 
to the laity. The 157 provisional delegates were admitted 
without a contest. 

"The step taken makes the Methodist church a 
democratic body, and the rule of the preacher passes 
with the century. As the roll was made up to-day 
there are 356 preachers and 236 laymen on the regular 
list. At least 50 reserve laymen will close some 
of the breaches in the delegations." 

Radical as this step is, it has little meaning and 
will have little effect in the affairs of Methodism, and 
it is because the preachers realize this that they yield 
the point without special contest. They well know 
that the name and form of liberty and power are all 
that their "laity" care for or know how to appreciate. 
So long as the preachers can keep "their people" in 
ignorance on the subject of hell, etc., they can manipulate 
them just as well in conference as elsewhere. 



A memorial has been drafted for presentation to 
this General M.E. Conference requesting that the 
strictures of the Methodist Discipline against dancing, 
theater-going, etc., be expunged. 

The Methodist "tares" know that they have just 
as much right to such things as the Presbyterian 
"tares" and the Baptist "tares;" and though they 
have been enjoying the interdicted amusements for 
years and intend to continue so to do whether the conference 
cancels the prohibition or not, yet somehow 
they would feel just a little more free if the words 
were not there. Not that their consciences are very 
tender on the subject, but that it gives some of the 
"wheat" class an opportunity to upbraid them and 
seems a curtailment of their "tare" privileges and 
pleasures. 

And why should not the General Conference grant 
the request and expunge the article so obnoxious to 
the "tare" element? The Methodist "wheat" need no 
such restrictions even as the Presbyterian and Baptist 
and other "wheat" need them not. After all, the 
"tares" are not "the children of the Kingdom" and 
why should such restrictions give some of them more 
of a deceptive appearance of being "wheat"? Let 
them do what they will— the wider the difference between 
"wheat" and "tares" the better, and the more 
speedy the separation, now that the harvest time of 
separation has come. 



PRESBYTERIANISM STANDS 
"BEFORE GOD AND MAN WITH A LIE IN ITS RIGHT HAND" 

SAYS ONE OF ITS ORDAINED MINISTERS. 



"Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee," saith the Lord. 
And they gnawed their tongues [chewed their words] in pain, 
but continued to blaspheme [slander, misrepresent] the God of 
heaven. 

The commotion amongst Presbyterians continues 
—some standing firm for their church creed, others 
repudiating it and begging to be released from it, but 
not noble-minded enough to step out into liberty in 
Christ (as they might so readily do) because of the 
cost of that liberty in name, salary, etc. Many thus 
indirectly confess that they despise the chain wherewith 
they are bound, and have despised it for years, 
and have realized it to be a lie and a blasphemy against 
God, and after confessing to this acting and confessing 
a lie for years they beg to be released without cost or 
loss either of human or divine favor, and especially 
without loss of bread and butter. 

Note the expression of Rev. Samuel T. Carter in 
a Presbyterian journal— The Evangelist. He says:— 

"It must be admitted that if a church is honest, 
that which stands in its Confession is its faith. It 
must be acknowledged that what is contained in its 
Confession is the faith of any honest church. The 
Westminster Confession of Faith is still the unquestioned 
Confession of the Presbyterian Church. Is the 
Presbyterian Church honest in its zeal for purity first 
and peace afterward?... 

"Be it known, then, to all the world that the 
Presbyterian Church by its Confession declares that 
all the heathen perish, that many men are hopelessly 
lost from all eternity by the decree of God, and that 
there are infants in hell.... In reality the church 
does not believe these dreadful doctrines. Then it 

R2631 :page 149 

stands before God and man with a lie in its right 
hand." 

The Independent, a high-class religious journal of 
Westminster proclivities, makes some very sensible 
remarks on the situation as follows:— 

"The time for removal of error is always; and 
now revision of some sort begins to be exigent. The 
Presbyterian Church is suffering for it. The arguments 
for it are those of truth and charity; the argument 
against it is that it will delay union with the 
Southern Presbyterian Church, which is not yet ready 



for revision. But we doubt very much if revision is 
the best course to be pursued. Let the old Confession 
remain as a historical document. It expressed the 
views of the Westminster Assembly. It answered its 
purpose then. It was a noble but faulty document. 
It gave forth all the light its makers had. Put it 
where it belongs, as an expression, not of what we 
must believe, but of what its makers believed. They 
did grandly to express their own faith, but they had 
no right to enslave our faith, any more than God has 
a right to enslave our will. There is no nobler intellectual 
work that a man can do than to formulate what 
he believes about God. Theology is the noblest of 
the sciences— a man of intelligence ought never to tire 
of making creeds for himself. He ought to revise his 
creed every year. A man's conduct, and so his religion, 
depends on what he believes about the relation 
between God and man. More evidence, more discovery, 
more study, more enlightenment from the Holy 
Spirit, will change his belief, his creed, and so affect 
his religious duty. We would leave the formulation 
of a creed to each man's own conscientious study." 

We are surprised and gratified to have so able a 
journal as The Independent come forward thus boldly 
in advocacy of a view we have been seeking to promulgate 

R2632 : page 149 

for years; namely, that each individual Christian 
should have his own creed, his own faith or belief 
respecting the things which God has revealed to his 
people by his spirit through his Word;— and that each 
Christian should keep adding to his knowledge and 
his faith daily from the inspired record, the Bible, 
using all the helps obtainable to this end. This is the 
thought of the Apostle when he speaks of growth in 
grace and knowledge and approach to the stature of 
manhood in Christ. He suggests that the beginner 
in the Christian way is but a "babe" who needs "the 
sincere milk of the Word that he may grow thereby," 
and that when further advanced he will need the 
"strong meat" of truth which is for the more matured. 

With such an arrangement there is no room for 
the methods in vogue among Christians of all denominations 
which just now is causing Presbyterianism so 
much trouble— namely, the fixing by the Doctors of 
Divinity of each denomination of a creed (claimed to 
contain all the "milk" as well as all the "strong meat" 
of God's Word) which each "babe" as it is received 
is required to swallow, and which it is instructed will 
supply all the spiritual nutriment proper for it to receive 
to the end of life. Such doses or pills are administered 
by every sect— some sugar-coated to conceal 
the real contents from the "babe," and some like 
the Presbyterian creed, plain, honest and terribly bitter. 

A gentleman in Allegheny related to us his conversation 



with a Presbyterian pastor before his withdrawal 
from that church. The gentleman said, "Pastor, 
I find many things in our Confession of Faith which 
upon now more mature consideration I cannot endorse 
nor continue to be identified with, unless you can help 
me to reason them out." The pastor replied, "My dear 
brother, you are getting at this matter from the wrong 
stand-point; our Confession must be swallowed whole 
or not at all. It is like a Brandreth pill; if you attempt 
to chew it [reason it out] you can never swallow it." 

How strange that the simple and rational way of 
feeding "milk" and then "meat," which affords both 
pleasure and nourishment, should have been discarded 
for the wickedly injurious practice of imposing upon 
the "babes" doctrinal pills which not only afford no 
nourishment but which hinder all growth, and as a result 
has filled Churchianity with "babes" who as respects 
spiritual things have never had their senses 
exercised to discern the true from the false and are utterly 
unable to follow the Apostle's counsel to "rightly 
divide the word of truth" and to "try the spirits" 
(doctrines) whether they be of God or are human 
fabrications. 

A SIMPLE CONFESSION NECESSARY. 

However, a simple public confession is necessary 
to demonstrate who are "babes" in Christ— to distinguish 
such from "children of this world." But this 
confession should be very simple— so that the merest 
"babe" in Christ could comprehend and fully endorse 
it as his own. (1) It should declare faith in Christ 
as a personal Savior: that he was sent of the Father 
and gave his life a ransom for all mankind. (2) A 
personal acceptance of him as a personal Savior and a 
determination to forsake sin. (3) A full consecration 
to be a follower of Jesus in every respect and to lay 
down life itself in his service. Whoever could not 
confess these should not be esteemed a "babe" in 
Christ at all— nor be fed as such, nor expected to grow 
up into Christ in all things. 

May we expect the Church nominal to follow this 
program— or that the voice of the Independent will be 
more potent than our own in bringing to pass such 
conditions? By no means. Churchianity contains too 
many "tares" and not enough "wheat" for such suggestions 
to be impressive. She will soon go down in 
the great time of trouble; and not until the Kingdom 

R2632 : page 150 

has been set up need we expect a better general arrangement. 
Then it will apply not to the elect Church, 
which will then be completed and glorified, but to the 
Restitution class, then being developed.— Acts 3:19-21. 



R2632 : page 150 

PROGRESS OF THE TRUTH IN CHINA. 



OUR dear Brother Randle, formerly a Baptist 
missionary in China, has been with us at Allegheny 
for about a month, and we have learned to love 
him dearly as one of the Lord's "brethren." He has 
written for the TOWER a little sketch of his recent experiences 
in receiving the Truth and of his efforts to 
let it shine forth in turn to others. We know it will 
be appreciated. The brother's depth of interest is well 
attested by his long journey of 16,000 miles to Allegheny. 
He proposes spending the remainder of his 
earthly life in sounding the Jubilee Trumpet— the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. He will probably select Great 
Britain, his former home, as his future field for harvest 
work— preaching, and colporteuring the DAWNS. 
Before leaving this country he has consented to 
do some "Pilgrim" work. He is now visiting a number 
of little gatherings in Ohio and western Pennsylvania, 
and later on will meet with the churches at 
Washington, Baltimore, Richmond, Philadelphia, New 
York City, etc., including some on the Hudson River. 
We confidently assure him a most hearty welcome from 
all WATCH TOWER readers he may be permitted to 
meet. His article follows: 

PRESENT TRUTH IN THE FAR EAST. 



There has been in China for years one solitary 
witness for the present truth, Miss Downing, of Chefoo. 
This lady was formerly a missionary of the Presbyterian 
Board and she chanced to meet with a stray 
WATCH TOWER, about the year 1883, in which she 
read an article on restitution, and at once decided to 
subscribe for the paper. She was the means of leading 
Mr. Fuller (whose letter is published at the end of 
VOL. III.) to study the DAWNS which proved so great 
a blessing to him. He died in 1894. 

Amongst the missionaries of Shantung I am afraid 
Sister Downing was considered a queer old lady having 
some odd notions. She prevailed on me, however, 
to subscribe in 1892 for the WATCH TOWER and to get 
the Diaglott. The latter I much wanted. I read a 
little here and there in the TOWER, but too rashly concluded 
that it was the organ of some kind of universalism, 
which I did not want to corrupt my orthodoxy, 
so threw them aside. 

I was too much afraid of the word "Universalism." 



Now I know that some things are universal. 
God's sunshine is universal; it shines from pole to 
pole, upon both the just and the unjust. So is his 

R2633 : page 150 

love. (John 3:16.) Light and truth are yet to be universal 
(John 1:9; Isaiah 11:9), and so is the testimony 
of the ransom. (1 Tim. 2:6; John 12:32.) Because 
of my prejudice then I continued four years longer in 
darkness. 

Toward the end of that time I saw MILLENNIAL 
DAWN advertised in the London Times, and having 
been interested for years in the Lord's return, I 
had a growing desire to read that book. In the summer 
of 1896 Miss Downing lent me VOL. I., but a day 
or two later I received another copy from England, 
sent to me (without my request) by my dear mother. 
I returned Miss Downing her copy, and starting for 
my mission station, four days journey from Chefoo, I 
first read the PLAN OF THE AGES in a mule-litter. It 
wonderfully opened my eyes, and I became more and 
more astonished at the beautiful Bible exegesis it revealed. 
Later on I received VOLS. II. and III., and continued 
to read with admiration. In November of the 
same year I wrote my first letter to Allegheny, asking 
for the TOWER, and more information of any kind 
along the same lines. After reading the three volumes 
myself, I read them again with my wife, and 
afterwards with my children, and God has been graciously 
pleased to lead both my wife and my eldest 
daughter into a joyous reception of the present truth. 

In 1897 I began to speak with my missionary colleagues 
about the character of the Judgment Day, for 
I was rejoicing in the strong consolation it gave me 
to see that God's purposes regarding the heathen— to 
give them a gracious and full opportunity to enter into 
life— were infinitely more grand and beneficent than 
I had ever dreamed. 

When the question of the Trinity loomed up it 
gave me a temporary shock, but I soon saw that I 
should neither honor the Father nor the Son by making 
the Lord Jesus more than the Bible clearly teaches, 
when examined without prejudice: and I recognized 
not only that all men should "honor the Son even as 
they honor the Father," but also that it was the supreme 
will of the Father to have it so. 

In 1898, being persuaded that this testimony is 
from God, and is in conflict with nominal Christianity, 
I did not consider it necessary to confer with flesh and 
blood, but resigned my connection with both the Baptist 
Church and the Mission Board with which I was 
connected. Being now free from the creeds and traditions 
of men my first desire was to tell to others 

R2633 :page 151 



the truth that had given me such comfort and joy. 

I was able to hold about a dozen meetings among 
missionaries in several stations, but my principal 
effort to reach the missionaries of the far East had 
to be done by correspondence, for they are scattered 
over thousands of miles of country, in some 500 
different stations. For this purpose I had a circular 
letter printed (a copy of which appeared in the TOWER, 
June 15, 1899, page 157). To each of these letters 
we added something further in writing, and enclosing 
one or more tracts, sent them all out by letter post, 
which we considered to be much more likely to command 
a reading than if the whole thing had been 
printed and sent out as printed matter. In all we 
despatched the following:— 1847 to missionaries in 
China; 385 to missionaries in Japan; 72 to missionaries 
in Corea; 20 to missionaries in Siam, etc.; making 
a total of 2324. The number of tracts sent out 
was about 5000. 

The vast majority ignored our appeal. This we 
fully expected, for we know that many are much too 
full of work for the Lord to hear him speaking to them. 
Still many replies were received, varying much in tone 
and spirit. No less than four accused me of blasphemy. 
One Doctor of Divinity thought I had lost my head; 
one predicted that I had begun to drift toward infidelity. 
Some deplored my departure from the faith, while 
yet others, more kindly in intention, begged me to return 
to the simplicity of the gospel; but none of them 
knew the pearl of great price I had found. 

One wrote to me thus:— "I am very grieved that 
you should have been so led away by the wicked one, 
and would solemnly urge you not to become one of 
Satan's agents, and a 'seducing spirit.'. ..We are 
living in perilous times, and I would warn you to beware 
of him who not only goeth about as a roaring 
lion, but also as an angel of light." Another wrote:— 
"It is just as Paul told Timothy, evil men will wax 
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. I am 
so sorry to think that you, Dr. Randle, are one who 
is being deceived by these evil men." These are both 
personal and esteemed friends, from whom, as from 
many more, I am now counted alienated. May the 
Lord deal very graciously with them. 

Others wrote thankfully, and showed their readiness 
for the harvest message. A well-educated Chinese 
woman wrote:— "I have been reading the tracts you 
so kindly left me, first with interest, then with delight, 
and I feel so much happier than I have been for 
a long time; the more I read the more I want to read 
and the more light I get, but there is still much I want 
to know. I would like to have MILLENNIAL DAWN 
and the pamphlet on Hell. If you tell me how to send 
the money I will be ever so much obliged." 

In all we sold 90 DAWNS and 38 pamphlets on 



Hell, Tabernacle Shadows, etc. One missionary, a 
young man who bought the four volumes, and has 
learned to appreciate and love the precious truths 
therein expounded, came out from Brethrenism, and 
is now standing alone in North China, bearing his 
testimony for the present truth. Four other missionaries 
are reading and studying the DAWNS with joy 
and profit, but have not yet come out of Babylon, which 
is to them no easy thing. I was also able to leave 25 
volumes in Shanghai for further sale, and will be able 
to send more out if required, so that I trust the harvest 
work in the far East may continue to develop, 
until all shall have received at least some testimony 
to the light of present truth. 

How true it is that the vast majority of the household 
of faith have no ear to hear the harvest message! 
As it was in Christ's first presence, so it is now. Immersed 
in their own work, many are preaching in his 
name, and doing wonderful works for him (Matt. 7:22), 
and yet they are as blind and deaf as the Pharisees 
of old, neither knowing nor doing the will of their 
Father in heaven. It is a strait gate indeed, and a 
narrow way, and verily few are finding the life they 
lead to. May we never cease to humbly and diligently 
inquire what is the Father's will concerning us, and 
abiding in Christ, that we may receive his spirit, may 
we be enabled not only to do that will, but also to see 
the loving-kindness that is in it! 

HORACE A. RANDLE. 



R2633 :page 151 

PARABLES OF THE KINGDOM. 

-MATT. 13:24-33. -MAY 27.- 

"The field is the world; the good seed 
are the children of the Kingdom." 

PARABLES of the Kingdom are really word-pictures 
of the Kingdom. No one of these parables 
represents the complete view of the subject, but 
merely one phase of it. The attentive Bible student 
will notice that the theme of the Gospel from first to 
last is the Kingdom. The message first given to Father 
Abraham was that his posterity would bless the 
world— that is to say, be a Kingdom exercising control 
over the world, and for its benefit and uplifting. 
This hope was before the Jewish mind for over sixteen 
hundred years, their expectation being that they would 
be exalted by God to that kingdom position and bless 
all the families of the earth, reconciling them to God. 
Our Lord's proclamation and that of his apostles, at 



R2633 : page 152 

the first advent was, "The kingdom of God is at 
hand"— God is now ready to establish his Kingdom 
if the people are ready to receive it. "But his own 
received him not," and the Kingdom was taken from 
them as a nation, to be given to the holy nation, the 
peculiar people, the royal priesthood, whom the Lord 
would select,— choosing first from fleshly Israel so 
many as were ready, and the remainder from amongst 
the Gentiles during this Gospel age. 

Naturally enough, the Jews did not grasp the 
situation, but were looking for our Lord to establish a 
fleshly Kingdom in their midst; and it was to counteract 
this erroneous thought that Jesus uttered these 
parables of the Kingdom— about nine of them— three 
being embraced in this lesson. The series began with 
the parable of the sower, examined in our last issue, 
which showed that there was but one true seed or message 
of the Kingdom, and that the fruitfulness of that 
seed would depend upon the character of heart into 
which it would fall. Next we have in order the parable 
of 

THE WHEAT AND THE TARES. 



Here the good seed or the message of the Kingdom 
which our Lord planted is represented as springing 
up in believers, and constituting them children or 
heirs of the Kingdom. It is very proper here to note 
that there is no other method at present of becoming 

R2634 : page 152 

a child of God, an heir of the Kingdom, except through 
the acceptance of the Kingdom message, with all that 
it implies of consecration to the Lord, even unto death 
—"if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be 
also glorified together" in his Kingdom.— Rom. 8:17. 

The object of these parables, then, was not to depict 
to our minds what the Kingdom would be like 
after it has been established in the world, but rather 
to picture before our minds something respecting the 
processes of development by which the Kingdom-class 
would be selected from amongst mankind and made 
ready for the Kingdom which is to be set up at the 
second coming of Christ in power and great glory,— 
when he shall establish that Millennial Kingdom for 
the very purpose of granting a judgment or trial to all 
the families of the earth— peradventure under the favorable 
opportunities of knowledge, etc., then granted 
unto them, many may choose life through obedience 
to God and attain it. 

As in the preceding parable the Lord Jesus himself 



was the sower of the good seed, so in this parable: 
It was Jesus who was sowing the seeds of truth, the 
promises, etc., which, springing up in the hearts of 
his disciples, transformed them to newness of life, 
making of them new creatures, and operating through 
them as his mouthpieces carried similar blessings 
wherever the message, the Gospel of the Kingdom, has 
gone. 

"While men slept" the enemy of the sower of the 
good seed, viz., Satan, came and sowed tares amongst 
the wheat. The Lord himself not only made possible 
the Kingdom by redeeming mankind, but announced 
his willingness to receive some as joint heirs of it, and 
then departed for the far country, even heaven itself, 
not to return until the time for his Kingdom to be established 
in glory and power. (Mark 13:34.) His chosen 
apostles faithfully guarded the field so long as they 
lived, but when they fell asleep in death, as the Lord has 
foreseen and here predicted, the Adversary found good 
opportunity to bring in false doctrines, to sow error, 
and through the error to produce amongst the wheat 
a crop of tares— darnel. Tares have the peculiarity 
that while growing they very decidedly resemble wheat, 
so that it is almost impossible to tell them apart until 
a certain degree of maturity is reached; then the difference 
is clearly discernible to all of experience. 

We see the fulfilment of this feature of the parable 
in Christendom to-day; the wheat was sown 
broadcast over a certain part of the field, the world of 
mankind, especially throughout Europe and America, 
and the tare-seed, the error and false doctrine, seems 
to have been sown still more liberally: and looking 
back we date that sowing as commencing as soon as 
the apostles were "fallen asleep." In consequence 
we find to-day Christians, true Christians, genuine 
Christians, begotten of the Word of God's promises, 
and fully in accord with it, and seeking to bring forth 
good fruit in their lives; and we also see an almost 
innumerable tare-class of imitation Christians, begotten 
not of the truth nor of the word of the Kingdom, 
utterly ignorant of it indeed; begotten of excitement, 
begotten of fear of hell, begotten of hopes of worldly 
advantage by joining a nominal church, begotten of 
pride and a desire to be in good society, begotten of 
social and financial ambition, etc. 

It is often very difficult to discern clearly between 
these wheat and tare classes; nor has it been necessary 
so to do down through the eighteen centuries of 
this age, for the Master declared that they were to be 
permitted to grow together until the harvest-time, 
when the ripening of both under the clearer light of 
the harvest-time would manifest each class thoroughly 
and distinctly, and then a separation would take place 
under his supervision. 

To our understanding we are now in the "harvest" 
or end of this age, and the light of present truth, 



as it shines for the Lord's people walking in the path 
of the just, which shines more and more unto the perfect 
day, as well as the light of present truth as it is 
shining upon the world and its social and financial 

R2634 : page 153 

and scientific questions, is tending to ripen both the 
wheat and the tares. The tare class no longer seeks 
to hide itself, but rather seems to claim that it is the 
genuine article, the scientific class, evolutionists, 
higher-critics, and in general the worldly-wise. The 
wheat class is also becoming more and more discernible, 
as it ripens in the faith and hope and joy begotten 
of the Gospel of the Kingdom. The separating 
work mentioned in the parable is not only at hand, but 
in progress; a cleavage and separation between nominal 
Christians (tares) and true Christians (wheat), 
as nearly every one who is awake discerns: and this 
separation will be more and more discernible year by 
year as the harvest work progresses, until its close. 

To have attempted to root out all the tares, and 
to have thus cleansed the wheatfield, at any time in 
the past, would have meant, as the parable shows, a 
complete shaking throughout the entire field, a commotion 
which would not have served the best interests 
of the wheat; hence the Lord has permitted for all 
these centuries that the two classes should live side by 
side and cooperate in church work, and unitedly profess 
to be his people, intending the separation to be 
manifest in the end of the age. And surely when the 
separation does occur it will cause a wonderful commotion 
in nominal Zion— "Babylon." 

The reapers are first to gather the tares and bind 
them in bundles to burn them. They do not burn 
them at once, but proceed to gather the wheat into the 
garner; and not until after the wheat is garnered does 
the fire consume the tares. We are to remember that 
this is a parable, and that the fire is as much a symbol 
as the tares, the wheat and the garner; hence we are 
not to expect a literal burning of the masses of Christendom 
in a literal fire, after the little flock, the faithful 
wheat class, the children of the Kingdom, have 
been gathered into the barn, the garner, the heavenly 
condition. 

The fire which will then come upon the wheatfield, 
from which the wheat has been gathered, and in 
which the tares are bundled, will be what the Scriptures 
elsewhere denominate "a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation"— social trouble, 
financial trouble, religious trouble, accompanied by 
famine and pestilence, and the end of it will be the 
disruption of all law, order and religion and the prevalence 
of anarchy. In that trouble all the tares will 
be destroyed, in the sense that none of them thereafter 
will claim to be what they are not— none of them will 



claim to be God's consecrated people. The various 
inducements by which they were brought to claim 
themselves to be Christ's followers, when they were 
not, will then be at an end. No longer will such a 
claim gain for them social or financial or other standing 
or advantage, and no longer will they make the 
false claim. 

Explaining the parable privately to his disciples, 
our Lord showed them that the gathering of the wheat 
into the garner meant the completion of the work of 
this Gospel age— the completion of the Kingdom class 
that shall bless the world, and he says, "Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father." Thus the Sun of Righteousness that 
is to arise in the Millennial morning, and which is to 
bless the whole world with the light of the knowledge 
of the goodness of God in Christ, is to be composed, 
not only of our Lord Jesus himself, the great light, 
but also of those chosen to be his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom, his associates in the shining forth of the 
light of truth. 

This was a totally different conception of the 
Kingdom from what had come to the minds of the 
Jewish people; and altho an explanation of the parable 
was given to the apostles, and they answered that 
they understood it, we may well doubt if they grasped 
the subject comprehensively, until after the day of 
Pentecost, when, as our Lord promised, the holy spirit 
brought them enlightenment of understanding. 

THE PARABLE OF THE MUSTARD SEED. 



The third parable-picture of the Kingdom in its 
present embryonic condition of development is intended 
to show that from a very small beginning the nominal 
church of this Gospel age would attain to quite 
considerable proportions. Its start is likened to the 
small mustard-seed, which attains to the largest size 
of its class of herbs. Yet this large development does 
not necessarily signify advantage or anything specially 
desirable, but on the contrary it becomes a disadvantage, 
in that the fowls of the air come and lodge 
in its branches, and defile it. The "fowls of the air" 
in the preceding parable of the sower represented Satan 
and his agents, and we are, we think, justified in 
making a similar application here, and interpreting 
this to mean that the Church planted by the Lord Jesus 
flourished rapidly and exceedingly, and that because 
of its attainments, strength, etc., Satan, through 
his agents, came and lodged in the various branches 
of the Church. They have been lodging in the branches 
of this Gospel Church for these many centuries, and 
are still to be found in her, a defiling element. They 
come in, not for the benefit of the mustard-seed tree 



or shrub, but for their own convenience and benefit. 
It is in harmony with this that in the present time the 
Lord speaks of Babylon, nominal Christendom, as 
"the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean 
and hateful bird."-Rev. 18:2. 
This contamination of the original good planting, 

R2635 : page 153 

by the Adversary and his agents, is as prominent in 
this parable as in the parable of the tares, merely 
showing it from a different standpoint. 

THE PARABLE OF THE LEAVEN. 



Here again we have a word-picture of the Lord's 
Church during this Gospel age of her development 
and preparation for the Kingdom glory to follow. 

In this parable we have brought to our attention 
the Lord's provision for the necessities of his people 
during this Gospel age— he did not leave them without 
a proper supply of food. The three measures of 
meal, equivalent to one ephah, constituted a good, 
liberal household supply. Like all of the Lord's provisions, 
it was good and pure, but as in the other parables 
the Adversary introduced impurity, falsity, etc., 
so in this one leaven is introduced into the meal. 
Leaven represents corruption throughout the Scriptures: 
in every other instance of its Scriptural use it 
is represented as an evil, an impurity, something that 
is defiling. For instance, the Israelites were to put 
away all leaven, all impurity, at the time of the Passover, 
that they might come the nearer to the Lord in 
holiness, etc. Again, our Lord Jesus refers to leaven 
as a corruption, bidding his disciples "Beware of the 
leaven of the scribes and Pharisees"— beware of the 
false doctrines, the corrupt influence, proceeding from 
the scribes and Pharisees. Again, the Apostle Paul 
represents the leaven as an evil thing, saying, "Purge 
out the old leaven."— Exod. 13:7; Luke 12:1; 1 Cor. 5:7. 

It would not seem reasonable that our Lord should 
use the word leaven here as Christian people generally 
suppose, in a good sense, as implying some grace of 
the holy spirit. On the contrary, we recognize consistency 
in all of his teachings, and we may be as sure 
that he would not use leaven as a symbol of righteousness 
as that he would not use leprosy as a symbol of 
holiness. 

How then shall we apply this parable? We answer, 
that the grace of God given to his people in the 
beginning of this age, (1) the faith once delivered to 
the saints, (2) the hope set before us in the Gospel, 
(3) love, the bond of perfectness, summed up the three 
measures of the Lord's provision for his people,— in 



partaking of which they were to become strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might. But gradually 
a woman arose, a false woman, represented in Revelation 
as a harlot, and as "that woman Jezebel." This 
Roman Catholic system obtained great power over the 
three measures of meal provided for God's household, 
and proceeded to mix therewith the leaven of her own 
impurity. The result was that all the family food, all 
the holy doctrines were contaminated with her false 
doctrines— nothing was left pure and clean, as handed 
to us originally by the apostles. The faith once delivered 
to the saints was distorted out of all semblance 
to its original simplicity; the hope set before us in the 
Gospel was changed to another hope entirely, unlike 
the original; the spirit of the Lord, Love, was perverted 
to a selfish love of creeds of men and human 
institutions. Alas! no wonder all Christendom is 
spiritually sick, because of this adulteration in its food 
supply. 

From this standpoint we readily see the force and 
meaning of the Master's declaration, that at his return 
he would gird himself, and come forth and serve his 
people, and that he would send forth at the hands of 
his servants things both new and old from the storehouse 
of his grace, "meat in due season." 



R2635 : page 154 

THE HARVEST PLENTEOUS-THE LABORERS FEW. 

-MATT. 9:35-10:8.-JUNE 3.- 

"It is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you."— Matt. 10:20. 

IT IS A GREAT tribute to the spirit of liberty 
which prevailed amongst the Jews, that our Lord 
could and did preach the Gospel of the Kingdom from 
city to city in their synagogues without molestation. 
In contrast, we may feel sure that were he to attempt to 
teach in any of the churches of to-day, of any denomination, 
he would be refused the privilege— no matter 
how faithfully he should adhere to the Scriptural 
declarations, and the more explicit his teachings the 
more unsatisfactory would they be to those now in 
charge, who have a theory of their own respecting the 
Kingdom, which will not stand investigation, and whose 
weakness they would not wish to have exposed. And 
this loss of liberty amongst Christians, as compared 
with the Jews, in religious matters, is to their injury 
—making it that much the more difficult for them to 
hear the joyful sound of the present harvest message. 

Notwithstanding all the healing of disease which 
our Lord accomplished, there were still multitudes of 



sick who flocked from various directions to him, in 
hope of relief, and when we read that he was moved 
with compassion for the distressed sheep of Israel, it 
gives us a deeper appreciation of his kindness, his 
love, his mercy, and we do not feel that it was strange 
that he who had left the glory of the Father and the 
holy angels, and had humbled himself to man's estate, 
should now feel compassion for the weak and sinful, 
the degraded, depraved and pained. Rather, we say, 

R2635 : page 155 

It was just like him! Without such a spirit of compassion 
how would he have become our Redeemer, how 
would he have left the heavenly glory on our behalf! 
And when we think of him as being still the same it 
gives us fresh confidence, that notwithstanding our 
weaknesses and imperfections, and the imperfections 
and weaknesses of the whole world, "the groaning 
creation," this same Jesus has compassion, not only 
upon his people, but in a large sense in due time will 
have compassion upon all the families of the earth, 
and grant to all a full opportunity of recovery from 
the blights of sin, mental, moral and physical. Surely 
he only waits for the due time— the time appointed of 
the Father; then with his faithful, his Kingdom-class, 
as the Seed of Abraham, he shall indeed, in times of 
restitution, bless all the families of the earth with a 
full opportunity of reconciliation to God, and thus of 
the attainment of life eternal. 

At the time of our lesson his work had not yet 
taken this broad sweep; nor has it yet, altho it has 
advanced beyond the confines of that time. Then his 
message of reconciliation and his help were extended 
only to the lost sheep of the household of natural Israel 
—not to the Samaritans nor to the Gentiles. Since 
then the blessing of reconciliation has been extended 
so that whosoever has an ear to hear, amongst the 
Gentiles or amongst the Samaritans, has the privilege 
of reconciliation during this Gospel age; but the great 
time of opening deaf ears and causing all to know the 
Lord, from the least to the greatest, will be in the 
Millennial age to follow this one. 

Compassion, however, will be an element of the 
Lord's character so long as there are any who need 
help, and desire it; and this will be until the close of 
the Millennial age, when all willing to receive the help 
will have received it, and the only ones not blessed 
thereby will be those who shall have deliberately rejected 
his help. Then, and not until then, will his 
compassion cease to be exercised, for then there will 
be no need of compassion, that which is perfect having 
come through the grace of God in Christ. 

Our Lord's compassion for the multitude suggested 
the sending forth of representatives, clothed 
with the power to heal the sick, etc., and in order to 



bring his disciples into line with his thought he told 

them that the harvest was plenteous, but the laborers 

were few, and that they should offer prayer on this 

subject. The substance of their prayer would necessarily 

be,— Lord of the harvest, send forth me as a 

reaper in the harvest. Jesus himself was the Lord of 

the harvest; the whole matter was in his hands, and evidently 

the twelve apostles quickly caught his thought 

and spirit respecting the increase of the harvest work, 

and in consequence he sent them forth two and two; 

yet he restricted their going, even as he had restricted 

his own ministry, to fleshly Israel, because all of God's 

covenants and promises were still confined to that nation, 

and would not be open to others until a due time 

which the Father had fixed, and specified through the 

Prophet Daniel— viz., the end of Israel's seventy weeks 

of favor— three and a half years beyond our Lord's 

crucifixion. 

"And he gave them power [authority] over unclean 
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner 
of disease and sickness." This power was holy spirit 
power, the same and yet different from that which 
they received later on at Pentecost from the Father. 
It was the same, in that the holy spirit or power of 
God is always the same power even tho it have differences 
of manifestation. It was holy, in that it was 
the spirit of our Lord Jesus, the holy spirit or power 
which was granted without measure unto him,— which 
he at this time communicated to these apostles, that 
they might, as his representatives, do a work in his 
name. 

Indeed, we may surmise that as the curing of 
disease caused vitality to go out of our Lord Jesus, to 
effect the cure, and that thus every cure meant the 
robbing of himself of his own life-powers, his own 

R2636 : page 155 

vitality, so in this case we should understand that the 
power for the healing of the sick was Jesus' power, 
that the disciples did not use their own vitality, but 
merely his, which he communicated to them, and 
authorized them to use, saying, "Freely ye have received, 
freely give." They were giving what cost 
them nothing, but which was costing Jesus much daily 
and hourly. It is when we get this thought of our 
Lord's yielding up his life daily in doing good to others 
that we can best appreciate how his perfect life was 
so thoroughly used up in the short space of three and 
a half years. 

The healing of the sick and the casting out of 
devils were but parts and incidents of their mission. 
In connection with it they were to preach the Gospel 
of the Kingdom— the good news that the Kingdom of 
God was nigh at hand; and the influence of the miracles 
should properly attract attention to the message, 



and make the people ready, yea, anxious, for the 
Kingdom. But so far as the record shows, the people 
were anxious for the miracles, the healing, but very 
indifferent respecting the Kingdom. They would take 
the cures from Jesus and his disciples, but if they 
wanted information respecting how and when the Kingdom 
of God would come they would follow their blind 
guides as usual. 

Nevertheless we may presume that the influence 
of this mission work throughout Israel was not entirely 
lost, and that after our Lord's crucifixion, and 

R2636 : page 156 

after the holy spirit had come upon the disciples at 
Pentecost, and they preached the Gospel of the Kingdom 
from a different standpoint, inviting all true Israelites 
to unite with Christ, and thus become joint-heirs 
of the Kingdom with him— then it was that 
many, no doubt, of these who had heard previously 
and witnessed the miracles, were that much better 
prepared to enter the embryotic Kingdom, the Church, 
through consecration of themselves to the Lord. And 
the conversion of several thousands within a few days 
after Pentecost corroborates this. 

The harvest in the end of the Jewish age foreshadowed 
or typified the harvest of this Gospel age. 
And now, as then, Jesus is the Lord of the harvest, 
and his disciples, his messengers, are his agents in 
the gathering work. Now, as then, he seems to speak 
to these, saying that the harvest is great and that the 
laborers are few, and that if we have his spirit in the 
matter, and entreat him to send us forth in his service, 
he will be pleased to do so. And many are thus 
praying from day to day, and seeking to see what 
more their hands can find to do in the harvest work. 
And the Lord is graciously with such to guide their 
service and to bless the results to their own good as 
well as to the good of others. As all of the disciples 
then prayed this prayer, and got opportunity to engage 
in some part of the harvest work, so now all true 
disciples should be praying this prayer and should be 
expecting and utilizing opportunities for service. 

The methods of the harvest work then and now 
may be slightly different, and yet they are considerably 
alike. This is not the fleshly Israel, and the 
blessings sent at the hands of the harvest reapers are 
not temporal blessings— not the healings of physical 
disease; but they are better than these— the opening 
of eyes of understanding, a far greater blessing than 
the opening of natural eyes; the removal of deafness 
as respects the Lord's great plan, a far more precious 
boon than the restoration of natural hearing, etc. 
Likewise, the offering of the Kingdom now is much 
more tangible and can be demonstrated much more 
clearly than was possible then, for it is nigh, even at 



the doors, and even the world can see the shakings of 
the present institutions, preparatory to their removal, 
that those things of truth and grace which cannot be 
shaken may remain, may be established, under the 
Lord's reign of righteousness. 

As the harvest laborers going forth now seek the 
ripe wheat of this Gospel age, each should remember 
the words addressed to the laborers in the Jewish harvest, 
"It is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you." Not that we are to 
expect to have miraculous powers of speech granted 
us, but that we are to be filled with the truth and its 
spirit; and then indeed it will be true that it will not 
be our own wisdom that we shall speak, nor our own 
plan that we shall declare, but the wisdom that cometh 
from above, and the plan of the Lord our God. 



R2636 : page 156 

A WICKED WOMAN AND A WEAK MAN. 

-MARK6:14-29.-JUNE 10.- 

GOLDEN TEXT:— "Be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; but be ye filled with the spirit."— Eph. 5:18. 

HERODIAS, a young woman, closely related to 
the reigning family of the Herods, was ambitious 
to become a queen; her uncle Philip, being the 
eldest son of Herod the Great, was presumptively his 
heir, and accordingly she pressed her suit, and with 
such success that she was accepted as Philip's wife. 
But at the death of Herod the Great it was found that 
he had disinherited his eldest son, Philip, and that 
Herod Antipas was made successor to the kingdom. 

It was necessary that Herod Antipas should go 
to Rome to be invested with regal authority, and while 
there he was the guest of his brother Philip and of 
Herodias, his wife and his niece, who of course was 
chagrined that she had failed of her ambition. However, 
ambitions know no bounds, especially selfish 
ones, and she seems at once to have set herself to captivate 
her younger uncle Antipas. Her cunning seems 
to have been without scruple of any kind, and remarkably 
successful. She so wrought upon Herod Antipas 
that he dismissed his wife, the daughter of the king 
of Arabia, and then Herodias, with her own child, a 
girl of probably fourteen, left her husband Philip, to 
become the wife of Herod Antipas, and thus to attain 
the position of queen, which she had coveted. 

The shortcomings and failures of others should 
become to us valuable lessons. In the case of Herodias 
before us we see illustrated the power of ambition, 
and how important it is that our ambitions be noble 



and true and pure. Nearly all there is of good accomplished 
in the world is somehow or other connected 
with good ambitions, and likewise nearly all the evil 
in the world is somehow or other associated with wrong 
ambitions. How important that we should learn to 
guard our ambitions, our desires, our hopes, our aims: 
we cannot accomplish anything without hopes and 
aims and ambitions; hence the necessity for securing 
good ones. And here let us note the fact that the 
majority of mankind have little or no ambition, and 

R2636 : page 157 

therefore are passing through life in a kind of maze, 
accomplishing comparatively little for themselves or 
others. This is a wrong condition; every man, woman 
and child should have a noble ambition, and should 
labor constantly for the attainment of that ambition. 

Others of the world have such ambitions as had 
Herodias: they are ambitious for wealth, or for social 
position and display, or for title and honor amongst 
men. These are all selfish ambitions, yet they are 
the powers that are moving politics and business and 
society every day— and we are sorry to say these are 
the ambitions which are moving many in the pulpits 
and many in various religious works. These are all 
wrong ambitions, and tho they may not all result as 
evilly as did that of Herodias they are all selfish, and 
all tend at least in the same general direction toward 
evil, and many are seduced by their selfish ambitions 
into doing those things which their consciences do not 
approve, and many such become seducers of others 
into evil deeds and reprehensible schemes. 

The Christian has before him the only proper, legitimate 
and worthy ambition possible at the present 
time; nor does the average or nominal Christian have 
these correct ambitions, but rather only such Christians 
as are taught of God, such as hear and heed the 
Word of the Lord. Before these are set the most noble, 
lofty ambitions; they are invited into the society, 
friendship and fellowship of the King of kings and 
Lord of lords. They are invited to become his companions, 
his brethren, co-workers together with him 
in the great work he is now accomplishing, and also 
to be joint-heirs with him in the great work of the 
Millennial Kingdom which he is shortly to inaugurate. 
Could there be a higher ambition than this set before 
mortal man? Surely not. Moreover, it is an ambition 
which tends to develop all the higher qualities of mind 
and character, for the terms and conditions of this 
fellowship are based upon purity of heart, devotion 
to the Lord, etc., so that he that hath these ambitions 
and hopes in him purifieth himself even as he is pure 
with whom he has become associated. Let us have 
these true ambitions before us, that they may crowd 
out and trample down the inferior ambitions of earth 



and sensuality, that lead to sin, groveling and 
devilishness. 

Herodias, having gained her point thus far, and 
finding herself in the coveted position of queen, undoubtedly 
felt greatly elated, flushed with her success; 
but in the midst of this elation came the news respecting 

R2637 : page 157 

John the Baptist, and how he had had an interview 
with Herod the king, and in the presence of 
courtiers and others had declared that it was not lawful 
for him to have Herodias for his wife. This was 
a shock to Herodias. Who would have thought that 
any man would have been bold enough to have spoken 
to the king on such a subject; and who would have 
thought that the king would have heard him patiently, 
and even have seemed interested in him, and have 
considered him a prophet of the Lord God? 

What wonder Herodias was angry with John the 
Baptist, and sought to wreck upon him her vengeance! 
Had she plotted and planned for years to reach her 
present position, and was she to be thwarted now, and 
to be cast out at the word of such a man as this? 
Moreover, if she were now cast out, it would mean a 
worse condition than ever, for of course she could not 
with decency go back to her husband Philip, and expect 
to be kindly received of him. Hence, if Herod 
should give ear to John the Baptist, and should permit 
his message to influence him, it might mean that 
Herodias would become an outcast. Can we wonder, 
then, that the evil ambition which had thus far ruled 
the woman's heart should now move her against the 
great prophet? We could only say that it would be 
the legitimate fruitage of such evil ambitions as she 
had for years been cultivating at the expense of every 
principle. It had not hesitated thus far at anything, 
and why should it hesitate even at murder, now in its 
greatest extremity? 

So it is with all evil, selfish ambition— the tendency 
is always downward, going from evil to evil, 
from sin to sin, from crime to crime. On the contrary, 
the ambitions which are inspired of the Lord tend always 
upward and upward, higher and higher— whatsoever 
things are just, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
holy, whatsoever things are in harmony with God— 
this is the tendency and impulse of the ambition which 
God inspires, the wisdom which cometh down from 
above, which is first pure, then peaceable and easy of 
entreatment, full of mercy and good fruits. 

Herodias had sufficient influence over her husband 
to secure the arrest and imprisonment of John: but 
apparently she was chagrined that she could not accomplish 
her desires to the full in securing his death. 
This was not so much because Herod had a mind of 



his own, but rather, as the narrative declares, because 
of his fear. He knew John to be a righteous man and 
holy, and, as the Revised Version expresses it, "kept 
him safe"— possibly fearing that if John were set at 
liberty Herodias would find agents for his destruction. 
Apparently John was granted unusual liberties in 
prison, for his disciples had opportunity to come to 
him and to bear messages to and from him; and the 
intimation is that Herod was perplexed respecting how 
he should deal with him, and occasionally sent for him 
and heard him with interest. 
Herodias concluded that this was a dangerous 

R2637 : page 158 

condition of things, and again her tact and shrewdness 
came to her assistance. Herod's birthday was 
approaching, and knowing that it was generally celebrated 
she proposed to make a special effort on that 
occasion to secure her ends. These birthday feasts 
were occasions of carousal; the king would be surrounded 
by the notable men of his realm; all would be 
considerably under the influence of wine, and then 
would be Herodias' opportunity for securing her 
wishes. She was crafty, however, and realized that 
John had an influence upon the king that to some extent 
at least off-set her own. She realized then that 
the king knew well her heart, and that he would hesitate 
to make a broad and liberal offer to her, and so 
she prepared her young daughter, educated in Rome, 
beautiful, attractive, that she should take the place 
before the king of the ordinary dancing girls who usually 
served on such occasions of revelry. 

This was supposedly a rare treat, a high honor to 
the king, that his niece, a young lady of refinement, 
should take the position ordinarily occupied by one of 
a low class. The ruse was successful; the king and 
the court were charmed with the girl's beauty, and 
Herod's mind, inflamed with the wine, was generous 
and unselfish to the extreme. It was customary to 
remunerate the dancing girls liberally on such occasions, 
in proportion to the dignity of the entertainer 
and now how liberally should he treat this one, who 
had so bewitchingly pleased himself and the company, 
and who was his own niece and step-daughter? He 
would ask her what she would like to have, and in 
her natural hesitancy he would press the matter upon 
her, to mention whatever it might be, even to the half 
of his kingdom; and then boastfully he would make 
oath to his liberality. The girl, no doubt, was instructed 
of her mother what to expect, and yet the 
crafty woman had kept the design wholly within her 
own grasp. Her daughter should not know in advance, 
lest she should make some error; she should 
merely first have the king's word that she would have 
her desire; then she was to come to her mother and 



receive instructions. Childlike, she seems not to have 
had great ambitions and wishes of her own, and hence 
she at once adopted her mother's wish, and asked for 
the head of John the Baptist on a platter. 

How horrible it seems, that anyone should have 
such a desire, such a murderous condition of heart! 
How strange it seems that a refined, educated woman 
should have such sentiments as would prompt such a 
request! Yet it was but the natural operation of the 
evil in the fallen heart. As the Apostle James says, 
the beginning of temptation is to be drawn away of 
desire, of ambition— enticed thereby. Then, when 
desire (ambition) has conceived, it bringeth forth sin; 
and sin when it is finished bringeth forth death.— 
James 1:14,15. 

Even the weak and despicable Herod was shocked 
by the request. He had been trapped, and he saw it; 
he realized at once that this was a scheme on the part 
of his wife, and that now, as on former occasions, she 
had proven more than a match for him. What would 
he do? Would he resent such infamous conduct, and 
denounce his wife and her daughter as murderers, plotters 
against innocent blood of a righteous man? Would 
he take his stand for justice and for truth, and resolve 
that now, seeing the depth of wickedness into which 
he had been ensnared, he would strive to turn about 
in his course, and follow the advice of this prophet of 
the Lord, and reform? 

No; he had not sufficient character for that; and 
from his wrong standpoint of view duty appeared to 
lie on the other side: First, had he not given his 
word, and should not the word of a king, given on his 
birthday, and at a feast, and in the presence of his 
chief generals and supporters, be inviolable? Moreover, 
in his maudlin condition he had riveted the matter 
with an oath, and now from his wrong standpoint 
pride asserted itself, and would not permit him to take 
the right course. Here again we see in an exaggerated 
form a principle which applies daily to worldly 
people in all of their affairs. They have a wrong standpoint 
before their minds. It is a standard of pride and 
self-esteem and love of approbation of others, and not 
a love for righteousness, for truth, and of deference 
for the Lord; and hence many have found themselves 
like Herod, led step by step, by what seems to them 
to be fate, and as they would say, beyond their control; 
but such matters are beyond the control of men 
because they are not under the proper control, because 
they are not the Lord's people; because they have not 
given their hearts to him. Therefore the affairs of 
life, instead of working for good to them and bringing 
them valuable lessons, helpful and elevating, are bringing 
them experiences which lead downward continually. 
The lesson here for the Lord's people is to 
make a proper start, to recognize the Lord, his will, 
his word, as the standard of justice and of truth, and 



to walk accordingly. A further lesson is, that wherever 
we may be, wherever the truth may find us, in a 
downward course, the only proper method is to at once 
recognize the voice of the Lord, the voice of right, as 
paramount, and to obey that voice, regardless of how 
matters may seem or appear to fallen fellow men. 
That the king was sorry is indeed an indication 
that his heart was not utterly corrupt, but that he 
should yield to what he knew to be wrong, through 
pride, is an evidence of utter lack of character. History 
shows that a certain amount of retribution came 

R2637 : page 159 

upon these guilty people forthwith: the sending back 
of his first wife led to a war between Herod and his 
father-in-law, the king of Arabia, in which Herod's 
forces were worsted seriously. Later on Herodias 
prompted Herod to apply to Rome for an enlargement 
of his dignity and power, but his application was rejected, 
and instead he was dethroned, lost all his title, 
power and influence, and the only redeeming quality 
noted in the case of Herodias is that she shared Herod's 
loss and banishment. Poor woman! Perhaps finally 
she learned that earthly ambitions are much like the 
apples of Sodom; perhaps she learned the folly of the 
course she pursued, that it brought no true joy, no 
true blessing, but only excitement and one disappointment 
after another. Perhaps, too, King Herod learned 
some lessons. We read that he heard of Jesus and his 

R2638 : page 159 

wonderful works, and that superstitiously he concluded 
that this must be John risen from the dead. Altho not 
a Jew, but of the family of Esau, he nevertheless had 
some knowledge of God and of the hopes set before 
the Israelites, and possibly his evil experiences brought 
him some valuable lessons. 

So with many of the world in the present time: 
their experiences are bad, and yet they impress lessons 
upon themselves, and upon others, which ultimately 
may be of service, of value. As we look at their mistakes 
let us learn to profit by avoiding them in our 
lives. Let us remember, too, that all ambitions and 
temptations are not on the large and terrible scale of 
this picture before us, yet that the same principles are 
involved. Let us learn to recognize principles, whether 
operating in little things or in great ones, and that he 
who is faithful to right principle in small things will 
be faithful in greater trials. Let us first of all learn 
that the proper course for us is to consecrate ourselves 
to the Lord, and then seek to have the lawful and laudable 
ambitions which he will inculcate through the 
Word. 



R2638 : page 159 

FAITHFUL CO-LABORERS HEARD FROM. 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

DEAR BRETHREN: --I have read carefully Bro. 
Russell's five volumes of DAWN, most of it the second 
time, and parts of it three and four times. I am satisfied 
Bro. Russell is correct on the general plan and 
application of God's Word, and the study of the Bible 
under his instruction is made easy and fascinating. 
It has been a great blessing to me and I can go about 
my daily business now with a prayer of thanksgiving 
in my heart continually, and can hardly wait to get 
through the cares of the day, so I can read God's 
Word and find out more about it. 

I had been a member of the M.E. Church here 
for about fifteen years, ten of which I was superintendent 
of Sunday schools, trustee and steward. I 
never was satisfied, tho I tried to do my duty as a 
member. I had no "plan of the ages" in my head, 
and all was confusion. The church was full of envy, 
deceit, hypocrisy, lies, malice, etc. I plead for months 
with the members for "better living," but did no good, 
so two years ago last August I severed my connection 
with same, and was inclined to drift into unbelief, 
till I got hold of your works about six months ago; 
and thank God! I have more confidence now in God's 
Word than I ever had before, and can see the beauty, 
justice, wisdom and love of God as it is therein manifested 
to poor human souls. 

I have five full sets of MILLENNIAL DAWN (five 
volumes each) now in circulation in this town where 
we think the parties will investigate and be benefited. 
I have lived in this place 24 years and when I was a 
member of the M.E. Church and paying them from 
$50 to $75 per year was considered by them at least a 
good man; but now the preachers devote a good deal 
of their time to denouncing me and "the devil's work 
of DAWN" as they term it. They denounce awhile, 
and then they pray for me awhile. Well, that is 
something they did not formerly bother about much, 
I think. I get their prayers anyhow, whether it does 
me any good or not. 

We now have about twelve believers in this neighborhood 
and others reading and thinking. I especially 
want to mention one brother, who has been reading 
your works for 20 years. I believe he is the best 
Christian, and most devoted, practical liver in Christ 
I ever saw, tho church members say he is crazy. I 
wish myself as crazy as I know him to be. [So our 
Lord and the Apostles were said to be "beside themselves." 
-EDITOR.] 

Will you have a meeting this summer like the 



one you held last summer in St. Louis? If so let me 
know, as I want to attend if possible. 

Yours in Christ, N. B. JINNETT-Iilinois. 

[We expect to have a "Believers' Convention" in 
Chicago the latter part of August.— EDITOR.] 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR SIR:— I take the opportunity to write to 
you, in manifestation of my sincere and heartfelt approval 
of your magnificent works, now in my hand. 
Your volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN I must hold and 
confess to be a veritable Bible Key, justly deserving 
the appellation they bear— Helps for Bible Students. 
I have in my possession volumes one to five, in addition 
to What Say the Scriptures About Hell? and Spiritism. 
Sir, before offering any opinion or remarks, 
permit me to say, first, that with regard to your little 
work on What Say the Scriptures About Hell? I do a 
little Greek reading. I know nothing of Hebrew, but 
I must confess that it puzzled me beyond measure to 
find out where our early interpreters of the Scriptures 
found the substance or foundation of that horrible 
doctrine. And gaining much, very much knowledge 
on the subject by reading that little work, I have 
to ask the question, "What was their motive for establishing 
this hell torment doctrine?" The only answer 
I can find is that it was from some selfish end, to 
frighten men into Christianity, a plan the Almighty 
never intended, having made man a free agent to choose 
for himself. But these "devil doctrines" will soon 

R2638 : page 160 

have to give way to the light of present day truth. 
My profession being that of Christian work— a catechist 
and schoolmaster— in the latter position I sometimes 
find it difficult indeed, after choosing a text, 
to know where to begin or where to end; not because 
words fail me, but from the fact that the doctrines I 
have been brought up in were so twisted and distorted 
that I did not know where was solid ground. I am 
not ashamed to confess that many passages appeared 
so difficult that I preferred to leave them to themselves. 
But thanks to your invaluable helps, many 
such confounding passages are now as clear to me as 
daylight. Sir, I hold that Almighty God himself has 
raised you up to be the purveyor of heavenly food for 
his famishing children; so that I need not say anything 
more than wishing you a fair share of his divine 
blessing. I am still reading and studying my volumes. 
At first there were some things that seemed to conflict 
with my views and opinions, and where disagreement 
crept in, but that, I hold, was because I did not grasp 
the full purport of the subject, for no sooner than 
grasped, disagreement disappeared, leaving the approval 
to remain. I never quickly agree to a special 



subject or point, before I thoroughly sift and strain 
and pry into it to find its foundation and harmony. I 
came to this country in November, 1898, under the 
appointment of the Bishop of Jamaica. Before I left 
my island I once had the opportunity of seeing the 
first volume of DAWN, which a friend possessed, but 
partly destroyed— back and inside leaves were gone. 
I determined to find out the authorship, and was gratified 
in having my wish supplied. Mr. A. M. Brownfield 
is the man from whom I obtained all. He is my 
constant visitor since. There is also another brother 
who has written me from Colon, after learning I was 
a reader of DAWN, Bro. Isaiah Richards. Sir, I am 
your disciple, I can assure you; and I hope one day 
to find myself where you are. This, I hope, is but 
the first of the many letters I expect to write. Yours 
in Christ, H. E. WYNTER.-Isthmus of Panama. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many thanks for the 
kindly words and token of your letter of Dec. 25th. 
The gracefulness of your action manifests an imitation 
of him who was the embodiment of grace. (Psalm 45:2.) 
Oh, to get nearer to him in thought, word 
and deed! The Christ-like spirit is so very rare, but 
the genuine article so very precious. I trust you will 
always bear in mind how very much we treasure up 
your many labors of love, and how our unceasing desire 
and prayer is, that Jehovah's richest blessing may 
constantly rest upon you and the great work committed 
to your care. 

In our work here we are striving to do what we 
can. We are not realizing all we desire, for our hearts 
are so human, that, battle as one will, the prevailing 
spirit of indifference brings at times a keen sense of 
disappointment. The truth is so glorious that one is 
saddened at the reception it meets from the vast majority. 
But then, of course, God's "due time" is the 
grand refuge and sweetener; the "lamps" of the "ten 
virgins" are not intended to take the place of the sun, 
but to light their individual pathway. Each must 
have his own lamp and oil in it. The great bulwark 
of error is leaning upon others: true faith must be individual, 
endurance likewise. A mob of sheep rushing 
after a leader of their own nature is the general 
position; the Good Shepherd leads his sheep and calls 
them each by name. The body of Christ is to be one, 
as a collective number (John 14:21-23), but this oneness 
is contributed to by each individual. 

How the truth isolates! It demands a strong individuality 
in each. Surely the life of Christ shows 
this most clearly. He was a reflex of the Father; he 
was the Father's great and perfect representative. 
"I seek not mine own will, but his that sent me." 
And yet what a wondrous personality! His was not 



a passive service, he was not a machine (holy spirit 
does not destroy personality) but an active, willing, 
responsive being, God's "vessel unto honor." Christ's 
moral nature responded to the touch of God like a bud 
to the rays of the sun or a grand organ to the fingers 
of a musician, but he was alone, in the most complete 
sense, so far as this world was concerned. His motives, 
ideals and practices were so different. "He dwelt 
amongst us." Fellowship with God was his only 
source of companionship, "God was with him." Why? 
"Because I do always those things which please him." 
Surely this is our pattern: individual fellowship and service 
is the one means for individual strength. "Study 
to show thyself approved unto God." The bride of 
the Lamb when gathered into one is plural, but its 
building up is in the singular. 

What a grand prospect the "truth" presents as 
the goal of this individual discipline! A perfect nature, 
"satisfied when I awake in thy likeness;" the goal of 
human creeds is paltry, absurd,— a future state of locality 
merely— going to heaven, missing "hell!" 

There is beautiful scenery on earth, but it does 
not give rest or peace or happiness. Our restless nature 
is like a troubled sea, nothing outside can calm 
it; the trouble is in man; that is where it started, and 
that is where the reform must be made. The chief 
value of heaven is because of God's presence and nature, 
"it is his throne;" so with the earth: far greater 
planets roll in space, but Christ places this planet as 
next in importance to God's throne, not because of its 
intrinsic value, but because of God's promises, purpose 
and presence. "The earth is my footstool," hence 
Jesus says, "Swear not by it." "Forever with the 
Lord," in his nature, throne and work is the perfect goal. 

But surely this perfect goal embraces even more; 
it is not merely for the individual believer and overcomer. 
"What shall they do, that are baptized for the 
dead?" etc. The joy set before Christ embraced more 
than his own perfect bliss. His glorified body is not 
only perfect, but it is a conquering one, "according to 
the working whereby he is able to subdue all things 
to himself." Preeminently this feature separates the 
"truth" from all human conceptions. Something to 
do, something to realize, "to show forth the praises of 
him who hath called us," etc. "The glory that shall 
be revealed in us." Service is the grandest law of 
God's universe. "My Father worketh hitherto, and 
I work." His angels are ministering spirits; perfect 
happiness and rest will only be realized by a perfect 
nature performing perfect service. May it be ours 
more and more to enter now into the true glory of 
service to see its lofty standard, its eternal basis, and 
by and by to see his face and enter into his joy. 

Your brother in the one blessed hope, 

ALFRED PEARSON, -New South Wales. 



page 161 
VOL. XXI. JUNE 1, 1900. No. 11. 
CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 163 

Why Rev. Lyman Abbott is Not a 
Universalist 163 

Animals Suffer Less than Man 165 

The War Spirit Growing 166 

Poem: "I that Speak am He" 168 

Philadelphia Convention, June 16-18 168 

Full Assurance of Faith 169 

"Give Us this Day Our Daily Bread" 171 

Review of the Quarter's Studies 173 

Questions and Answers 174 

Faithful Co-Laborers Heard from 176 

Special Notice to Subscribers 162 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

We have filled back orders and have now a good supply of this 
precious book. It is, we think, the very choicest collection of poems 
and hymns in the world. Most of them are old and familiar. 
493 pages, cloth-bound, 50 cents (to TOWER subscribers 25 cents) 
plus 8 cents postage. No friend of present truth can afford to 
be without this book: hence if there be on our list any who 
cannot afford the price, let him so inform us and we will endeavor 
to have him provided free. 

The tunes are generally copyrighted but most of them can 
be found in Gospel Hymns 1-4 and Winnowed Hymns and Songs of 



Pilgrimage. These we can now supply postpaid, the three for $1.80. 
SPECIAL NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS. 

The labors of our office assistants have been greatly increased 
since we proffered WATCH TOWER subscribers the wholesale 
rate on DAWNS, etc.,— the time being lost in looking whether 
the writer's name appears on our lists. Hereafter, therefore, 
those expecting wholesale rates will be required to state in their 
order that they are on our lists. 

Please also remember to give full street address in each letter 
and to write name at top of first page; and when notifying 
us of a change of address say wherefrom as well as where to. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 
--ALSO-- 
WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 

This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 
In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 



R2639 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



WHY REV. LYMAN ABBOTT IS NOT A UNIVERSALIST. 



AT A GENERAL CONVENTION of Universalists 

one session was set apart as "Interdenominational 

Evening," and amongst other speakers 

was Dr. Lyman Abbott, a representative Congregationalist, 

who gave his reasons for not believing in 

universal salvation. Speaking as a liberal Congregationalist 

he declared that modern Congregationalism 

does not accept the doctrine of eternal punishment as 

preached by the celebrated Jonathan Edwards of the last 

century. 

We make quotations from Dr. Abbott's discourse 
as follows:— 

"I do not believe that any one of God's creatures 
will be kept by God in eternal existence simply that 
he may go on in sin and misery forever. The proposition 
has long since become spiritually unthinkable 
to me. I might perhaps believe that a soul could suffer 
eternally; but I can not believe that any being that 
God ever made will be kept in existence by God that 
he may go on in sin eternally. 

"What was the old doctrine of eternal punishment? 



The Savoy Confession, up to about the middle 

of this century, was the recognized expression of orthodox 

Congregationalism. Not that it was binding 

on orthodox Congregationalists; but it was the only 

historic creed they possessed. Except in the matter 

of polity, and one or two minor matters, it was identical 

with the Westminster Confession of Faith; and 

this was the substance of its statement: It declared 

that our first parents fell by eating the forbidden fruit; 

that, they being the root of all mankind, their guilt 

was imputed and their sinful and corrupted nature 

was conveyed to all their posterity; that as a result 

we are 'utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite 

to all good;' that from the race thus lost and ruined 

in the Fall, 'by the decree of God, for the manifestation 

of His glory, some men and angels are predestined 

unto everlasting life, and others are foreordained to 

everlasting death;' that those not effectually called, 

God was pleased, 'for the glory of his sovereign power 

over His creatures, to pass by, and to ordain them to 

dishonor and wrath for their sin, to the praise of his 

glorious justice;' and that those 'not elected, altho 

they may be called by the ministry of the Word, and 

may have some common operations of the Spirit, yet 

they never truly come to Christ, and therefore can not 

be saved.' 

"Specifically, and clause by clause, I disown that 
statement.... This doctrine is inconsistent with the 
character of a righteous God. I might fear such a 
God; I might tremble before such a God; I might, 
because I was a coward, obey such a God; but I could 
not reverence such a God. It is inconsistent with the 
faith that Jesus Christ is God manifest in the flesh, 
for it was not His nature to pass any by or to ordain 
any to dishonor and wrath. It is inconsistent with 
the Scripture; inconsistent with the parable of the 
prodigal son, which is Christ's epitome of the Gospel; 
inconsistent with the declaration of Paul that 'every 
knee should bow and every tongue confess Jesus Christ 
to be the Lord, to the glory of God the Father'; inconsistent 
with the very chapters of Romans on which 
it is supposed to be founded, for they close with the 
declaration that 'God hath concluded all in unbelief, 
that he might have mercy upon all;' inconsistent with 
the splendid picture John paints, of the time when 
every creature that is in heaven and on earth and under 
the earth, and such as are in the sea, shall give 
praise and glory to the God of their salvation." 

These noble words and logical arguments surely 
appeal to all God-loving and God-honoring hearts and 
heads; and we are glad so to think: it is a sign of 
heart enlargement which should be admired, even tho 
the speaker (like other great men of our times) has 
swerved far from the Bible under the influence of Evolution 
and Higher Criticism, and is no longer trusting 
in the great sacrifice for sins "finished" at Calvary 



for salvation. But Dr. Abbott said some more good 
things in that discourse. In telling his Universalist 

R2639 : page 164 

audience why he does not believe in universal salvation, 
he displayed excellent logic. In reasoning that 
"the ultimate fact in human life is the freedom of the 
human will," he said:— 

"I know that I can choose the good, and therefore 
I can choose the evil. What I find true in myself 
I believe to be true in every other man; he can 
choose the good, and therefore he can choose the evil. 
And while I wistfully desire— yea, and sometimes devoutly 
hope— that when the great drama of life here 
and hereafter is ended, all God's creatures will have 
chosen the good— I do not know. If I were a Calvinist, 
I should be a Universalist. If I believed that God 
could make all men righteous, I should be sure that 
he would make all men righteous; otherwise he would 
not be a righteous God. But I start from the other 
pole. I begin with my own absolute freedom. I recognize 
as a fact, in my life, in my philosophy and in my 
preaching, that, in the last analysis, the destiny of 
every man is in his own hands. Father may persuade, 
mother may entice, influences may environ, God himself 
may surround with all possible persuasions, but 
in the last analysis the destiny of every man is in his 
own hands. And what he will do with it I do not 
know. 

"Why, if God be good, has he made a world in 
which there is sin? Why has he not made a world 
sinless? Could he not? Certainly; he not only could, 
he has. The birds are sinless. But he could not make 
a world in which are free moral agents able to choose 
the good without giving them at the same time power 
to choose the evil. Power to choose the one is power 
to choose the other; and a world in which there are 
some men who choose shame, dishonor, sin and death, 
is a better world, I dare to say, than a world made of 
machines that could choose neither the good nor the 
evil." 

We fully concur with the foregoing, reminding 
our readers nevertheless of the necessity for remembering 
the two opposite views of free agency which 
may properly be taken from different standpoints, as 
shown in our issue of Dec. 1, 1899, page 264. 

But two queries naturally arise: 

(1) How does Dr. Abbott harmonize his two 
propositions, (a) that the decision respecting his harmony 
or disharmony with God lies with man himself, 
individually; (b) that God has made no provision for 
the eternal torture of any? The logical mind will 
surely inquire, What then will become of the wicked 
who are unwilling to be saved on divine terms and 
hence unfit for the rewards of eternal bliss, if the 



time is to come when "every creature that is in heaven 
and on the earth and under the earth and such as are 
in the sea shall give praise and glory to the God of 
their salvation"? 

Is it possible that so fine a logician as Dr. Abbott 
has overlooked the logic of his own expressions? Oh 
no! We answer, the connecting link in the Doctor's 
logic is clear to his own mind, but he does not care to 
make it very public because it is not very popular yet 
—the same is true of many others of the ablest ministers 
in all denominations. The connecting link of his 
logic will be seen at once when it is stated,— he believes 
in the utter destruction of the incorrigibly wicked, 
as we do, and as we teach publicly. 

But public teachers who keep silence on this subject 
and put their light under a bushel, do so at a 
great cost— the cost of further guidance of the Lord 
into the "all truth" promised. Oh, how many ministers 
in seeking to avoid the senseless charge, "Annihilationist," 
have suffered God's character to be blasphemed 
and his people to be deluded by the doctrine 
of an eternal torment of the unsaintly;— preferring 
numbers and popularity and honor among men and the 
financial emoluments of these rather than the truth! 
Alas! they seek to be wise and prudent according to 
this world's standards, entirely overlooking the fact 
that the Lord declares he will not reveal his secrets 
to such. Our Lord pointed this out, saying, "I thank 
thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou 
hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent and 
hast revealed them unto babes"— who will utter the 
truth regardless of consequences.— Matt. 11:25. 

(2) Some one will say then, If Dr. Abbott believes 
thus in the final reign of righteousness and the 
destruction of the incorrigibly wicked, is he not very 
close to the truth and a very hopeful subject? 

We answer, No. At one time, so far as we might 
judge of any man's heart by his writings, Dr. Abbott 
was very close to the truth— a believer not only as 
above but also in the Atonement and in the second 
coming of him who made the atonement with his own 
precious blood. But the Doctor seems to have permitted 
himself to become one of the "wise and prudent" 
who prefer honor one of another rather than 
that which cometh from God only. (John 5:44.) At 
any rate, instead of coming out more and more boldly 
for the truth on these unpopular subjects, he seems to 
have put the light he had under a bushel until it has 
gone out. For according to Dr. Abbott's present teachings 
he undoubtedly is now an Evolutionist with 
all that implies of rejection of the Bible doctrine of a 
fall by our first parents (and we in them) from perfection 
and harmony with God— into sin and its mental, 
moral and physical degeneration and death. And 
the rejection of this implies a rejection of the Atonement; 
for if man did not fall he needed no redemption 



from the fall— no Redeemer. And if the "ransom for 
all" (1 Tim. 2:6) is denied, then logically "times of 
restitution" to a former estate (Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:55,61) 
must be denied also. And accordingly there 
would be no object in establishing the Millennial 
Kingdom— for Evolutionists argue the world is progressing 

R2640 : page 165 

splendidly under Evolution and needs Christ's 
Kingdom no more than it needed a sin-offering when 
it had committed no sin and was under no 
condemnation. 

Thus nearly all the great and wise and prudent 
according to the course of this world, professing themselves 
to be wise, have by leaving the truth of God's 
revelation, the teachings of the Bible, become foolish; 
and their foolish hearts have become darkened. Indeed 
we believe this to be the secret of the greater 
blindness and more rapid falling away of ministers 
than other Christians from the very hub of revealed 
truth, the ransom, and hence from all truth. With 
greater advantages for learning the truth than others 
they have not loved truth so as to search for it, especially 
when they perceived that their search would 
not only cost time and energy; but the truth being 
now as ever unpopular would cost them popularity 
with all classes wedded to errors. 

In consequence many ministers have so trifled 
with truth and with their own consciences that they 
not only have lost love and relish for truth as truth, 
but have even lost much of that keen perception for 
truth which always accompanies a tender and trained 
conscience. This is well attested by the frequent confessions 
of prominent ministers appearing lately in the 
public press. They confess to systematic deception 
practiced for years respecting their beliefs versus their 
confessions. And the fact that this is done without 
even an apology or any manifestation of shame for so 
ignoble a course demonstrates that these gentlemen 
either never had much conscience to hurt, or, as we 
prefer to think, that they have so long and so persistently 
trodden it in the mire of self-interest and 
"prudence" that it has lost its life, its power. It is 
for this reason that the ministers of all denominations 
are much less amenable to the truth than the consecrated 
"sheep" of their flocks;— just as it was in the 
end of the Jewish age. Not only so, but they are 
the greatest enemies of the truth— and now as eighteen 
centuries ago many of them do not hesitate to say all 
manner of evil falsely, openly and by insinuation, to 
stir up the evil passions of their deluded followers to 
reject and to crucify the Truth! Woe is surely coming 
upon all such hypocritical scribes and Pharisees, who 
will neither enter the Kingdom themselves nor permit 
those who would be so inclined to enter.— Compare 



Matt. 23:13. 

LOWER ANIMALS SUFFER LESS THAN MAN. 



Infidelity's hyper-criticism has charged the Bible 
and the Bible's God with unsympathetic brutality in 
commanding Israel to sacrifice sheep, oxen, goats and 
doves by the tens of thousands— causing these innocent 
creatures intense pain merely to typify something future. 
Moreover, it is claimed that the method commanded 
by Moses' law for the killing of animals for 
food— namely by bleeding to death— is barbarous, 
causing needless prolongation of the animal's sufferings: 
and the Hindus of India are pointed to as examples 
for Christians, because they will not taste animal 
food even if starving: whereas the founder of 
Christianity, while giving his followers the law of 
Love, not only neglected to mention the lower animals 
but ate thereof himself. 

Our answer has been that it is a mere supposition, 
quite unproven, that the lower animals suffer pain in 
anything like the degree known to man:— especially 
such as under the Jewish Law were prescribed as food 
for man. In our opinion the cutting of the throat, 
while it does not exhaust life instantly, does render 
those animals unconscious so that they suffer no pain 
whatever. The horse and the dog, not permitted the 
Jews as food, give many instances of greater nerve-sensitiveness 
than do the ox, sheep, etc., and more 
than any other animals, tho very much less than man. 
Doubtless the sensitiveness of these two is designed to 
make them more tractable to man's control and therefore 
more useful and companionable to him. 

We clip from the Pittsburg Press an article corroborative 
of the above that may be both interesting 
and profitable reading, as follows:— 

ANIMALS WHICH HAVE NO PAIN. 
RECENT EXPERIMENTS SHOW THAT LOWER ORDERS 
ARE NOT SENSITIVE. 



"The old writers, according to science, assumed 
that an insect has sensations and feelings resembling 
our own— that it sees what we see and suffers as we 
would suffer if treated in the same way. Recently the 
pendulum has swung in the other direction, and high 
authorities practically deny that the lowest organisms 
feel anything that can properly be called pain. 

"Thus the late Prof. W. W. Norman, of the University 
of Texas, maintained as the result of experiments 
on the flounder and lower species, that the reactions 
of these creatures against injury do not indicate 



pain sensations at all. 

"Certain motions are said to express pain, because 
they always accompany injury. Since they do accompany 
injury they are said to indicate that the injury 
causes the animal to suffer. This, the professor says, 
is a mere argument in a circle. He regards movements 
as the immediate consequence of physical stimulation. 
To prove his position he made a considerable number 
of experiments. 

"The most striking and classic of these experiments 
were made on the common earth worm. If such 
a low animal be divided at its middle transversely, only 
the posterior half shows those squirming and jerking 
movements which, anthropomorphically viewed, seem 

R2640 : page 166 

to indicate pain; the anterior half (containing the 
brain) crawls, as ordinarily, away. Now, if each of 
these halves be halved again, the posterior segment 
of each squirms while the anterior halves crawl away. 
This same process may be continued with precisely 
like result until the pieces are no longer large enough 
to crawl independently. 

"This striking phenomenon is explained in part 
by the two sets of muscular fibers in the worm, one 
longitudinal, causing the squirming and jerking, and 
the other circular, which produce the crawling. Why 
in the posterior segments the former set should be 
initially stimulated and in the anterior the latter set, 
Professor Norman says he does not know. 

"The abdomen of a hermit crab may be cut in two 
without any 'but a very slight response' from any remaining 
movable organ. 'Limulus' stops a few seconds 
when four or five abdominal segments are cut 
away, then proceeds quickly breathing as before. 

"'Geophilus' cut in two in the middle continues 
its crawling, the front half going forward and the rear 
half backward. Millipedes divided while walking do 
not hasten nor stop nor jerk. Dragon flies lose part 
of their abdomens without any appreciable change in 
position. Eels continue to eat when their abdomens 
are cut away during the process. 

"Lastly, sharks and flounders, provided a current 
of water circulates through their gills, will allow the 
most tedious and deep-going operations on their heads 
without the slightest appreciable movement indicative 
of pain." 



Many friends of the Truth have queried whether 
or not God's plan reveals any provision for the lower 
animals. They query whether or not there will be 
deaths among the lower animals during the Millennium 
and if so if that would not cause pain to their 



human friends, etc. 

Scripture promises are addressed only to man and 
refer to the lower animals only as they stand related 
to man's welfare. For instance, the promise that the 
lion shall eat straw like the ox and lie down peaceably 
with the lamb, is for man's comfort and assurance, and 
by no means implies everlasting life to the lamb. Altho 
all animals have suffered by the fall of man, it is 
indirectly, in that their ruler, their king, lost his balance, 
his full sanity, and hence has been unable to 
regulate and govern properly his subjects. Restitution 
times therefore will bring its blessings chiefly to man, 
who because of his much higher and finer organism has 
suffered by his degradation and death sentence immeasurably 
more than the brutes. 

We may expect death among the lower animals 
during the Millennium as they shall live out their 
periods of usefulness. And by reason of the contrast 
the everlasting life provided for man (made in God's 
image) will be the more appreciated. Since summer 
and winter are to continue (Gen. 8:22) we may know 
that the flowers and all vegetation will likewise die 
and revive perennially, reminding restored and perfected 
man of the blessed change that came to him by 
divine grace through Jesus, his Redeemer and Lord. 

These conditions prevailing in the animal and 
vegetable worlds will bring no pain, neither sorrow 
nor crying (Rev. 21:4) because all of the former things 
will have passed away. Amongst these will be present 
misconceptions by which we are inclined to attribute 
to the lower animals human feelings and sentiments- 
some even carrying these mistaken notions to flowers 
—loving and talking to their flowers as others do to 
a pet dog— imagining reciprocal feelings and 
sentiments. 

Restitution will not only bring to men greater 
knowledge but also sounder minds, in harmony with 
the divine mind,— so that their loves and hopes, like 
the divine promises, will measurably pass by the lower 
creatures and think and plan for and be absorbed in 
uplifting man— "the groaning creation." And already 
those who receive a knowledge of the divine plan and 
with it the spirit of the Lord, find themselves no longer 

R2641 : page 166 

disposed to waste valuable time and affection upon 
dogs, flowers, etc., while the Lord's "brethren" need 
sympathy and aid and counsel in the narrow way, and 
while mankind in general are in so deplorable a condition 
as at present— mental, moral and physical. And 
such a change of sentiment is an evidence of their attaining 
more of "the spirit of a sound mind."— See 
2 Tim. 1:7. 

THE WAR SPIRIT GROWING. 



For years Germany, France, Italy, Austria and 
Russia have had military fever, as is well known; and 
now the same has spread in virulent form to Great 
Britain and her colonies and to the United States. 
Just what bearing this may have on the great time of 
trouble impending is somewhat difficult to prognosticate, 
but it forcefully reminds us of the Prophet's pronouncement 
respecting our day: "Proclaim ye this 
among the Gentiles: Prepare war, make up the mighty 
men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come 
up [to battle]: beat your plowshares into swords, and 
your pruning hooks into spears: let the weak say, I am 
strong." The context following clearly describes the 
great day of trouble in which the symbolic sun and 
moon shall be darkened and the voice of the Lord shall 
be heard in rebuke of evil and the present symbolic 
heavens and earth shall be shaken.— Joel 3:9-16; 
Heb. 23:26-29. 

In the light of the Boer war and the resistance 
shown to be possible for a weak nation when well 
armed with modern weapons, we need not wonder if 
some of the small, weak nations now feel themselves 

R2641 : page 167 

comparatively strong, and if they will be proportionately 
independent— even to arrogance. Belgium for 
instance and Switzerland are amongst the weak nations 
now feeling themselves strong: and it is said that the 
latter is now spending on its military forces and armaments 
(pro rata to its population) more than any 
other nation of Europe. 

Of course this war spirit may quiet down; but 
while it lasts— while every boy's heart is throbbing 
with military enthusiasm and every school-yard is a 
drill-ground— when even the Sunday School scholars 
are organized into "Boys' Brigades"— when professed 
Christians are so infected with the fever as to be blinded 
to justice and love and pity,— things are not favorable 
to peace. It looks very much as tho the International 
Peace Congress cried Peace! Peace! when there is no 
peace— because the spirit of avarice controls the world 
and not the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love and 
benevolence. However, we who look from the Watch 
Tower can note these things with equanimity. In the 
world but not of it, we can sympathize with all the 
contestants, realizing that each nation is more or less 
blinded and misled by the spirit of pride which forgets 
or has never learned that only "righteousness exalteth 
a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people."— 
Prov. 14:34. 

Every evil course amongst men seems to be the 
result of the misdirection or perversion of a good quality; 



and so it is in this war spirit: it is the misdirection 

of combativeness and destructiveness,— two qualities absolutely 

indispensable to progress. But very few even 

of Christians have learned of the Lord's Word and 

spirit how to use these faculties properly— in fighting 

the good fight, in overcoming and destroying the 

forces of sin in themselves and in opposing error with 

truth, the darkness with the light— "Speaking the 

truth in love." 

We pray that as the spirit of warfare rises in 
others it may be fully awakened also in the Lord's 
consecrated soldiers of the cross, that they may become 
valiant for righteousness, courageous for the 
truth as "good soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ," and 
be zealous to the extent of enduring hardness,— 
shame, contempt, evil speaking and general opposition 
from the world, the flesh, the devil and the nominal 
Church which, blinded by false doctrines, Satan is so 
grievously misleading. 

This thought respecting the Lord's soldiers, and 
the true nobility of character, and deadness to the 
world, and alive-ness to God necessary to victory over 
self and the world, much impressed us recently on the 
occasion of our visit to the Washington City Church. 
We found that, out of a total of twenty-seven professing 
full consecration to the Lord, three-fourths were 
"Volunteers," and the other fourth desirous of being 
such and only hindered by circumstances they could 
not so far control. The Editor had the pleasure of 
joining these soldiers of the Lord in their campaign 
against error and for the liberation of "brethren" 
still bound in Babylon;— a campaign, a warfare for a 
purpose, a noble purpose, a loving purpose; a warfare 
for God and truth and liberty, which injures none and 
can offend none except the great Adversary or those 
whom he has blinded. The Editor has longed to join 
in this service in Allegheny, but thus far has been restrained 
by the fear that harm rather than good might 
result because of his being known to be closely identified 
with the publication. It would be credited to a 
desire to "blow his own horn" rather than as the 
blowing of the Jubilee Trumpet, proclaiming the times 
of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth of all 
the holy prophets. -Lev. 25:9,10; Acts 3:10-21. 

We are thankful that we can record that this war 
fever is spreading as well as the evil life-destroying 
one. The soldiers of the cross are becoming more and 
more courageous and coming more and more to realize 
that, if "we ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren," this would imply our willingness to lay 
down any and every lesser thing— time, influence, etc. 
The Boston Church (numbering about seventy) we understand 
has enlisted in this "Volunteer" work almost 
without an exception. We have sent them 13,800 of 
the "Volunteer" TOWERS which they are hastening 
to distribute before the warm weather thins the congregations 



they would serve. 

What a privilege is here for such as have prayed 
God for opportunity to serve him and his cause! 
Counting that each of these double TOWERS represents 
four sermons, and that each should reach and be read 
by at least three persons, can any one point out any 
other method for reaching this same desirable class of 
"brethren" at the same low cost? If we know of no 
other method of reaching this class at any price, and 
if we know of no other way by which we could preach 
to them the true gospel, why should not all of the 
Lord's consecrated people who enjoy the light of present 
truth avail themselves of the privilege? The fact 
that it is a new method of preaching is nothing. It is 
surely a successful method, not only as respects the 
"brethren" we would aid, but also as respects those 
who have covenanted themselves as living sacrifices to 
the Lord and his cause. All who engage in this service 
as something done for and unto the Lord are sure 
to be correspondingly blessed. Let all who can secure 
a share in this blessing. See the item in our issue of 
April 15th, discussing the work, method, etc., hearken 
to the joyful sound of the Jubilee Trumpet and 
become enthused with the spirit of this holy warfare. 

R2646 : page 168 

"I THAT SPEAK AM HE." 

-JOHN 4:26; 9:37.- 

She came, the thirsty one, to fill her pitcher, 

And found a stranger sitting on the brink; 
And while she poured for him the well's refreshment, 

He gave the precious cup of life to drink. 
And when she wondered at her life's revealing, 

And if Messiah deeper depths could see, 
He graciously her rising faith encouraged,— 

"I that speak to thee am He!" 

And so when we, blest Master, come, all empty, 

To fountains, we but drink, and drink in vain; 
Be thou with satisfying waters waiting, 

That we may drink, and never thirst again. 
Our wayward hearts' true inwardness disclosing, 

Constrain our timid faith to hope in thee, 
And let us hear again the gracious message— 

"I that speak to thee am He!" 

They turned him from the synagogue accursed, 
Whose gift of sight the Savior had bestowed; 

And, burning under grief and indignation, 
He sought again the well-remembered road. 

And while he mused upon his kindly patron, 
And if he could indeed Messiah be, 

Lo, One with beaming countenance addressed him, 



"I that speak to thee am He!" 

And so, dear Lord, when our dim eyes are opened, 

And one-time friends thy healing power despise, 
Be thou anear with words of cheer and comfort, 

To grant our saddest hour a glad surprise. 
And when life's subtle mysteries perplex us, 

Unlock to us with faith's unfailing key, 
That we may hear from out the open portals, 

"I that speak to thee am He!" 

The proud and haughty still a sign requiring, 

In vain the zenith and horizon scan, 
While walks among them One with vesture girded, 

To wield the purging and discerning fan. 
But he who humbly treads the path of duty, 

With eyes unsealed shall his Deliv'rer see; 
His trial hour shall brighten with this token— 

"I that speak to thee am He!" 

R. B. HENNINGES. 



R2641 :page 168 

PHILADELPHIA CONVENTION, JUNE 16-18. 



SHORT NOTICE is not always a disadvantage, 
and we trust will not be in this instance. 
Arrangements for the Philadelphia convention had 
not been completed when our last issue went to press. 
The above date gives us the advantage of the low 
rates granted by all railroads to the Republican party 
convention,— namely one fare for the round trip from 
all directions. The season of the year is very favorable 
and we anticipate a large attendance. 

The convention will be held under the auspices of 
the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. The Church 
at Philadelphia, our hosts or entertainers for the occasion, 
have made bountiful arrangements as follows:— 

(1) St. George's Hall, corner of 13th and Arch 
sts., has been secured for the use of the Convention. 
It is one of the finest halls in Philadelphia. 

(2) The Lincoln Hotel, No. 1222 Locust St., 

has been engaged upon moderate terms for the class 
of accommodation, namely one dollar a day each person 
for lodgings. Meals can be had at various restaurants 
in that vicinity at fifteen cents and upward. It will 
be safe for those of limited means to reckon expenses 
at two dollars per day, for the hotel and Convention 
hall are very centrally located near to depots and little 
street car fare need be expended. 

(3) The Convention will open Saturday morning, 
June 16. The forenoon will be devoted to meeting 



arriving friends, getting acquainted, etc. On that 
morning representatives of the Philadelphia Church 
will be at the various railway depots to meet arriving 
friends, who will be expected to identify themselves 
by displaying conspicuously the front page of a WATCH 
TOWER. Should any fail to be identified they will 
have no difficulty in finding St. George's Hall as above, 
and there a Reception Committee (recognizable by a 
silk badge) will look out for their welfare. 

(4) Any of the friends who can attend, but who 
cannot afford more than one dollar a day expense during 
their stay, will be assisted by others more able, out of 

a fund already provided: and any who cannot afford 
the modest sum of one dollar per day, if they can arrange 
their railway fare will be provided for gratis. 
Come, all who can, who have the Lord's spirit and 
who seek more of it. The assembling of ourselves 
together for the consideration of our Father's Word 
will surely bring a blessing as he has promised. 

R2642 : page 168 

(5) When purchasing your ticket, ask for— 

"Excursion ticket to Republican Convention at Philadelphia.' 
The railroad people assure us that such 
tickets will be satisfactory to them. 

(6) Decide about your going as speedily as possible, 
and if you decide to attend, at once address,— 
"Reception Committee," P.O. Box No. 3084, Philadelphia, 
Pa., stating by what road you will travel, and 

if possible the hour of your train's arrival on Saturday 

morning or afternoon. The Convention Program will 

be announced at its first session and posted up for 

reference. We cannot now announce the speakers, 

but among them, D.V., will be Brother Randle (formerly 

a missionary in China) and the Editor of this 

Journal. 

(7) An opportunity will be afforded (Monday 

R2642 : page 169 

afternoon, June 18th) for any confessing baptism into 
Christ's death to symbolize this in water baptism. 
Robes and towels will be provided, and the service 
will be preceded by a discourse defining and explaining 
Baptism and its import. 

(8) No collections will be taken up, nor other 
solicitations for money made. Our assemblings are 
for spiritual refreshment and for the acquirement of 
heavenly riches for all. 

(9) Only Christians, who trust in Christ as the 
"ransom for all," are invited to this convention. It 
is hoped and earnestly requested that all such who 
come will seek preparation of heart for a blessing- 
hunger and thirst after righteousness, truth, purity, 
holiness; and all who come humbly in this condition 



will surely not only get a blessing, but also bestow 
blessings upon others. To these desirable ends let us 
each make the Convention and our own association 
therein a subject of prayer. We bespeak for it also 
the prayers of all of the Lord's consecrated people who 
cannot attend: and thus they will no doubt participate 
in the blessings. 

Other Conventions for this season will be as follows: 
—At Chicago, about Sept. 1st; at Dallas, Texas, 
Sept. 29th, 30th and October 1st. Particulars respecting 
the last two, will appear later. 



R2642 : page 169 

FULL ASSURANCE OF FAITH. 



"Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of 
my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever." 
-PSALM 23:6.- 

SAINT PAUL speaks of the full assurance of 

hope and of full assurance of faith, as being 

the proper conditions for the Lord's people. (Heb. 6:1 1; 

10:22.) And this is the thought expressed by 

the Prophet, in our text— full confidence that he who 

has begun a good work in us is both able and willing 

to complete it. (Phil. 1:6.) But how few Christians, 

comparatively, have this full assurance of faith; how 

few can say, Surely, undoubtedly, goodness and mercy 

shall follow me henceforth through life, and by God's 

grace I ultimately shall gain the heavenly Kingdom 

and the glorious things which God has promised to them 

that love him! The few who can enter fully into 

sympathy with the Apostle and Prophet in these expressions 

have therein a great joy, a great blessing, 

a great rest of heart which others do not possess. Let us 

therefore inquire why it is that the number who thus 

enter into the rest of faith is so small. What are the 

hindrances to the others, and how can those hindrances 

be removed, that a larger number of the Lord's people 

may enjoy their patrimony? 

The hindrances are of two kinds: (1) Many who 
are on the Lord's side, and who have been greatly 
blessed of him, and who have made considerable progress 
in the knowledge of the truth, and who are trusting 
in the merit of the Lord Jesus' sacrifice as the only 
hope of a future life, and who are thus justified, have 
nevertheless failed to take the second step necessary 
to their full induction into sonship in God's family and 
into joint-heirship with Christ to all the exceeding 
great and precious promises which extend only to 
those who become his sons. This step, essential to 



becoming sons and joint-heirs, is the purpose of full 

consecration— the full surrender of our own wills, including 

all the aims and objects and purposes of life, 

and including also all that we have in the way of time, 

influence, means, reputation, etc. Not having taken 

this step, not having taken up the cross to follow the 

Lamb whithersoever he goeth, this large class very 

properly feels that it is questionable to what extent 

the Lord's promises, either for the life that now is or 

for the life that is to come, belong to them. And in 

this they are right; for none of the promises, present 

or future, belong to them, nor to any, until they have 

come under the terms of a full self-surrender, consecration, 

presenting their bodies living sacrifices to 

God, holy, acceptable, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Our advice to these, then, is that realizing the 
situation they do not longer delay, but hasten at once 
to avail themselves of the greatest privilege that could 
possibly be offered, even by the Almighty. If they 
stand still they are, in the language of the Apostle, 
receiving the grace of God in vain— failing to use it. 
(2 Cor. 6:1) God's grace, as freely bestowed upon 
those who have come to a knowledge of the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus, is the grace of the forgiveness 
of sins, of justification through faith; and 
the very object of this grace is to permit or qualify us 
to become living sacrifices, acceptable to God's altar 
through the great sacrifice of our Redeemer. 

Whoever, therefore, shall advance thus far and 
know of his privilege, and yet refuse to present his 
little all, has failed to be constrained by the love of 
Christ, has failed to appreciate the divine favor bestowed 
upon him, and manifests this failure by his 
neglect to use his opportunities, by his neglect to sacrifice 
the imperfect fragment of this present life, that 
he might obtain in exchange the great prize of glory, 
honor and immortality, and join t-heirship with Jesus 
in the Kingdom: such receive God's grace in vain, 

R2642 : page 170 

profiting nothing by it over and above the world, 
which as yet lies in darkness and blindness. 

What should such do? They should at once resolve 
that to render all they have to the Lord's service 
is not only a reasonable thing, but an offering far too 
small— far less than what they would like to render to 
him who has manifested such compassion and grace 
toward us. And we should feel thus, even if there 
were no rewards attached to such a consecration of 
ourselves. But inasmuch as God has attached great 
rewards and blessings, we should feel not only that a 
refusal to accept would be an indication of non-appreciation 
of divine mercy, but an indication also of a 
weakness of mind, of judgment, which is unable to 
balance the trifling and transitory pleasures of self-will 



for a few short years, with an eternity of joy and blessing 
and glory, in harmony with the Lord. 

And more than this, the consecrated are the only 
ones who really fully and truly enjoy this present life, 
for they indeed have a peace of heart which the world 
can neither give nor take away— a condition which all 
the world is coveting and seeking after, but finding 
not because they seek it not in the Lord's way of full 
self-surrender to him. We urge, then, upon the class 
now addressed that they promptly make their covenant 
with the Lord, and thus become heirs of his good 
promises pertaining to the life that now is, and also 
of that which is to come, and that thus they lay the 
foundation for entering into "full assurance of the 
faith" and full assurance of the hope that God's 
mercy and goodness shall follow them all the days of 
the present life, and that they shall dwell in the heavenly 
home forever. 

(2) But amongst those who are real Christians, 
and who have made a full covenant of sacrifice unto 
the Lord, we find many who say, and more who think 
it without saying,— "O that I could feel sure that 
God's goodness and mercy would continue with me 
all the days of my life, and that I should attain unto 
his Kingdom ! O that I might have a full assurance 
of faith, a full assurance that I am accepted of the 
Lord, and that by his grace I shall ultimately be an 
overcomer!" What is the difficulty with this class? 
Why is it that these do not possess this full assurance 
of faith? We answer, that their difficulty is a lack of 
faith in God, and such a lack of faith is not pleasing 
to God, for "without faith it is impossible to please 
God." Such a lack of faith, moreover, is a constant 
hindrance to their overcoming, as it is written, "This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even our 
faith." The Christian who has not the shield of faith, 
and a large one, is continually at disadvantage before 
the Adversary.— Heb. 11:6; 1 John 5:4. 

What must be done to overcome this lack of faith, 
and to have an increase of faith? We answer, that 
like the apostles of old he should pray, "Lord, increase 
our faith." And then, acting in harmony with this 
prayer, each should cultivate faith in his own heart: 
(a) By refreshing his memory continually with the 
divine promises, becoming very familiar with these in 
the Father's Word, (b) He should seek more and 
more to remember that having made his covenant with 
the Lord these promises are his, and in his heart and 
with his lips he should claim them as his before the 
Lord in prayer with thanksgiving. He should claim 
them as his in his own thoughts, and in his conferences 
on holy things with the brethren. 

R2643 : page 170 

When trials or difficulties or perplexities arise, he 



should think of these promises, remembering that they 
belong to him— because God has promised them to such 
as love him,— who have made a covenant by self-sacrifice. 
(Psa. 50:5; Mai. 3:17.) He should resolve 
henceforth to trust the word of the heavenly Father 
implicitly. Thus, if some seeming accident befall 
him, let him call to his mind the promise that "All 
things work together for good to them that love God, 
to them that are called according to his purpose," and 
assure himself that the seeming accident would not 
have occurred had God not seen a way to make it the 
channel of a needed lesson or blessing. Let him refresh 
his mind with the thought that he comes under 
the provisions of this promise because he loves the 
Lord, and so loved him as to make a full consecration 
of himself to him; thus he is assured that this promise 
was intended for him. 

Let such also remember the language of the Apostle, 
that if God loved us while we were yet sinners, 
so that he provided for us the great salvation in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, much more does he love us now, since 
we have been justified through faith in the great 
atonement, and have made a full consecration of ourselves 
to him, and thus come under the terms of adoption 
into his family. Let him remember too, that he 
who has begun the good work changes never, and that 
if our hearts are still in harmony with him, if our 
faith is still clear and firm in the great atonement, if 
our consecration is still full and complete, so that we 
seek not our own wills but his will to be done in our 
affairs, then we may indeed have the full assurance 
of faith, because knowing that God is unchangeable, 
and knowing that we are still in line with his promises 
and arrangements, we know that all of his gracious 
providences are still being exercised on our behalf. 
This is full assurance of faith— full confidence in the 
Lord. 

(3) It is possible, however, for the true Christian 
who has taken the step of justification and the 
step of consecration and adoption into God's family, 

R2643 :page 171 

and who has had the blessing of full assurance of 
faith— it is possible for such to lose this, if he become 
overcharged with the cares of this life, cold and 
indifferent as respects the Lord, his Kingdom, his 
brethren, his cause, etc. Such, of course, should not 
have a full assurance of faith; God does not intend it 
for them, but rather intends that if we leave the proper 
consecrated attitude we should also lose the joys and 
consolations which belong to it. And this is not merely 
as a retribution or punishment, but designed specially 
to awaken us to a realization of what we are losing, 
to the intent that such as have "lost their first love" 
may be revived, may renew their consecration vows, 



and thus return to the Lord, who will abundantly pardon, 
and restore unto them the joys of his salvation. 

So then, reviewing our text, we say that this assurance 
of faith that God's goodness and mercy will 
follow us all the days of our lives, and that we shall 
ultimately by his grace attain to the Kingdom, is for 
the class mentioned in this Psalm, viz., the Lord's 
sheep— those who are following him, and who are 
having the experiences outlined in this Psalm. One 
of these experiences is that following the Shepherd 
they are not left to hunger and thirst, but are bountifully 
supplied in the green pastures and by the still 
waters of the truth. Moreover, it applies to those who 
experience the Shepherd's care, his rod and staff, correcting, 
reproving or guiding them. Such sheep as 
learn to love and have confidence in the Shepherd and 
in his guidance, and to take comfort and blessing out 
of all the afflictions and trials of life which may be 
permitted to come upon them, realizing that they are 
providential, and for their blessing— such continue to 
follow the Shepherd, continue to have the experiences 
of sheep, and may rejoice with full assurance of faith 
that he who began the good work of shepherding them 
and leading them out from the by-ways of sin and of 
selfishness into the full blessing of the heavenly Father, 
will continue this work and complete it, if they abide 
in him.— John 15:4-6. 



R2643 :page 171 

"GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD" 

-MATT. 6:11; JOHN 6:5-14.-JUNE 17.- 

JESUS and the apostles, entering a boat, sailed 

across the northerly end of Lake Galilee. The 

boat was in full view of the shore for probably all of 

this distance, and the multitudes, not only of those who 

had heard Jesus, but other multitudes on their way to 

Jerusalem to attend the Feast of the Passover, going by 

slow journey afoot, saw the boat and judged of its objective 

point, and many, desirous of seeing the great 

Prophet Jesus, of whom they had heard many things, 

deviated their course toward the point of the boat's 

landing. And so it was that after Jesus and the disciples 

had reached their destination (and he had been 

for some time instructing them in things pertaining to 

the Kingdom) looking up they beheld a vast concourse 

of people approaching the spot. 

Jesus of course knew that with the vast majority 
at least the object in coming was merely curiosity, not 
faith nor desire for instruction. Nevertheless, as always, 
his generous heart was full of sympathy. He 
beheld them as sheep having no shepherd, as following 



Moses and the Doctors of the Law in a blind, almost 
irrational manner, and having comparatively little capacity 
or hearing for the good tidings which he had to 
give. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the fact that they 
were not in a condition to receive spiritual truths such 
as he could give to his disciples, he proposed to give 
them a general object lesson which might do them good 
physically at the time, and which might be a channel 
for blessing in the future, as they would look back and 
remember the event. He proposed to feed the multitude 
with natural food, and to do it in such a manner 
as would impress them favorably, and besides, teach a 
great lesson of faith and trust to his apostles, who would 
need in future times the faith and confidence inspired 
by the miracle which he intended to work. 

Philip, one of the apostles, resided in a city not 
far from where they were; hence it was with special 
appropriateness that our Lord addressed to him the 
question of supplies— where sufficiency of bread could 
be obtained, etc.; not, as the Apostle explains, that 
Jesus was in any question on this subject, but that he 
wished to stimulate the thought of Philip and the other 
apostles, and thus to prove or test them, and develop 
their faith in him. Philip, however, took the question 
in a purely practical form, and replied that it would 
require two hundred pennyworth ($34) of bread to satisfy 
even partially so large a company. But Andrew, 
apparently thinking of our Lord's power, but scarcely 
able to realize so great a miracle, suggested that there 
was a beginning of the supply at least, in the five 
barley loaves and two small fishes possessed by one of 
the company. 

Combining the testimonies of the different Evangelists 
we might suppose the dialogue between Jesus 
and the disciples to have been about as follows: 

Jesus.— "Whence shall we buy bread, that these 
may eat?" 

Philip.— "Two hundred pennyworth of bread is 
not sufficient for them, that everyone may take a little." 

All the apostles.— "Send the multitude away that 

R2643 : page 172 

they may go into the towns and country round about, 
and lodge, and get victuals." (Luke.) 

Jesus.— "Give ye them to eat." (Luke.) 

All the apostles.— "Shall we go and buy two hundred 
pennyworth of bread and give them to eat?" (Mark.) 

Jesus.— "How many loaves have ye? Go and 
see." (Mark.) 

Andrew.— "There is a lad here which hath five 
barley loaves and two small fishes; but what are they 
among so many?" 

Thus did our Lord prepare the minds of his disciples 
to appreciate the miracle he was about to perform, 
and then instructed them to seat the people for 



the proposed meal. This was a comparatively easy 

task, because it was a grassy country, we are told, and 

the people were accustomed to a certain method of arranging 

themselves in groups of fifties and hundreds for 

general feasts. 

The fact that our Lord Jesus gave thanks for the 
bread and fish should be an important lesson to all who 
seek in any degree to be his followers. If it was appropriate 
that he should render thanks to the heavenly 
Father for some plain barley bread (the poorest and 
cheapest sort), and for some dried fish, how appropriate 
it is that we who by nature are sinners and under condemnation, 
and only permitted to call God our Father 
through the reconciliation that is in Christ Jesus— how 
appropriate that we should lift our hearts and voices in 
thankfulness to the heavenly Father as the author of 
every good blessing and gift which we enjoy! 

We cannot understand how any Christian dare neglect 
to render thanks for his daily food, and we thoroughly 
believe that those who do neglect this propriety 
are great losers thereby. God, of course, loses nothing, 
for giving does not impoverish him, neither would withholding 
make him rich; but the Christian who has 

learned in everything to give thanks, and to make acknowledgment 
to the heavenly Father, has learned to 
appreciate and to enjoy his blessing more than others. 

R2644 : page 172 

To such thankful hearts the plainest of food will be 
more appreciated, more happifying, more satisfying 
than to others. And it is undoubtedly a fact that a 
peaceful, thankful, happy mind is not only a blessing 
of itself, but additionally an aid to digestion and to the 
obtaining of good benefits from the food which we eat. 
How many dyspeptics know that it is possible to eat 
without satisfying, and to have plenty, and yet be unable 
to derive therefrom comfort and proper nourishment! 
And perhaps there is no better antidote to dyspepsia 
than a thankful, grateful heart, which acknowledges 
divine blessings and seeks to use them, not only 
with thankfulness, but with contentment, and thus has 
great gain. 

True, God does not resent failures to acknowledge 
him in all our ways, but continues to cause the sun 
to shine upon the evil and upon the good, and to send 
the rain alike upon the just and the unjust, and to permit 
many of the blessings of this present life to continue 
with those who make no proper acknowledgment of 
them. Nevertheless, such cannot hope to grow in divine 
favor, as they might if in all their ways they acknowledged 
God and sought to see in all the affairs of life his 
providential care. 

These remarks, however, apply not to the world in 
general, nor to mere nominal believers, but only to those 
who have become the Lord's people by entering into a 



covenant with him through Christ. As for the world 
in general, who are not seeking to be the Lord's people 
and to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, it would seem 
that their offering of thanks, or prayers of any kind, 
would be inappropriate, as we read: "But unto the 
wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my 
statutes; or that thou shouldest take my covenant in 
thy mouth? Seeing that thou hatest instruction and 
castestmy words behind thee." (Psalm 50:16,17.) In 
a word, then, there is just one right way to begin to be 
the Lord's followers, and those who do not wish to begin 
according to the Lord's direction, in self-consecration, 
have no right to suppose that outward acts of formalistic 
piety are acceptable or pleasing to God. We 
must first become the Lord's before we can hope that 
any worship or service from us will be acceptable to him 
through Jesus. 

The faith of the apostles is well demonstrated in 
the fact that they proceeded to seat the people, according 
to the Lord's instructions, and then proceeded to 
divide to them the, at first, very limited quantity of food. 
Without faith in the Lord they would undoubtedly 
have refused to take any part in the proceedings, fearing 
that it would bring reproach and ridicule upon themselves. 
The lesson which they learned in this connection 
no doubt went with them through subsequent years, 
teaching them that they could do all things by the 
power of Christ, if laboring under his command. And 
the same lesson comes forcefully to us all. Neither our 
duties nor our privileges are wholly measured by our 
own abilities. A proper faith in the Lord permits us 
to realize his omnipotent power, and that if he be with 
us, for instance in the distribution of spiritual food to 
the hungry, the little of means and ability and opportunity 
at our disposal may be so blessed as to accomplish 
marvelous things. Indeed, have we not this very 
experience to-day in connection with the spread of the 
harvest message? Out of the little of means and talent, 
opportunity and ability, what God hath wrought! How 
many have been fed and are being fed! 

The miracle was all the Lord's, and yet a great 
blessing came to the apostles, in that they were privileged 

R2644 : page 173 

to be co-workers with the Lord. And similarly 
here, in the dissemination of the harvest message, we 
recognize that it is all of our Lord, the present Bridegroom, 
King, Reaper, and yet that he is pleased to use 
as disseminators of the truth all those who have faith 
in him and who gladly accept his service. As our Lord 
could have performed the miracle of feeding the five 
thousand without the instrumentality of his disciples, 
so now he could feed the hungry Israelites indeed— who 
are famished, not for bread and not for water, but for 
the hearing of the Word of the Lord (Amos 8:11)— 



without our aid. Let us gratefully thank him for the 
privilege of being co-workers in any capacity, and let 
us the more zealously do with our might whatsoever our 
hands find to do. 

Another great lesson taught by this miracle was 
that of economy; for the apostles who distributed the 
food were required to gather up for their own future 
use the suitable fragments which remained, and each 
one accordingly filled his basket or haversack, which 
they were accustomed to carry in their journeys. The 
miracle would have had only half its weight without 
this closing lesson of economy. The disciples and the 
multitude might have learned to think of God's powers 
in an improper light, and to have expected such provision 
as would compensate for their carelessness and 
prodigality. But the gathering of the fragments showed, 
first of all, the immensity of the miracle, and secondly, 
it taught the lesson that we are to use the means which 
God has put into our hands, and not to expect unnecessary 
miracles. 

How many of the Lord's dear people need to learn 
this lesson of economy! How many are wasteful of the 
daily food which the Lord provides! How many would 
be the more blessed by learning to practice careful economy, 
not only that they might have in the future, but 
also that they might in emergency supply to others 
spiritual or natural food as opportunity afforded! Let 
all who are disposed to be extravagant and wasteful 
well consider this lesson from the great Teacher, that 
nothing is to be wasted, that we have a responsibility 
in respect to all that God has provided for us, either 
directly or indirectly, and that after asking divine blessing 
upon our affairs, and thus signifying our appreciation 
of them, we are to seek to wisely use them, as we 
think would be pleasing in his sight, and frugally, 
economically. 

The same lesson might be applied also to our spiritual 
food. The fact that the Lord has given us bountifully 
"things new and old" does not mean that we 
are to treat those blessed truths carelessly, when we 
have eaten thereof and found satisfaction to our souls; 
rather, we are to be careful of all the fragments, and 
are to gather and preserve them for further and future 
use, esteeming them none the less the Lord's provision 
than when first we received them from his hands. 



R2644 : page 173 

REVIEW OF THE QUARTER'S STUDIES. 



"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven. 



REVIEWING the studies of the quarter we find 
that nearly all of them are closely related to 
our Golden Text. 

(1) We had the Beatitudes— the conditions of 

heart and character essential to our participation in this 
Kingdom class that God has declared he is selecting 
from the world, and which by and by he will glorify 
with the King Emmanuel in his Millennial Kingdom. 

(2) We had certain precepts, promises and warnings 
respecting how this Kingdom class must make development, 
not in sitting in judgment upon others now, 

but rather by judging nothing before the time, when 
they shall be granted the powers of judgment in such 
glorious measure as will permit their judging to be a 
blessing to the world, and that thus this Kingdom class 
must seek the narrow way to glory, honor and 
immortality. 

(3) We had the miracle of the awakening of the 
daughter of Jairus, an illustration of the great work 
of the Kingdom when it shall be set up, and when all 
mankind shall be released from the prison-house of death. 

(4) We had the healing of the centurion's servant, 
another picture of restitution blessings which are 

to be general at the time that our Lord's prayer, in our 
Golden Text, is realized, and God's Kingdom shall 
come and his will be done on earth as it is in heaven. 

(5) We saw how the faith of John the Baptist 

was tested by reason of the fact that the Kingdom work 
did not come in his day just as he had expected it 
would, and we saw how carefully our Lord explained 
to him wherein his expectations had been partly erroneous, 
and indicated how events as they were in progress 
were in full accord with the testimony of the 
prophets. And so we have learned in respect to the 
establishing of the spiritual Kingdom now, to trust not 
to our own imaginations, but to go rather to the Word 
of the Lord, and to see what therein is written, and so 
doing we are able to note to-day what we would not 
otherwise be able to discern, how that our Lord's great 
plan is grandly progressing in harmony with what was 
written aforetime. 

(6) We saw, in our Lord's denunciation of Capernaum, 

R2645 : page 174 

Chorazin and Bethsaida, how possible it is for 
some in our day to have great privileges, as those cities 
had great knowledge, great opportunities of coming into 
accord with the Lord's Kingdom, and yet through lack 
of faith to fail utterly— to fail more miserably as respects 
pleasing God than did such heathen cities as 
Sodom and Tyre and Sidon. We saw, nevertheless, 
that the full number of the elect Church or Kingdom 
class would be found in God's due time, and that then 
will commence the great Judgment Day of the world, 



in which it will be tolerable for all, under the righteous 
judgment of the great King, but more tolerable for such 
as Sodom and Gomorrah than for those who have had 
the greater privileges and knowledge and misused them. 

(7) We found, in the case of Simon and the woman 
that was a sinner, that some who occupy important 
positions in the nominal church may be much further 
from the Kingdom of God as respects their hearts than 
are some others who have outwardly been living a less 
correct life, and that some of the latter, reforming, may 
become more zealous toward the Lord and more acceptable 
with him, and hence more eligible to the Kingdom. 

(8) The parable of the sower showed us the importance 
of having our hearts in a correct attitude toward 

God, not full of worldly ambitions and cares, which as 
"thorns" would choke the very best seed, but freed 
from these that we should be ready to receive "the 
good seed of the Kingdom" into our hearts, and to be 
exercised thereby into seeking first the Kingdom of God. 

(9) We saw various parables of the Kingdom, 
illustrating to us the Church's present experiences, 
while waiting for the completion of the elect number 
and the full inauguration then of the Kingdom glory 

and power to bless the world. We saw the true Christians 
represented by the "wheat," the outgrowth of 
pure doctrine, the good seed of the Kingdom. We saw 
false Christians represented by the "tares," and the 
false doctrines which produce such, which were sown 
by the Adversary. We saw the growth of the nominal 
church represented as being very great, but as resulting 
in inviting into it the fowl— "every unclean and hateful 
bird." We saw that the spiritual food provided for the 
Lord's household had been corrupted by the "woman" 
everywhere predominant throughout the Scriptures, the 
wine-cup of whose abominations have made drunk all 
nations.— Rev. 18:2,3. 

(10) We have seen that the sending forth of the 
twelve apostles was with the same message, the same 
Gospel of the Kingdom, that the Master declared, and 
that similarly whoever is sent out of the Lord to-day as 
a servant of the truth has the same message, the Gospel 
of the Kingdom, under which, when it is established, 
God's will shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 

(11) The lesson of Herodias and her wicked ambition 
and sinful course, in which Herod shared, taught 

us that earthly ambitions lead downward and sinward, 
away from God and into degradation, but that the ambition 
set before the Church, viz., to be God's Kingdom, 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, is the lawful 
ambition which leads upward and is elevating in its 
every influence, and purifying as respects our hearts 
and lives. 

(12) Finally, in the feeding of the multitude, we 
see illustrated our Lord's compassion for the people, 
which compassion during the Millennial Kingdom will 



have fullest sway, when the bread of life shall be broken 
to all of the hungry, and when all shall be privileged 
to share in the blessings which the Lord's Kingdom 
will bring, and that then those who have followed him 
in the present time shall be associated with him in the 
work of blessing the multitude under the glorious Kingdom 
conditions. 

We may well pray from the heart, in the language 
of our Golden Text, Lord, "Thy Kingdom come; thy 
will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 



R2645 : page 174 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



WHEN PERSECUTED, FLEE. 



Question.— How should we understand and apply 
Matt. 10:23— "When they persecute you in this city, 
flee ye to another; for verily I say unto you, ye shall 
not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of 
Man be come"? 

Answer.— These instructions were given primarily 
to the twelve Apostles, and doubtless were understood 
by them to mean that their mission was not to stay 
long in a place, but that as persecution arose, and the 
people were unwilling to hear their message, they were 
to go to other cities and villages, full of the conviction 
that the time for their special testimony of the 
Kingdom at hand was limited, and that they would not 
more than have accomplished their proclamation in 
all the cities of Israel before the Son of Man would be 
presented as King, and the testing of the nation reach 
its climax. This climax was reached when, at the end 
of his three and a half years' ministry, our Lord rode to 
them on the ass, as their King, and failing to be received 
(in harmony with the prophecy) declared their 
house henceforth left desolate.— Luke 13:35. 

But while this was the primary signification of the 
Lord's words, we believe that like most of his teachings 
to Israel after the flesh it had a still larger meaning 
than was then due to be understood— an application 
to the parallel closing of this Gospel age. As 
there was a "harvest" in the end of the Jewish age, in 
which natural Israel was tested, so in the end of this 

R2645 : page 175 

age there is a "harvest" in which spiritual Israel will 
be tested. And as there was a proclamation of Jesus in 



the flesh, as King, so there must be correspondingly a 
proclamation of Jesus, the new creature, as King of 
Glory. And as in that "harvest" some were sent forth 
with the harvest message, and it was to reach all the 
Israelites within the borders of the promised land, so 
now we understand that in the present harvest the message 
is going forth, "behold the bridegroom," and the 
further announcement to Zion, "Thy God reigneth." 
(Matt. 25:6; Isa. 52:7.) This harvest message is also to 
be understood as limited in time, and the bearers of it 
are not to dally, but to exercise diligence, realizing that 
the time is short, and that they shall have time and no 
more to go over all the cities of spiritual Israel, before 
the grand consummation shall be reached, and the Son 
of Man shall have completed the first part of his work, 
the collection of his saints, the "Jewels," the "Little 
Flock," and thus the Kingdom be set up in power. 

OF WHOM AND FOR WHOM DO WE SPEAK? 



Question. --When in the WATCH TOWER and 
DAWNS and Old Theology Tracts we read "we believe," 
"our views," etc., are we to understand that 
a Church or Society or creed so teaches? If not, how 
shall we understand such expressions? 

Answer.— No; we speak for no party or sect or 
creed or confession, but merely for ourself,— the Editor. 
Long ago we adopted the plural pronoun in referring 
to our personal views as being much more 
modest than the frequent use of "I said," "I think," 
"I expect," "I believe," I find, etc. And this custom 
is followed in the ablest newspapers and journals 
of our land. 

Of course, incidentally, we voice the sentiments 
of many of our readers when voicing our own; because 
they and we recognize the Bible as a divine revelation, 
the only standard of truth, and endeavor to 
keep close to its letter and spirit. But "we" will 
neither bind others to "our" convictions nor permit 
any to bind "us" to theirs. The only fixed creed we 
recognize is the simple and fundamental one— that 
God sent his Son, who died for our sins; and that 
through faith in this, and obedience to him, to the extent 
of our ability, we shall be saved. All who so confess 
are "Christians" and are to be treated as "brethren." 
They should be assisted to grow in knowledge 
and grace, but should be accorded fullest liberty,— 
"The liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free." 
Neither directly nor indirectly has anyone a right to 
make a creed for them nor to otherwise speak for them 
and then imply their "disloyalty" and "heresy" if 
they attempt to resent misrepresentations. 

WATCH TOWER readers are supposed to be, and 
urged to be, the Lord's freemen, and at the same time 



the Lord's bond-servants; and to call no man master; 
because one alone is their Master and Lord— Jesus. 
This liberty, however, does not hinder them from appreciating 
one another as "brethren"— 

"Whose kind designs to serve and please 
Through all their actions run." 
Each is free to love and esteem each other for 
their work's sake, and to seek to note how the Master 
is pleased to use one and another in serving "the body 
of Christ." Each free one, loyal to the Lord, is pleased 
to recognize as special servants of "the body" those 
whom the Lord specially uses. Those who are not 
free with the liberty wherewith Christ makes free, are 
enslaved to decisions of men and to customs and theories, 
and are not at liberty to follow the leadings of 
divine providence and the testimonies of the divine 
Word. 

WHEN WILL SATAN BE BOUND? 



Question.— In the DAWNS you have intimated that 
the binding of Satan in the end of this age will be accomplished 
by the increase of general intelligence,— 
light, etc. Is this the only sense in which you consider 
that he will be bound? 

Answer.— By no means. The binding of Satan 
with the great chain, and the putting of him into the 
abyss mentioned in Rev. 20:1-3, is all figurative; but 
the figures are all meaningful. To us they signify a 
complete restraint of Satan and all his powers of evil. 
The great chain represents restraint. The word abyss, 
in our common version rendered "bottomless pit," 
represents oblivion. The seal upon it represents divine 
care that none shall interfere with God's arrangement, 
but that it shall all be carried out strictly in accordance 
with the divine prearrangement. Our suggestion 
respecting the influence of the increased light of 
the present time is that a preliminary restraint of evil 

R2646 : page 175 

results from turning on the light of present truth, 

which makes the evil the more manifest and the less 

able to deceive. But this is not all, by any means. 

The thought is that the great King, who is now about 

to take full control of the world, has full power to 

bind, to restrain Satan and every evil power and influence, 

that nothing may hurt or injure that which is 

good throughout the Millennial Age, as has been the 

case during the present age, when the Kingdom of 

heaven (the Church in its incipient state) suffereth 

violence, and the violent take it by force, misusing 

the members of the body of Christ, even as they misused 

also the Head of the body— our Lord. 



Whether Satan and his associates, the fallen angels, 
will remain associated with this earth we do not 
know, but it is quite sufficient for us to have the Lord's 
assurance that they will no longer be prince and powers 
of the air, able to misrepresent and deceive mankind, 
as at present. Some have surmised that Satan and 
his angels would be deported during the Millennial 
period, but while there is no Scripture that we are 
aware of which would settle this point, our view is to 
the contrary of this. We believe that they will not be 
deported but remain, powerless to deceive. Our reason 
for so supposing is two-fold: 

(1) This earth has been the scene of their original 
transgressions and subsequent misdeeds, and it 

would seem proper that they should witness the marvelous 
transformation which will ensue after the 
Prince of Light, the Prince of Peace, Emmanuel, shall 
assume the reins of power, and bring blessings to all 
the families of the earth. 

(2) The Scriptures assure us that the work of 

the glorified Church will not only be to give trial to 
or "judge the world" of mankind during the Millennial 

R2646 : page 176 

age, but that it will include also the judgment or 
trial of these fallen angels: and if both mankind and 
the angels are to be judged, during the same period, 
it would seem entirely reasonable that both should be 
associated with the earth and its atmosphere.— 1 Cor. 6:3; 
2 Pet. 2:4; Jude 6. 



page 176 

FAITHFUL CO-LABORERS HEARD FROM. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I praise God for the 
new life that has come to our Church here lately. I 
conclude it is the food in Vol. v. of the DAWN and the 
helpful articles in the WATCH TOWER as much as the 
"Volunteer" letters that have awakened us to new 
energy. The work of our dear brethren is indeed a 
powerful stimulant and has enlivened me. I enjoy 
the honor God has bestowed on me in permitting me 
to lay down my life in service for the brethren in 
Babylon. 

I feel like a full-sized man while standing before 
a church door handing out the "glad tidings" to my 
fellow men. It is such an honorable business to be an 
ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ. Everyone seems 
polite and nearly always thank us for the books. 
When occasionally they refuse them, I believe it is 
because they think we are selling them. The books 
appear too expensive to give away. They have asked 



me a number of times who pays for the literature. I 
simply answer, "The Tract Society." 

How few recognize that the "glad tidings" are 
like a beautiful air whose accompaniment (full of deep, 
rich bass solos, baritone minors, bursts of wild, thrilling, 
harmonic chords and countless thrilling rivulets 
of counter melody) is the Old Testament. Before Jesus 
came there was no connected tune in the accompaniment. 
There were grand sounds of rich chords, occasional 
weird musical phrases and counter melodies. 
It took Jesus, the Lamb of God, the spotless friend of 
mankind to bring to light the charming tune, the entrancing 
air, by simply making it more prominent than 
the accompaniment. Imagine us listening to the orchestra 
of God's universe, listening to this anthem of 
the ages! It seems, sometimes, almost frightful in the 
grandeur and sublimity of its awe-inspiring greatness. 

Dear brother, I appreciate your unselfish devotion 
in laying down your life for us— for me. I was 
ignorant of God in almost everything until, through 
the DAWNS, you divided the word of truth in its proper 
dispensations, massing Scripture on the various points 
of importance, until I saw a plan threading its way 
through the Bible. My life is new now, it has been 
changed; the love for God's business has weaned my 
heart away from the fleeting phantoms of the world- 
its pleasures. How small they now look beside the 
radiant beauty of pureness and truth! 

To realize day by day that our trials of patience, 
love, our humility and all the graces of the spirit, is a 
discipline or training that God is imposing on us in 
order that we may be transformed in heart into the 
likeness and character of our blessed Redeemer, is 
what gives me peace and contentment with such things 
as I have, and it also makes the trials easier to "endure." 
"Blessed is that man who endures temptations." 
I used to wonder why you "harped" (Rev. 14:2) 
on these things year after year. Now I know 
why;— that when my ears got open enough to hear 
the instruction, I could profit by it. 

Dear brother, I have learned valuable lessons from 
your mode of work and I want you to know how 
thoroughly I am in sympathy with all you do. You 
have helped me out of darkness, and it makes me all 
the more appreciative of your work because I know 
you do it, not for the reward of praise from us, but 
from your faithfulness and love of our Redeemer and 
God. I rejoice to know there are true hearts on the 
earth, that God has transformed human minds. Praise 
his holy name! Yours in loving service, 
F. A. HALL,-Indiana. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Words would fail to 
express how thankful I feel to our dear Lord for sending 
me the message of "present truth" and revealing 
unto me the great reward that awaits those who earnestly 



seek both to know and to do his will. 

It is now about 3-1/2 years since I began to study 
MILLENNIAL DAWN and to me these few years have 
been of more real importance than all the other 22 
years of my life put together. When I look back and 
see how the Lord has been leading me, and how often 
he has delivered me from the snares of the adversary, 
I cannot help feeling glad. At first Satan tried to ensnare 
me by telling me that the sacrifice was too great- 
more than I ever could hope to fulfil, but after counting 
the cost I resolved to trust our Master for it all, 
and he has not disappointed me. Praise his name! 

Our meetings here for the last 12 months have 
been very helpful to the study of the Word, and all 
testify to receiving great blessings from them, except 
a few who went out from us when the truth began to 
get strong. We have also had occasional visits from 
Bro. Hemery and Bro. Houston, which have been highly 
appreciated. I have been thinking of trying to colporteur 
DAWN here when the mild weather begins. I 
tried it for a month some time ago and met with a 
measure of success. It seems to be a little in my line; 
I am entirely free from worldly cares, and have a fair 
business experience, being in the grocery trade here. 
Bro. Anderson and I had thought of trying it together. 
With much love to all the saints in Allegheny, I 
remain, Yours in our Master's service, 

WILLIAM CRAWFORD,-Scotland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write you my 
thanks and gratitude for many things. The TOWERS 
are always full of good things for the children of the 
"household." For several weeks past I have been in 
doubt over an important point, and several times was 
ready to write you for instructions, but when last 
TOWER came in there it all was, just as if you had 
written for my special case. Surely God's blessing is 
with you and on us through you as his agent. My 
way has not always been clear and I sometimes find it 
hard to determine the right course, but it is my prayer 
that I may meet such chastisements as will keep me 
in the straight path. The last TOWER hit me quite 
hard, but I very much appreciated it for it served to 
show me my way. 

I revert with special pleasure to our meeting at 
De Funiak. Very sincerely your friend, 

ELSTON LUTTRELL,-Alabama. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXI. JUNE 15, 1900. No. 12. 

CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 179 

Thoughtful Words of an Able Man 179 

The Anomalies of Orthodoxy 179 

Methodism and Higher Criticism 180 

Educated White Savages 181 

Keep Yourselves in the Love of God 182 

Jesus Walking on the Sea 184 

I Am the Bread of Life 186 

Lord, Help Me! Matt. 15:25 190 

Revised Price List of Bibles, Etc 192 

Special Items: The Volunteer Work 178 

Attention Watch Tower Readers! 178 

page 178 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



THE VOLUNTEER TOWERS. 

The friends of the truth in every direction are joining heartily 
in circulation of this special issue of the WATCH TOWER. They 
evidently consider, as we do, that it should be regarded as a 
sharp sickle of truth for gathering the ripe "wheat." 

We have already printed over half a million copies of it, a 
good share of these being already in the hands of the people. 
We are proceeding with the work, and hope to make the total 
at least a million. We regret that we cannot as yet supply foreign 
orders except from Great Britain on account of freight rates. 
We are having an edition printed in London for Great Britain. 

Do not waste any, nor let any lie idle; but send us your requests 
for all you can use judiciously— amongst intelligent readers. 

R2653 : page 178 

ATTENTION WATCH TOWER READERS! 



We have learned recently of some readers of this journal 
who have not read the MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes entire. This 
is a great mistake. None can rightly understand or appreciate 
the precious truths presented herein unless he first have a clearly 
outlined view of the great divine plan of the ages: and hence 
we urge upon all that they begin this study at once. 

All on our list are supplied the DAWNS at wholesale rates 
(to assist in their wide circulation through loaning, etc.) and 
any too poor to pay even this small sum will be supplied gratis 
for their own reading if they will let us know, requesting under 
this offer. For prices and descriptions, etc., see next column. 

In view of the fact that our "earthen vessels" are so leaky 
we all need to replenish our stock of grace and truth continually; 
and hence we advise repeated readings of the DAWNS. When 
reading them you are really reading the Bible; for they are 
merely an arranged and systematized Bible. It is for this reason 
that like the Bible they do not grow old to the truth-hungry. 



R2646 : page 179 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THOUGHTFUL WORDS OF AN ABLE MAN. 



AN EXCHANGE quotes epigrammatic statements 
from various addresses delivered before 
the "Ecumenical Mission Conference" held recently in 
New York City, and among them all none impressed 
us so much as the following by Mr. Benjamin Harrison, 
ex-President of the United States:— 

"The natural man lives to be ministered unto— 
he lays his imposts upon others. He buys slaves that 
they may fan him to sleep, bring him the jewelled 
cup, dance before him, and die in the arena for his 
sport. Into such a world there came a King, "not to 
be ministered unto, but to minister." The rough 
winds fanned his sleep; he drank of the mountain 
brook and made not the water wine for himself; would 
not use his power to stay his own hunger, but had 
compassion on the multitude. He called them he had 
bought with a great price no more servants but friends. 
He entered the bloody arena alone, and, dying, broke 
all chains and brought life and immortality to light." 

THE ANOMALIES OF "ORTHODOXY." 



The "Ecumenical Conference" on Missions recently 



in session in New York City, considering ways 
and means for preaching the gospel to Brahmins, 
Buddhists, Confucians, Greek Catholics and Roman 
Catholics— in its very name ignoring Romanism as 
anti-Christian, since its missions were not recognized 
or included under the comprehensive term Ecumenical 
—was of course "orthodox." At the same time there 
was in session in the city of Boston another and quite 
different convention or Religious Congress, which being 
under the lead of the famous "orthodox" preacher, 
Heber Newton, supported by many other notable reverend 
gentlemen and Doctors of Divinity also "orthodox," 
must be considered equally as "orthodox" a 
conference as the one which met in New York City. 
Yet note the wide difference in these applications of 
the term "orthodox;" for the Boston Convention accepted 
and heard all religions— Christian, anti -Christian, 
Buddhist, Brahmin and Confucian on a common 
level. 

As a matter of fact this word orthodox, which signifies 
"correct or sound doctrine," is claimed by everybody; 
for no one could conscientiously hold to anything 
he considered unsound or incorrect. But in applying 
the term to others is the difficulty: how for instance 
can a Methodist agree that Presbyterian doctrine of 
foreordination and predestination is correct or "orthodox" 
and still refuse to accept it? Or how can a Presbyterian 
agree that Methodist doctrine is "orthodox" 
when it differs so radically from his own? And how 
can "Disciples" and "Baptists" recognize as "orthodox" 
or correct and sound other doctrines which ignore 
water immersion, which Baptists and Disciples strenuously 
claim is absolutely essential to a membership 
in the Church of Christ, and to the salvation which 
they claim is provided only for the Church? 

The fact is that the various sects were much more 
consistent when they each denied that the other was 
"orthodox" and each claimed that itself alone was the 
"orthodox," the correct and doctrinally sound church. 

What brought about this change? We answer, 
two things conspired to produce the present inconsistent 
condition. 

(1) Religious doctrinal convictions have softened, 
tho the professions continue as hard and stout as ever. 
Instead of conviction has come uncertainty, doubt, 
skepticism and the general feeling that "nobody knows 
—we may be right, you may be right or all may be 
wrong." 

R2647 : page 180 

(2) Not knowing who is right we will simply 
stick to our own church [not to Christ's one, true 
Church "whose names are written in heaven"] as being 
as good as any other man-made church, and merely 
recognize all others claiming the name of Christ and 



having influence, wealth and numbers as being also 
"orthodox," correct also— for all we know to the contrary. 
But in preventing any advanced thought being 
known as "orthodox" all are agreed— they have already 
sufficient confusion unavoidably covered by that 
term: unavoidably, because to deny the term "orthodox" 
to any popular system would be to invite it to 
denounce yours as "unorthodox," and thus to raise a 
doctrinal discussion which neither cares to risk before 
the people, lest the weaknesses and fallacies of all be 
disclosed to those now "at ease in Zion," dozing, if 
not sound asleep, on all such subjects. 

This is the meaning of the general opposition of 
all denominations to what we are presenting from the 
Scriptures as present truth: they see that it is a positive 
doctrine and that those who receive it have convictions: 
they see, too, that these appeal to the Bible 
and apply its statements in a manner that brings order 
out of the hitherto confusion and babel of the sects: 
they perceive, too, that it is reasonable (which they 
know none of the others are) and they each individually 
and all collectively fear that if heard upon its 
merits it would sweep all theories before it into oblivion. 
It is therefore "Self-preservation, the first law 
of nature" which incites the so-called "orthodox" 
against the glad tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people. For just the same reasons the various 
sects and parties of the Jews, however diverse, 
united against the true Light as God revealed it in the 
close of the Jewish age. 

We of course claim that the WATCH TOWER presentations 
are orthodox, correct, sound doctrinally— 
otherwise we would not promulgate them. And we 
go farther and deny that the various inconsistent, unreasonable 
and unscriptural doctrines of Babylon are 
orthodox. We claim that altho almost all the creeds 
of Christendom contain some grains of truth, they 
contain much more error, which quite beclouds and 
nullifies their elements of truth. 

Nevertheless, we claim that our standard of "orthodoxy" 
is not narrow when applied to Christian people, 
tho it is so exclusive as respects all the creeds of 
Christendom. It is just as broad as the Bible will 
permit: and who that acknowledges its authority has 
a right to ask for more or to accept less? 

Our standard of orthodoxy as applied not to sects 
but to Christians, personally, recognizes as correct and 
sound in doctrine all who acknowledge the following 
points. (1) That he is by nature a member of the 
fallen, condemned race and hence a child of wrath 
even as others, and justly under the divine sentence 
of condemnation. (2) That Christ died for the ungodly, 
for Adam and all his condemned race; and 
hence God can now be just in justifying him and all 
who believe in Jesus. (3) That his justification is the 
basis of his call to full consecration in self-sacrifice, 



and that he has thus devoted his all to the Lord, in 
exchange for the share in the Millennial Kingdom 
which the Lord has promised to all such "overcomers." 
-Rev. 2:26; 3:12,21. 

All the above described class are properly recognized 
as "orthodox" and "brethren," however they 
may differ on minor details in the correct knowledge 
of which they may be expected to grow under the 
Lord's guidance;— building one another up in [the 
details of] their most holy faith, as revealed in the 
Word of the Lord, which, as they come more and more 
to understand it, will make them wiser and wiser respecting 
the good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God,— unto salvation,— until salvation actual, the 
"crown of life," with glory, honor and immortality, 
shall be the grand outcome of the finished race. 

Who knows any fault to find with this Bible standard 
of "orthodoxy"? No one! But this is the chief 
ground of objection to it in the eyes of churchianity: 
it antagonizes and would speedily destroy not only 
one but all sects: hence all oppose it:— the far-seeing 
preachers leading their ever-confiding flocks into the 
battle against the Lord and his truth,— in which 
through temporary success they eventually are the sad 
losers. 

METHODISM AND HIGHER CRITICISM. 



It was expected that the General M.E. Conference 
would be asked to take some stand for or against 
"higher criticism;" but so far we have seen no mention 
of it. The expectation was based upon the protest 
made by a few students against "Higher Criticism," 
Evolution, etc., being taught at the M.E. 
Boston Theological Seminary. The students resigned, 
intending to go to other M.E. colleges presumed to 
be sound on the Scriptures; but to their surprise they 
found a solid denominational front against them, which 
conspired so successfully that they were refused admittance 
to any. This means that infidelity to the 
Bible, under the name of "higher criticism," is being 
impressed upon every M.E. minister now issuing from 
these seminaries. And it means that the greatest 
power of Methodism, its ministry, scattered all over 
the land, is to be exerted to the gradual undermining 
of the faith of Methodists. And, "like priest like people," 
it means that Methodism will soon be fighting 
God's Word stealthily, covertly, from the inside— inside 

R2647 :page 181 

the house of its professed friends. However, this 
will only awaken some of the Lord's true saints in 
that house and show them that it is high time for them 



to come out from Babylon— and from its confusion of 
false doctrines. 

Zion's Herald publishes the results of an investigation 
respecting the number of "conversions" made 
by two hundred M.E. ministers, educated in the Boston 
Seminary since Higher Criticism and Evolution 
began to be taught there fifteen years ago. The results 
are reported with great satisfaction as giving evidence 
that Methodism is prospering exceedingly under the 
diet which repudiates the doctrine of the ransom and 
makes void the Word of God. These two hundred 
ministers report 6,023 "conversions" during the six 
months preceding March 1, 1900. The argument 
drawn from this is that M.E. prosperity lies in that 
direction, and that the sooner the old fogy believers in 
the Bible and the Cross wake up and abandon these 
the more rapidly will Methodism prosper. Hence it 
was taken as beyond question that the General Conference 
would certainly not raise its voice to interrupt 
successful procedure. 

But to what were these 6,023 persons "converted"? 
To Methodism! Possibly a very few of them may have 
been converted to the Lord. Yet when one remembers 
that nearly all such so-called converts are children 
of from eight to fifteen years it seems amusing 
to credit their "conversion" to either truth or error 
or to call them "conversions" at all. 

Principle seems to be disappearing in respect to 
religious matters. Churchianity of all denominations 
seems to be getting to be a business governed by "rules 
of trade" and "laws of supply and demand." What 
do the people want? What will draw the crowd, add 
to the church list and treasury? Evidently these are 
the queries which cause preachers most of their anxious 
thoughts rather than— What message does the 
Lord's Word give me for his people? What is the 
Truth and how can I best make it plain to the Lord's 
sheep? 

But then again, how could we expect these wise 
"higher critics" to lay much emphasis on the words 
of our Lord and the apostles and prophets when they 
have concluded themselves to be wiser than they— 
claiming that our Lord and the apostles made numerous 
and grievous mistakes in quoting from Moses, 
David, Isaiah and other prophets, words which these 
modern wise men declare were never uttered by these 
prophets. The conclusion is that if the Lord and the 
apostles erred in these matters they were not infallibly 
inspired respecting others: and if they, the "higher 
critics," could correct them on these points they could 
give them general instruction, and are surely more 
competent authorities themselves. 

Alas for the poor sheep ! How many may be expected 
to follow the pernicious ways of these false 
shepherds! None too extravagant is the prophetic 
declaration, "A thousand shall fall at thy side"— only 



the sanctified in Christ Jesus, copies of God's dear Son, 
will be able to stand complete in him. These will be 
the "very elect," and it will not be possible for them 
to be deceived and ensnared; for God will give his 
messengers a charge [a message] for them [present 
truth] and thus these "feet" of the body of Christ shall 
be upheld that they stumble not.-Psa. 91:1,7,11,12. 

EDUCATED WHITE SAVAGES. 



That education is valuable no one will dispute, nor 
is it to be denied that it frequently puts a refined polish 
upon the actions and words of men and women who 
are therefore known as gentle-men and gentle-women. 
It is a mistake, however, to confound this kind of surface 
polishing with the "begetting of the spirit," "a 
new heart." The one is a gilding of the surface manners, 
the other a transformation of the entire being 
affecting the sentiment as well as the conduct. 

As a painful lesson on this subject, proving that 
fine education may leave men still savage at heart and 
only needing opportunity to develop it, we quote below 
an article from the Literary Digest. It relates 
specially to college bred men of two nations, both of 
which combine religious and secular education— Protestant 
Germany and Roman Catholic Belgium: the 
representatives of the former probably were three-fourths 
Protestants and one-fourth Catholics and of the 

R2648 :page 181 

latter all Catholics, corresponding to the populations 
of those countries. Both claim to be "Christian nations," 
kingdoms of God, and their coins declare that 
their rulers reign "by the grace of God." We are 
glad that we hope for a very much better Kingdom 
for which all the more we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth even as it is done in heaven." 
The article follows:— 

"THE WHITE MAN'S SAVAGERY IN AFRICA. 



"While it is customary to speak of the African 
natives as 'savages,' and to deplore the cruelty of the 
Sultan of Turkey, who permits the slave trade to 
flourish between his dominions and the east coast of 
Africa, late revelations prove that men of more civilized 
nationalities can be quite as cruel. The Brussels 
Petit Bleue relates the following: 

"The rise of the Bundja tribes against the Kongo 
authorities was caused by Belgian tyranny. Hundreds 
of men died with Lothaire and other Kongo agents in 



defense of the cruel practices there. The agent Moray 
says: 'The rebellion of the Mongalla region is due 
solely to the cruelty with which the natives are treated. 
Rubber is the booty of the white invader now. If, in 

R2648 : page 182 

a village of 100 male inhabitants able to work, only 
50 appear with the required amount of rubber, soldiers 
are sent to kill the other fifty. The 'loyal' natives 
are used to fight against the 'disloyal,' and as all are 
man-eaters, it is easy to reward the loyalists by promises 
of feasts on the corpses of the slain. 

"The following statement which appears in the 
continental papers speaks for itself. 

"CONGO STATE, DISTRICT BENGALA: Before me, 
Agent of the Antwerp Trading Society, appeared at 
Mandika, the sergeants Massamboko and Mulanda, 
and the privates Mutuana and Pongo, all of the Station 
of Mandika, who swore as follows: 

'"White Man! We have returned from the war. 
We marched thirty hours' distance with the white man 
Imela (Van Eyken). He ordered us to enter the villages, 
to see if the inhabitants had gathered enough 
rubber. If they had not, we were to kill them. In 
one village we told him we had fulfilled his orders. 
He told us we had not done enough. He told us to 
cut up the men, placing the pieces on poles; the bodies 
of the women and children we were to put in a big 
scaffold in the shape of a cross. Returning through 
N'Dobe we found all the natives treated like that. We 
swear that this is true. Follow marks and agent's 
name: Moray.' 

"According to other reports hundreds of natives 
have had their hands chopped off because they did not 
furnish the required quantity of rubber. Similar cruelties 
are reported from the French Sudan. Several 
high officials formerly in the German employ have also 
been punished as offenders of this kind. The Dutch 
papers remark that the French, English and Spaniards 
have a great advantage in the patriotic discipline of 
their newspapers, for while the Dutch and German 
papers will report an outrage of their countrymen immediately, 
Frenchmen and Englishmen will exercise 
patriotic prudence." 



R2648 : page 182 

"KEEP YOURSELVES IN THE LOVE OF GOD." 

-JUDE2L- 

WE CANNOT KEEP ourselves in this love unless 
we have gotten into it. And that all 



men do not possess it, or are not in this condition of 
heart, is not only manifested to our senses through the 
experiences of life, but testified to by our Lord Jesus, 
who said to some of the holiness people of his day, "I 
know that ye have not the love of God in you."— 
John 5:42. 

We are to distinguish then between natural love 
and the love of God. All mankind has some share at 
least of natural love— self-love, love for family, love 
of friends. Our Lord, speaking of this kind of love, 
implies that it is not the love of God, saying, "If ye 
love them that love you, what thank have ye? For 
sinners also do even the same." (Luke 6:32.) The 
love of God, therefore, is a different kind of love to 
that which is common to the natural man, and we 
need to be directed into it, and to grow or develop in 
it, as the Apostle testifies, saying, "The Lord direct 
your hearts into the love of God." (2 Thess. 3:5.) 
We are directed into this love through the divine Word 
which brings to our attention the peculiarity of God's 
love as distinguished from that of the natural fallen 
man. While love in the natural man is more or less 
selfish, even in our very best exercise of it, on behalf 
of friends, God commendeth his love toward us as 
being of a superior kind, in that while we were yet 
sinners, aliens, strangers, enemies through wicked 
works, under his gracious, loving plan Christ died for 
us. This kind of unmerited, sacrificing love is wholly 
different from anything that is known to fallen humanity. 
As our Lord Jesus said, the greatest love 
amongst men would be that a man should lay down 
his life for his friends, but to lay down his life for his 
enemies is certainly a much higher type of love,— unselfish, 
gracious, heavenly.— John 15:13; Rom. 5:7. 

The first blessing that comes to us, as the eyes of 
our understanding open and we come to some knowledge 
of the divine character and love, is that we perceive 
or discern or come to realize this higher type of 
love— the love of God. As the Apostle says, "Hereby 
perceive we the love of God, because he [Christ] laid 
down his life for us." "Herein was manifested the 
love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world that we might live through 
him."-l John 3:16; 4:9. 

It is after we have thus perceived the love of God 
that it begins to operate upon us, if we are in a favorable 
condition— if our hearts are good ground, prepared 
under divine providence for this knowledge. 
Of such the Apostle says, "The love of Christ constraineth 
us"— draws us, awakens a reciprocating love 
in our hearts, so that in turn we love God. Not that 
we first loved God, but that his love attracted and developed 
ours. (1 John 4:19.) The effect of this love 
upon the good-ground heart is that very shortly it 
decides that it could do nothing less than love similarly 
in return, and thus be willing to lay down life 



itself in God's service. It esteems that this would be 
but a reasonable service, a reasonable recompense for 
divine favors. 

The Apostle Paul sums up this transformation 
from selfishness to the love of God in a few words, 
saying, "We ourselves also were at one time foolish, 
disobedient, deceived, serving divers desires and pleasures, 
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating 
one another; but when the goodness and love of God 
our Savior toward man appeared he saved us [delivered 

R2648 : page 183 

us from this evil condition of heart], not on account 

of works of righteousness which we had done, but according 

to his own mercy, he saved us by the washing 

of regeneration and renewing of the holy spirit, which 

he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our 

Savior."— Titus 3:3-6.— See Diaglott. 

This newness of spirit, this new mind, this mind 
in accord with the love of God, the Apostle assures us 
is not received except by those who receive the holy 
spirit. Those who merely take the step of justification 
may to some extent experience a reformation of 
life, so that instead of living an openly evil course 
they will seek to live at least moral lives. But none 
can expect to receive the begetting of the holy spirit 
of love, and thus to become possessed of "the love of 
God," a self-sacrificing love, unless he takes the step 
of consecration to the Lord, which brings him into the 
condition in which he may indeed have the holy spirit, 
the spirit of divine love, shed abroad in his heart. Let 
none then hope to obtain the love of God in any other 
way than the way which God has provided. Undoubtedly 
in the Millennial age it will be made possible 
for the natural man to come into "the love of 
God" through a process of restitution; as he shall 
more and more attain to the perfection of human nature 
in that time he may to that extent more and more 
become possessed of the love of God until, when finally 
perfected, he may possess this love of God in full 
measure,— because humanity, in its perfect condition, 
is a fleshly image of the invisible God. But now, 
while we still have these mortal bodies that are imperfect, 
and while restitution has not commenced, 
there is only the one way of attaining the love of God 
—by obedience to the call of this age, to present our 
bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, 
through Jesus our Lord. 

The new creature is to grow and to be more and 
more filled with the holy spirit— more and more filled 
with the love of God; hence we may expect that there 
will be differences of attainment in this matter, and 
we should know what to look for as evidences of our 
growth in grace and of our attainment of this love of 
God. The Apostle John declares, "This is [proof of 



our possession of] the love of God, that we keep his 

commandments, and do not find them grievous." (1 John 5:3.) 

He who keeps the Lord's commandments, 

but who finds them grievous, has thus an evidence 

that he is not in heart-harmony with them, that he 

has not made a full consecration of himself to the 

Lord— the obedience of such an one would be no proof 

whatever of the possession of "the love of God." But 

whoever of the Lord's people is so in harmony with 

him that they delight to do his will, have in this an 

evidence that the love of God is dwelling in them 

R2649 : page 183 

richly and abounding. This is the same thought which 

the Apostle again expresses, saying, "Whosoever 

keepeth his word [loves the word of God, and takes 

pleasure not in turning, twisting and endeavoring to 

avoid the force of that Word, but who keepeth or cherisheth 

it, loveth it, and seeketh to conform thereto] in 

him verily is the love of God perfected."— 1 John 2:5. 

This reminds us of our dear Redeemer, in whom 
verily the love of the Father was perfected, and who 
is represented by the Prophet as saying, "I delight to 
do thy will, O God; yea, thy law is within my heart." 
(Psalm 40:8.) And our Lord marked out the same 
spirit, as being essential to those who would be his 
disciples, saying, "If ye keep my commandments, ye 
shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Father's 
commandments, and abide in his love." (John 15:10.) 
There is no suggestion in any of these or in other 
Scriptures that mere outward formalistic obedience 
and piety count anything with the Lord. The Lord 
"seeketh such to worship him as worship him in spirit 
and in truth"— such as have the spirit of righteousness, 
love for righteousness, love for truth, love for 
all the qualities of the divine character, and a desire 
to conform thereto in thought, word and deed. 

Nor are we to make the mistake that some have 
made, of supposing that the commandments referred 
to by our Lord are the Ten Commandments upon which 
hung the covenant which God made with the Jews. 
We are not Jews, and hence have nothing whatever 
to do with their covenant, given through Moses, its 
mediator, at Sinai, nor with the Law upon which it 
was based. We are Christians, and have to do with 
a better covenant, sealed with the precious blood of 
Christ our Mediator, and based upon a still higher law 
than the Decalogue— a law which instead of saying, 
"Thou shalt not" do this, "Thou shalt not" do that, 
is positive, and declares what we shall do, saying, 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
with all thy mind, with all thy being, with all thy 
strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 
This is a higher law, of which our Law-giver, Jesus, 
said, "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye 



love," and of which the Apostle said, "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law." The Apostle John says, "He that 
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God; he that loveth not 
knoweth not God, for God is love."— 1 John 4:8,16. 
Altho the first evidence of the possession of "the 
love of God" is a love for God, nevertheless the Scriptures 
distinctly point out to us that an additional requirement 
is specified, viz., love for the brethren— for 
those who have the spirit of God, especially, but in a 
general way at least a sympathetic love for all mankind. 
Thus the Apostle says, "If we love one another, 
[it is an evidence that] God dwelleth in us, and [that] 

R2649 :page 184 

his love is perfected in us." (1 John 4:12.) The same 
Apostle emphasizes this same point, saying, "Whosoever 
hath this world's goods [interests, affairs], and 
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels 
of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of 
God in him?" (1 John 3: 17.) The intimation is that 
such a lack of love and sympathy, and such a restraint 
of assistance from a brother in need, would imply that 
the love of God either did not at all dwell in such an 
one, or that it was but slightly developed— far from 
being perfected. 

Nor does this love merely exercise itself toward 
the brethren in matters of temporal necessities; rather, 
it affects all the affairs of life, leading the one who 
enjoys it to "walk in love," "forbearing one another 
in love." (Eph. 5:2; 4:2.) And even were it necessary 
to speak an unpalatable truth, the spirit of the 
Lord, "the love of God," will dictate the speaking of 
the truth in love, which the Apostle assures us is essential 
to our growth in Christ.— Eph. 4:15. 

Knowledge is valuable, but only incidentally; of 
itself the Apostle assures us knowledge would be inclined 
to puff us up, make us vain and boastful, and 
thus quite out of harmony with the spirit of God, the 
spirit of love, meekness, gentleness. Knowledge might 
make us merely tinkling cymbals giving out a sound, 
but possessing no real merit in the Lord's sight. But 
knowledge, when it serves its proper purpose, brings 
us to the appreciation of "the love [that is] of God" 
and to a realization of the wisdom of copying his character, 
that we should seek so far as possible to be like 
our Father which is in heaven, copies of his dear Son, 
our Lord. The Apostle brings this position clearly to 
our attention when he says, "That ye being rooted 
and grounded in love may be able to comprehend with 
all saints what is the breadth and length and depth and 
height and to know [appreciate] the love of Christ... 
and be filled with all the fulness of God.— Eph. 3:17-19. 

Undoubtedly love is the principal thing to be 
studied, to be appreciated, to be copied and practiced 
in our lives. We trust that a large proportion of the 



WATCH TOWER readers have already become partakers 
of this "love of God," and that all such are seeking 
to have it perfected in them, and to be rooted and 
grounded in it. We have the Apostle's assurance that 
only those who take this standpoint can make permanent 
and thorough progress in grace and knowledge. 
Those who have entered the school of Christ, and who 
refuse to progress in it toward perfection, may assuredly 
expect that sooner or later their knowledge 
of the divine plan will slip from them; while those who 
do make progress in this proper direction may expect 
that the lengths and breadths of the divine plan will 
continue opening before them, and that their growth 
in knowledge will keep pace with their growth in love. 

Finally, in harmony with our text, let us remember 
that this is not a matter that God attends to, but 
a matter which requires our own attention. God has 
made all the provisions whereby we may know of his 
love, and may be constrained by it, and may be accepted 
into it, but it devolves upon us to keep ourselves 
in the love of God: and we can only thus keep 
ourselves in his love by seeking to practice in the daily 
affairs of life the principles of his love: permitting the 
love of God to constrain us daily to sacrifice ourselves 
in the Lord's service, for his honor and for the spread 
of his truth; permitting the love of the brethren to so 
fill our hearts that, as the Apostle expresses it, we 
may be glad to "lay down our lives for the brethren" 
(1 John 3:16); permitting a sympathetic love for mankind 
in general, the "groaning creation," in all of its 
trials and difficulties, to exercise our hearts so that we 
shall more and more feel kindly and generously toward 
all with whom we have contact and to make us helpful 
to them as we have opportunity; permitting this 
love even to extend to the brute creation under our 
care, so that we will not be negligent of their interests; 
all this seems essential to our keeping ourselves in 
this love of God. Let us more and more practice, and 
thus become more and more perfected in this love, 
which is the spirit of our Father, the spirit of our 
Lord, and the spirit of all who are truly members of 
the body of Christ. 



R2649 : page 184 

JESUS WALKING ON THE SEA. 

MATT. 14:22-33.-JULY 1. 

"Of a truth thou art the Son of God." 

OUR LAST LESSON, respecting the feeding of 

above five thousand persons with five barley 

loaves and two small fish, and the twelve haversacks of 



fragments gathered, and the illustration this afforded 
of divine ability to care for the Lord's people, and at 
the same time the propriety of frugality on their part, 
was followed that same night by another miracle and 
another lesson. After the multitudes had been fed, 
toward the close of the day, they evidently were loth to 
leave the company of one so able and willing to care 
for their necessities, and probably it was to expedite 
their dispersion that our Lord urged the apostles to 
start in their boat for Capernaum. 

Our Lord, after dispersing the multitude, sought 
the solitude of the mountain in prayer. Tho he sometimes 
prayed with his disciples in their hearing, so that 

R2649 : page 185 

they recorded the words of his prayer, it is evident that 

he was not content with merely these opportunities, but 

frequently sought the Father alone, as he has counseled 

his disciples to do, saying, "Enter into thy closet [private 

apartment] and pray to thy Father in secret." 

(Matt. 6:6.) All Christians of experience have realized 

the value of such secret personal communion with the 

heavenly Father, nor are we surprised that our Lord 

Jesus felt the need of a similar communion. His knowledge 

of the Father, and his fellowship with him before 

the world was made, so far from satisfying him and 

rendering prayer unnecessary, rather stimulated his desire 

for further fellowship and communion, especially 

as he was alone in the world— even his beloved disciples, 

not having yet been begotten of the spirit (John 7:39), 

could not enter into fellowship with him in respect 

to spiritual things, nor appreciate the trials which 

came to him as a perfect man, in a way in which they 

do not come to fallen humanity. He needed such fellowship 

with the heavenly Father for the refreshment 

of his own zeal, for the keeping warm of his own love 

and devotion, which was the basis of his consecration 

and his daily sacrificing of himself as a man, even unto 

death. 

There is no intimation given that our Lord spent 
much time at prayer, morning and evening, yet we may 

R2650 : page 185 

reasonably suppose that he never neglected to seek the 
Father's face; but these brief seasons of worship and 
prayer daily were evidently supplemented by occasions 
like the one mentioned in this lesson, in which our 
Lord spent, apparently, considerable of the night in 
prayer and communion with the Father. There is a 
lesson in this for the Lord's people. The duties of life, 
pressing upon us daily, are not to be neglected; each 
is to feel, as our Lord expressed it, "I must be about 
my Father's business," and this would imply, ordinarily, 
short prayers, which our Lord commended, saying, 



"When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the 
heathen do; for they think they shall be heard for their 
much speaking. Be ye not therefore like unto them; 
for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of 
before ye ask him." (Matt. 6:7,8.) And the example 
of a prayer, given his disciples, is brief. Nevertheless, 
in proportion as we feel the importance of the great 
work in which, by the Lord's favor, we are privileged 
to be co-laborers with him, our hearts should be and 
will be drawn to seasons of spiritual communion;— not 
necessarily a prayer in the sense of making requests of 
the Father, for much of such seasons will doubtless be 
devoted to thanksgiving for the mercies and favors already 
experienced, and for the gracious promises upon 
which we base our faith for the future, and communion 
with the Lord, in the sense of pondering his will respecting 
us, and how we may most acceptably serve 
and please him. 

While our Lord was thus holding communion with 
the Father, the apostles rowing the boat were having 
difficulty to make headway, a strong head-wind having 
arisen, which made the lake very rough, boisterous, 
billowy. John, who was one of those in the boat, tells 
us that they had only gotten about twenty-five or thirty 
furlongs (two and a half to three miles) from the shore, 
in the several hours they had been rowing. This was 
what is termed the fourth watch of the night, viz., between 
three and six o'clock in the morning. While 
thus rowing hard, worn and sleepy, they saw the figure 
of a man near them, walking on the water, and apparently 
intending to pass their boat. (Mark 6:48-50.) 
Some of them cried out in fear, thinking that they had 
seen a supernatural being, and that it foreboded some 
calamity, but it was Jesus who spoke to them, and set 
at rest their fears. 

The boldness of Peter's faith was then most strikingly 
illustrated by his request that the Lord should 
bid him walk on the water; and having received the 
permission, his faith was so strong that he did walk for 
a few steps, until seemingly appalled by his own temerity 
and the boisterousness of the water, he began to 
sink, and cried to the Lord for help, which he received 
through touching the Lord's hand. If the miracle of 
the loaves attested the superhuman authority of our 
Lord, so likewise did this manifestation of his power 
attest the same; and if the former illustrated his power 
to protect his people from want and to supply all their 
necessities, this last manifested that divine power is unlimited 
and able to preserve his people in all the storms 
and difficulties and trials of life. 

This is a good lesson for us to apply individually, 
realizing, as we all must, that our Lord has supernaturally 
fed us with spiritual food, and that during the 
darkness of the night-time which precedes the Millennial 
dawn and sunlight there will be storms and difficulties 
arising which would overwhelm us without the 



Lord's aid. We are to remember that not only the 

natural winds and waves obey his power and command, 

but that all the storms and billows of trouble and persecution 

which may impede and weary us are amenable 

to his control. The more we are able to realize this, 

the more of joy and peace we will experience, because 

the stronger will be our faith in him who is able to 

succor us and who has promised eventually to do so, 

and that meantime all things shall be overruled for our 

highest welfare, if we abide in him. 

But the boat and the twelve toiling rowers, and the 
storm and darkness of the night, all picture still more 
perfectly the experiences of the Lord's people as a 
whole— not the experiences of a sectarian church, but 
the experiences of the one true Church, of which the 
Lord is the Head, the "Church of the First-born, whose 

R2650 :page 186 

names are written in heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) This 
true Church has indeed had a stormy time since parting 
with her Lord who ascended to the Father. The 
darkness came down upon them— darkness of error and 
superstition; and the great Adversary, through the Antichrist 
and many less antichrists, has aroused all through 
this Gospel age a great storm against the Lord's faithful 
few. The difficulties of their position have caused them 
to bend every effort to make progress against such fearful 
opposition, of which one of the apostles declares, 
"We wrestle not against flesh and blood [merely], but 
against principalities, and against powers, against the 
rulers of the darkness of this world, and against wicked 
spirits in high positions." (Eph. 6:12.) This battle 
against adverse influences has continued throughout the 
night-time of this Gospel age, and yet the Church has 
not reached the harbor nor has the storm abated. 

As our Lord came to the disciples in the midst of 
the storm, in the fourth watch of the night (that is, in 
the early morning), so his second coming in the Millennial 
dawn is to the Church and to "help her," rescue 
her from her toil and weariness and peril, as the 
Prophet says, "The Lord shall help her early in the 
morning." (Psa. 46:5.) And as the manner of our 
Lord's coming to his disciples was different from that they 
had expected, so the manner of his second advent differs 
from what has been expected, and Peter would seem 
to represent a class living now, in the end of the age, 
who being fully convinced of the Lord's presence are 
privileged to walk to him by faith. But as Peter's faith 
was unequal to the occasion, except as the Lord came 
to his rescue, so all of the faithful now will need the 
Master's hand stretched to their relief, otherwise they 
would sink in discouragement, because of the lack of 
faith. 

Is there not a good lesson here for all who have 
been faithfully laboring in self-control, and in the Lord's 



service, to bring all their thoughts and words and doings 
into full accord with the will of God in Christ, and who 
experience from the world and the flesh and the Adversary 
serious opposition as the Lord's people? The 
lesson here, in harmony with its presentations elsewhere 
in the Scriptures, is that little progress can be made by 
the Lord's people until the Master himself shall join 
them; and that then their blessedness and privileges 
will be proportioned to the measure of their faith. How 
strongly this speaks to us, then, of continued faithfulness 
and of growth in faith, not in ourselves but in the 
Lord, and of his ultimate deliverance of all who put 
their trust in him. 

In John's account we learn that as soon as the 
Lord and Peter got into the boat, immediately the wind 
and storm ceased and the ship was at the harbor. So 
it will be with the Lord's people, the "little flock;" so 
soon as their faith has been fully tested at the Lord's 
second presence, he will join their number, and immediately 
the trials and storms, difficulties and oppositions 
will be at an end, and the desired haven of 
heavenly condition will have been reached, the Kingdom 
will have come. Courage, then, dear brother-mariners 
on the sea of experience, seeking to make your 
calling and election sure! Let us note carefully the 
Master's words to Peter as especially applicable to ourselves, 
viz., that all that will hinder us from walking 
out to meet the Lord is lack of faith. "O thou of little 
faith: wherefore didst thou doubt?" 

Let us learn to trust the Lord, not only in the 
matters which pertain to his Church and all of its interests 
and affairs, but also in all of the matters and interests 
of ourselves and families. The lessons will be profitable 
to us, and prepare us for larger measures of divine 
favor, and for the joys of the Kingdom. And all this 
faith is based upon a clear realization of our Golden 
Text, viz., that our Lord Jesus is truly the Son of God. 
If the Son of God, he is true, and if he is true then all 
the exceeding great and precious promises which he 
left for us may be relied upon, built upon, anchored 
into; and such reliance in them will give us the faith 
requisite for the overcoming of all the difficulties and 
obstacles of life, that we may come off more than conquerors 
through him who loved us and who bought us 
with his own precious blood. 



R2651 :page 186 

"I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE." 

--JOHN 6:22-40.-JULY 8.- 

SOME OF THE MULTITUDE who dined on the 
five loaves and two fish were evidently very 



deeply impressed with the miracle, and inspired with 
great respect for Jesus. A number of them (we cannot 
suppose very many) concluded that they would follow 
this great Teacher, possessed of such wonderful powers, 
feeling assured that becoming his disciples would at 
least safeguard them from want; and this, to a people of 
their kind and under those conditions, was evidently 
quite an inducement. However, when they found the 
Lord on the other side the lake, at Capernaum, and expressed 
to him their interest, and how it had led them 
to follow him, he told them plainly that theirs was a 
selfish or mercenary interest, and not the kind that he 
desired to cultivate, namely, an interest in the truth. 
Taking advantage of the situation, our Lord gave, 
not only to these but also to his disciples and to us 
through them, a most valuable lesson on the proper 

R2651 :page 187 

things to be sought after; pointing out that the chief 
aim and desire and object of life should not be the meat 
that perisheth, earthly food, earthly comforts, earthly 
pleasures, which at very most can be but transitory, 
but that on the contrary the chief aim of all should be 
to attain life eternal, beyond the present dying condition. 
He points out that God's provision for his creatures 
is not merely earthly food for the sustenance of our 
natural bodies for a little time, but much more important, 
a spiritual nourishment, of which, if we partake, 
we shall attain eternal life. 

He would have them see that the miracle which 
he had performed, and whose blessing they had shared, 
was merely an illustration of a greater gift, of a more 
valuable bread of life, that he, the Son of God, was 
alone able to give them— and the same is true of us and 
of all. By way of assuring them that he was as able to 
provide the bread of eternal life as he had shown himself 
able to provide the natural food, he declared himself 
to be the Son of God; and that the heavenly Father 
had sealed him, marked him, granted him the evidences 
and proofs of sonship in the powers conferred upon him. 
The seal was the holy spirit, the holy power of God, 
which acting upon our Lord Jesus enabled him to turn 
the water into wine and to increase the broken barley 
loaves and two little fish so as to feed the multitude. 
These powers were the evidences or outward manifestations 
to men that God's holy spirit was with him, the 
mark or seal of his relationship to God as an honored 
representative, a Son. On the strength of these evidences, 
the witnesses having the right condition of heart 
should have been prepared to heed our Lord's testimony, 
as a message from the Father. 

The discourse was not without its effect: the hearers 
felt the force of the suggestion that the important food 
to be sought after was that which would give the life 
eternal, and as Jews they had before their minds the 



further thought that God had made a covenant of works 
with their nation, with promises of eternal life attached 
thereto— the Mosaic Law Covenant. Hence their inquiry, 
What works shall we do that would be pleasing 
to God, and that thereby we might have eternal life? 
Give us whatever message you have that will help us 
in this matter. 

Our Lord's answer may at first seem to us a peculiar 
one, in that he declares that to believe on him would 
be a "work"— the work most acceptable before God— 
the only work that could possibly make them acceptable 
to God. What is meant by this we will consider further 
along. His hearers evidently understood exactly what 
he meant, viz., that the thing most pleasing in God's 
sight would be that they should acknowledge him as 
the Son of God, the Messiah, coming into the world 
according to divine promise, to establish the Kingdom 
of God, and to begin the blessing of all the families of 
the earth. But now they asked a sign of his Messiahship, 
instead of realizing that they had already seen the 
sign or signet or seal of God upon the Lord Jesus, as 
manifested not only in his spirit of love, kindness, 
generosity, goodness, purity and truth, as well as in 
his doctrines, but additionally that they had seen outward 
manifestations and evidences of the divine power 
upon him, as shown, for instance, in the miracle of the 
day before. This was because they were hard-hearted, 
as the Scriptures elsewhere express the matter (Mark 3:5; 
John 12:40), that is to say, they were in a faithless 
attitude, not readily impressionable, but rather inclined 
to be skeptical: hence these signs or evidences 
of the seal of God upon Jesus were not sufficient for 
them. 

We can readily see, however, that if sign upon sign 
had been given, the same "evil heart of unbelief" could 
reject ten signs as well as it could reject one. Just so it 
was in the case of Pharaoh: he was really more impressed 
with the first sign given by Moses than by the 
succeeding ones, each of which being received in an improper 
spirit tended to make his heart the harder, until 
the last. Just so it is with some today in respect to the 
Lord's promises. They incline to ask, Did the Apostle 
say this, that is contrary to my prejudices? And if 
convinced of the fact they would want to know whether 
any other apostle had said it, and thirdly, whether the 
Lord himself had said it, and fourthly, whether any of 
the prophets had said it,— seeking not so much to believe 
as for an excuse for disbelieving. Such persons usually, 
if they had all of these evidences, would be no more 
convinced by the multiplicity of testimony. On the 
contrary, he who really believes the Bible to be God's 
Word believes its every authentic testimony, whether 
by the Lord or an apostle or prophet, and whether stated 
once or many times reiterated. 

The workings of skepticism in the minds of our 
Lord's auditors is evidenced by their statement. In 



substance they said, "We cannot acknowledge that your 
miracle was so great or so wonderful as necessarily to 
imply that you are the Son of God, for we remember 
that Moses exercised a power something of this kind; 
in fact, he provided bread enough for our forefathers, 
the whole nation of Israel, for quite a long time in the 
wilderness, and that without any loaves and fish to begin 
with,— we refer to the manna." 

Our Lord's response is that the manna was not 
produced by Moses, that he had nothing whatever to do 
with sending it; that it came directly as a provision of 
the heavenly Father, Moses not being even an agent in 
the matter. And then our Lord pointed out that the manna 
given in the wilderness was typical of the true Manna, 
the true bread of eternal life— himself and the truth he 

R2651 :page 188 

proclaimed— which he now desired them to receive at 
his hands. 

They did not yet get the thought that he referred 
to himself, but rather were getting a crude and natural 
thought, that as God had given manna from heaven 
that sustained their fathers in the wilderness, so now 
this great Teacher, Jesus, was telling them of a still 
higher class of manna, the partaking of which would 
yield eternal life, and hence they exclaimed, "Lord, 
evermore give us this bread!" Our Lord then explained 
the figure or parable, declaring, in the language of our 
Golden Text, "I am the bread of life; he that cometh 
to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me 
shall never thirst." 

It is evident that in the words "cometh to me" our 
Lord did not mean to approach him as his hearers had 
done, coming across the lake. The expression "cometh 
to me" must be understood, therefore, as coming 
to the Lord with hunger and thirst for righteousness, 
with a desire for the life eternal, and hence for the bread 
of life by which it might be attained. All who would 
thus come to Jesus, in this proper attitude of heart, 
would find him to be indeed a satisfying portion. Likewise 
the expression, "He that believeth on me shall 
never thirst," must be understood to mean more than 
merely believing that such a person lived, for it is written 
that "devils also believe and tremble:" to "believe," 
therefore, must be understood to signify accepting 
the Lord, not merely intellectually, but with the 
heart, as it is written, "With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness" [to a change of heart which aspires 
to righteousness]. He who thus believes in the Lord 
from the heart, recognizing him as the Son of God, 
through whom are to be fulfilled all the exceeding great 
and precious promises of the divine Word, receives such 
a refreshment, such a slaking of thirst, such a satisfaction, 
as will never end so long as he maintains this 
faith. (Rom. 10:10.) Such find the divine provision 



in Christ so abundant that they could not ask for more, 
and exclaim,— "It satisfies my longings, as nothing else 
could do." 

And now we see the meaning of our Lord's words 
of verse 29, "This is the work of God [the work which 
God would be pleased with], that we believe on him 
whom he hath sent." There is a work connected with 
believing;— not a work with our hands, but a work with 
our heads and our hearts: and no work that we could 
do with our hands would be as acceptable in the Lord's 
sight as this. Indeed, when we realize that in our fallen 
and imperfect condition it is impossible for us to 
do anything perfectly, when we remember also that 
God is perfect, that all his work is perfect, and that he 
cannot therefore be in sympathy with imperfection, or 
any degree of sin, we can readily see that the very best 
works we could offer him aside from faith would be 
unacceptable. 

But God has proposed to do a great work for us— 
he has done that great work in that he has provided the 
Redeemer, through whom the ransom-price has been 
paid for our race: and now God can be just and yet be 
the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. Hence, 
while no work that we can do could be accepted of the 
Lord so long as we are under condemnation, yet he 
can, by his own provision, accept our faith in Christ, 

R2652 : page 188 

and justify us through that faith: this, our first work 
possible, is therefore what God calls for. He will accept 
no other work, except it is preceded by this one 
and based upon this one. O that all could realize the 
importance of faith in the Lord's sight! "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God," and the more faith 
we exercise the more do we please him: not credulity, 
not a belief of something which God has not said; not 
a belief in our own imaginings or those of other men; 
but a belief in what God has said, and a firm, confident 
trust therein: this is acceptable with God, and becomes 
to all who exercise it the ground or base of justification, 
that "being justified by faith we might have peace with 
God through our Lord Jesus Christ."— Rom. 5:1. 

The Lord did not here discuss the further step to 
the high calling of this Gospel age; hence we will not 
discuss it now. He is dealing merely with our first 
necessary step in approaching God,— justification. The 
thing necessary, in order to justification, is the acceptance 
of Christ as the Bread of Life— which must be preceded 
by the realization that we have no life in ourselves, 
death having passed upon all of our race through 
father Adam's transgression; and that the Lord Jesus 
was made flesh in order that he might meet the penalty 
that was upon father Adam, and thus upon the race; 
and that now, therefore, whoever accepts this free grace 
of God in Christ, whoever appropriates to himself the 



merit of Christ's sacrifice, is thereby eating, partaking 
of the great benefits and blessings provided by God in 
the Anointed one, who gave his life for the life of the 
world, a ransom price. Whoever mentally accepts this 
fact, and feeds upon it in his heart, is represented as 
feeding upon the flesh of the Son of Man— partaking of 
the human rights, privileges and blessings of restitution 
[or in this age justification] provided in him. 

Our Lord pointed out to his hearers the fact that 
their slowness to receive him, and the slowness of the 
people of Israel in general, was not an evidence that he 
was not the Messiah, but rather was an evidence that 
they were not in a condition to receive the Messiah. 
And further, that it was not God's purpose that he 
should attract the whole Jewish people, but merely that 
he should draw to himself, by the gracious words which 
should proceed out of his mouth, and by the miracles 

R2652 : page 189 

or evidences of power of the Lord in him, such as the 
Father had "given" him— such as were pleasing to the 
Father, such as were ready to receive a further blessing 
through this channel which the Father had provided. 
And he assured them that while not expecting all to be 
thus drawn to him, nevertheless all who would be drawn 
thus of the Father he would most gladly welcome, because 
he was not in the world on a mission of his own 
merely, but to fulfil the Father's purposes,— with which 
he was in full harmony. 

In the two verses following, our Lord seems to distinguish 
between the two classes of saved ones, verse 39 
referring to the elect class of this Gospel age, and verse 
40 to the general blessing upon mankind to follow this 
age, during the Millennium,— and to the opportunity 
that will then be afforded to every creature to be blessed 
with this great gift of eternal life, purchased by our 
Lord at such high cost as his own life. 

The elect are frequently, as here, spoken of as specially 
given to Jesus, while the whole of mankind are 
referred to as his because bought with his own precious 
blood. The Father draws to the Son during this age a 
special class, and gives such a class to him to be companions, 
joint-heirs in his Millennial Kingdom— these 
are sometimes called his "brethren," as when it is said 
that Jesus was "the first-born among many brethren" 
(Rom. 8:29); and again, they are designated his bride 
and joint-heir, in contradistinction to the saved of the 
world of mankind, who will be recognized as the children 
of Christ, and of whom he will be the "Everlasting 
Father. "-Rev. 21:9; 22:17; Rom. 8:17; Isa. 9:6. 

Our Lord declares it to be the Father's will that all 
whom he has "given" him shall be saved, shall be 
raised up— not one of this class shall be lost. Who, 
then, are these thus sure of salvation? We answer that 
the Apostle Paul adds a word of explanation along this 



line, informing us of the class whom the Father has 
elected and predestinated: they are such as receive the 
Lord Jesus now by faith, and who hearing the invitation 
of this Gospel age, the "high calling," are so impressed 
with it that they lay aside every weight and run 
with patience the race set before them in the gospel;— 
and so doing, under divine providence and direction 
they are molded and fashioned as respects their characters 
so that they become "copies of God's dear Son." 
-Rom. 8:29.-Diaglott. 

The heavenly Father fixed the marks and conditions 
of his predestination of this class, not so much 
in respect to all who shall hear the good tidings (altho 
he has to do with sending the message); not so much 
in respect to who all shall be drawn by the message of 
his grace in Christ (tho he has to do with the drawing, 
and in the present time is drawing only a particular 
class); not so much with reference to the call that goes 
forth to all who accept Jesus, inviting them to run the 
race of self-sacrifice in his footsteps (tho he is interested 
in this call, and supervises the affairs of those who accept 
this call, causing that all things shall work together 
for their good); but especially he has predestinated in 
respect to the number who shall constitute the Bride of 
Christ, and to the character of all who shall be in that 
company: that it shall be composed of such and such 
only as shall during this Gospel age, while in the school 
of Christ, learn thoroughly the lessons of faith and obedience, 
developing characters of like pattern to that so 
gloriously manifested in Jesus, whom the Father sent 
forth to be not only our Redeemer, but also our Pattern. 

It is the Father's will that every one who thus obeys 
the leadings of divine providence, and attains to the 
likeness of the Lord Jesus in his heart, his will, his intention 
(not perfection of the flesh), shall everyone of 
them be saved in this great salvation, and be sharers 
with Jesus in the "first resurrection," and in the glory, 
honor and immortality to which it leads. Not one of 
these shall be lost; every one of them shall be raised up 
to that glorious station at the appointed time— "the last 
day," the seventh of the great week of thousand-year 
days,— the Millennial day. And as the Prophet declares, 
it will be early in that day, for "God shall help 
her [Zion] and that right early [in the morning]." 

The 40th verse does not refer to those whom the 
Father specially gives to the Son to be companions and 
joint-heirs in the Kingdom, and whom he draws through 
his providences during this age: it refers to the remainder 
of mankind whose ransom price our Lord Jesus has 
paid, and who, according to the Father's program, our 
Lord Jesus himself is to draw unto himself, during the 
Millennial age; as it is written, "I, if I be lifted up, 
will draw all men unto me." But even as the Father's 
drawing is not a compulsory drawing, so likewise the 
drawing of the Son will not be compulsory. But since 
we may assume that the majority of those who now resist 



the Father's drawing do so because of blindness, 
ignorance, etc., because the prince of this world is now 
reigning and deceiving, we may reasonably suppose that 
when our dear Redeemer's Millennial Kingdom shall 
have been established, and when Satan, the prince of 
this world, has been "bound" (Rev. 20:2), and when 
the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth,— 
then the drawing influence upon the world of mankind 
exerted by the Redeemer himself and by the Church, 
his body, associated with him in glory, will be a drawing 
which will yield much larger results, so that many 
will yield to it and come to the Lord truly and heartily, 
and receive of the blessings which God has provided 
in him;— all except those who wilfully love sin and refuse 
the terms of the Kingdom, faith and obedience. 
Of this class our Lord declares (verse 40), that it is 

R2652 : page 190 

his Father's will that all such shall see the Son (their 

blinded eyes being opened in that Millennial day, as 

the Lord has promised through the prophets.— Zech. 12:10.) 

Their eyes of understanding being then opened, 

they will be able to appreciate, as they cannot now appreciate, 

the Lord and the covenant of eternal life which 

he offers to all who obey him. They will not thus see 

him, however, until the god of this world, who now 

blinds the eyes of their understanding, shall be bound 

for the thousand years, and his baneful influence offset 

with the light of the knowledge of God which will then 

shine out to the world from the great Sun of Righteousness, 

—the Lord and the glorified Church, his body. 

It is God's will that all who shall accept Christ 
then shall have everlasting life too; and that they shall 
be raised up by the Lord Jesus to perfection also,— tho 
theirs will be an earthly, and not like the others a heavenly, 
perfection; and their raising up will also be "at 
the last day," but not at its beginning as with the 
"elect" of the "first resurrection." The overcomers of 
this Gospel age, the body of Christ, will be perfected in 
his likeness in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 
and then subsequently, throughout that age, the work 
of raising up the world of mankind out of sin and depravity 
and degradation will go gradually and grandly 
forward, until by the close of the Millennial age all the 
willing and obedient shall have eaten to their fill of the 
bread from heaven and shall be fully raised up, out of 
sin and death, to life eternal— in the image and likeness 
of God as was Adam before sin, but with characters 
perfected and tested in righteousness by their Millennial 
experiences. 



R2653 : page 190 



"LORD, HELP ME!"-MATT. 15:25. 

--MARK 7:24-30.~JULY 15.- 

AFTER OUR LORD'S discourse on the bread from 
heaven (we know not how long after) he and 
his disciples went westward to the border of Phoenicia. 
There, entering into a house with the evident design of 
secluding himself from general notice, and possibly to 
gain quiet and rest, the Lord was quickly discovered by 
a Syro-Phoenician mother, whose daughter was possessed 
of a demon, and who availed herself of this opportunity 
to importune the Lord for her daughter's 
deliverance. The fame of Jesus and his miracles, in the 
healing of the sick, etc., had evidently extended throughout 
that region, yet it must also have been known that 
Jesus was a Jew, and that his miracles and favors were 
confined to his own race. 

We can readily see that there were numerous obstacles 
to the woman's faith, and the strength of faith 
which surmounted them compels admiration. 

(1) She was a foreigner, a heathen, for whom 

God had manifested no favors, "without God and having 
no hope in the world." (Eph. 2:12.) Hence, coming 
to Jesus she not only had to overcome the prejudices 
of her own heathen ideas and instruction from infancy, 
but had also to overcome everything akin to pride and 
the fear of being despised and rejected as one unworthy 
of the favor she sought. 

(2) As a poor and uneducated woman she would 
naturally have great diffidence in approaching a learned 
man, especially one so notable as this great Prophet of 
Israel, of whom no doubt she had heard much. 

Notwithstanding these obstacles, her love for her 
daughter, and her confidence in Jesus, were so great 
that she sought him out; and after the manner of that 
time and place, in a loud voice and probably with weeping, 
"cried" to the Lord for compassion and assistance, 
in her trouble, saying, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, 
thou son of David: my daughter is grievously vexed 
with a devil." She met with a rebuff at the very start, 
for according to Matthew's account (15:23) our Lord 
ignored her entirely, not answering her a word. To 
many this would have been sufficient to have discouraged 
faith, and sent them away weeping; but not so 
with this woman: she kept up her cries and importunities. 
She was confident that the Lord had the power 
to assist her, and had not yet refused to do so, and hence 
her faith continued to cling. 

The disciples seem to have been annoyed with her 
cries, which probably kept up for some time, and Jesus 
and the disciples had evidently left the house in which 
they were lodging and proceeded on their journey, the 
woman still following and crying out for assistance. 
The disciples came and besought him, saying, "Send 
her away, for she crieth after us. But he answered and 



said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel." 

Our Lord's answer to the disciples would seem to 
indicate that the meaning of the apostles' words was 
that he should grant her request and send her away; 
and his answer shows why he delayed so doing. The 
blessings he had to give were for God's covenanted people, 
the typical seed of Abraham, and this woman was 
not of that nation to which God had granted much 
favor every way; she was of a heathen nation, with whom 
God had not entered into any covenant relationship whatever, 
and for whom as yet he had done nothing. Our Lord 
explained this to the disciples, and in the hearing of the 
woman, not merely for their benefit and hers, but also, 
we may presume, for our admonition. 

Altho our Lord would seem to have been resisting 

R2653 :page 191 

the woman and unwilling to grant her favor, we consider 
it not unreasonable to suppose that he thoroughly 
understood the case from the beginning, and that he 
adopted the method he did to draw out her faith, preparatory 
to the giving of the blessing desired. 

And herein we have a lesson respecting persistency 
in entreating the Lord for relief from the power of the 
devil, however exercised, whether in our friends or in 
ourselves. As the woman knew that the case was a 
hopeless one as respected relief from any other quarter, 
so we know to hope for relief from the Adversary only 
through the Lord's interposition. Like this woman, 
therefore, our faith should be equal to the emergency, 
and should persistently hold on to the Lord for the 
blessing which, with a greater knowledge than she, we 
may be sure he will be pleased to grant in his own due 
time and way. "Shall not the Lord avenge his own 
elect, which cry day and night unto him, tho he bear 
long with them?" (Luke 18:7.) If in our case the 
Lord shall not see best to grant a prompt response to 
our prayer, "Abandon us not in temptation, but deliver 
us from the Evil One" (Matt. 6:13), we may be sure 
that it is not from lack of interest in our welfare, for has 
he not manifested his interest by redeeming us, and by 
calling us to joint-heirship in the heavenly Kingdom? 
If then the response shall not come in the way or at the 
time we had inclined to hope, let faith still hold her 
anchorage in the divine goodness and power, and in the 
exceeding great and precious promises, and let us remember 
that according to these the time, at very farthest, 
will not be long, until the Millennial Kingdom, 
when the great Adversary shall be bound, and deliverance 
full and complete from his power shall be granted, 
not only to ourselves and those immediately dependent, 
but also to all of the "groaning creation" now under 
his baneful influence. 

The hearing of the reason why she had been ignored, 



so far from discouraging the poor woman, seemingly 

convinced her the more that Jesus had the power 

to help her, and, quite probably in front of him, she 

prostrated herself at his feet, after the custom of the East, 

so expressive of humility, dependence and entreaty, accompanying 

this with the plea, "Lord, help me!" (Matt. 15:23-25.) 

When finally our Lord addressed the poor 

woman prostrate at his feet, importuning his assistance, 

his words were again a rebuff, calculated to dishearten 

one of little faith, but correspondingly to strengthen a 

great faith. His answer to her was not one of disdain 

and contempt, nor of indifference to her woe; for indeed 

we well know that our dear Lord had no such feelings 

toward any. It implied interest and sympathy, but 

explained to her a reason why she was not a proper 

subject, namely, that as the children of a household 

would be provided for first, before the dogs, so it was 

proper that the Lord's covenant people, the Jews, should 

be ministered unto, healed, taught and blessed, first,— 

before these blessings should in any manner or degree 

be extended to the Gentiles, who in comparison were 

as the dogs of the household. And, by the way, we 

should notice here that altho dogs amongst the Jews 

were spoken of frequently with great disrespect, as for 

instance, in Rev. 29:15, "Without are dogs," etc., referring 

to the wild dogs which roamed the country and 

were pests, yet the Jews were in the habit of having 

house dogs which were esteemed and petted by the family, 

and the word that is here used by our Lord, and 

also by the woman, signifies these house dogs or little 

dogs, pet dogs, and not the objectionable kind. 

The woman triumphed over the obstacle of the 
Lord's argument, and with wonderful keenness and 
humility she acknowledged that she was not one of the 
children who had a right to the Father's blessing, but 
was merely one of the dogs under the table, desiring a 
stray crumb of divine favor. Then our Lord, appreciating 
such great faith and earnestness, said, "For this 
saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter," 
and that the woman's faith was of the proper kind 
was demonstrated by the fact that she believed the 
Lord's word, ceased her importunings, and went to her 
home, to find the matter even as Jesus had said. 

How different is our case in many respects from 
that of this poor woman! So far from resisting us the 
Lord has graciously called us to a knowledge of himself 
and of his gracious plan, and we who were once 
aliens and strangers and foreigners have not only been 
redeemed with the precious blood, but upon making a 
covenant with the Lord have been adopted into his family, 
have been privileged to surround his table, and he 
has set before us as "meat in due season," in great abundance, 
all the exceeding great and precious promises of 
his Word. We need not to importune for these; they 
are ours for the taking. We simply need by faith to 
accept them and to use them. And if the poor woman 



of this narrative could exercise such faith in the Lord, 
and could get so great a blessing, it evidences to our 

R2654:page 191 

minds what is abundantly stated elsewhere in Scripture, 
that nothing that we have or could offer to the Lord 
would be more acceptable in his sight than faith— faith 
in him, in his power, in his love and in his promises. 
Whoever will not exercise faith in these things cannot 
grow in knowledge of the Lord, cannot make development, 
cannot be overcomers, gaining the desired victory, 
for, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith," and "Without faith it is impossible 
to please God."-l John 5:4; Heb. 11:6. 

There is little that any of us possess that we could 
reasonably hope would be acceptable to God outside 
those mercies which he has bestowed upon us through 
Christ— faith, trust in God, is one of those heart-qualities 
which we can bring to the Lord, that he will not 
despise; honesty of heart is another; humility, realizing 
our utter dependence upon him, and confessing it, is 
another. These various sentiments were expressed by 
the woman in the narrative, by her actions and by her 
words, and as these brought to her divine favor, even 
before it was due to come to the Gentiles, much more 
should our humility, faith and candor prevail and make 
us endeavor to do that which is pleasing to God, who 
has already accepted us in the Beloved, and with whom 
he is well-pleased in proportion to the measure of our 
accepting through the Lord all the exceeding riches of his 
grace, which he has promised to them that love, reverence, 
trust and obey him. 



page 192 

REVISED PRICE LIST OF BIBLES, Etc. 



Our Society does not supply Bibles free, but it justifies 
the Bible feature of its name by supplying Bibles, Testaments and 
Bible Study Helps at wholesale rates. Additionally we give our 
readers the benefit of our experience and judgment respecting which 
Bibles are the best value at the wholesale rate. Publishers expect 
to make a further advance in prices of cheap Bibles January, 1901. 

OXFORD PRESS BIBLES. 

The Students' Hand Bible. 

No. 04403 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, Selected 
Helps, including Concordance 75c Post, extra 20c 



The Self-pronouncing Teachers' Bible. 

No. 0823 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Round corners, Red under Gold edge, $1.00, Postage 25c 
This is a wonderful book for the price, and its self -pronouncing 
feature is on a new plan preferred by many. 

The Revised Version Teachers' Bible. 

No. 02752 (not self-pronouncing), Bourgeois type, French 
Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Round corners, Red under 
Gold edge $1.75, Postage extra, 25c 

OXFORD PRESS INDIA PAPER BIBLES. 

No. 01 157x Ruby type, French Morocco, Postpaid $1.45 

No. 03009x Pearl type, Persian Levant " 2.25 

No. 031 14x Ruby type, Persian Levant " 2.50 

No. 03229x Ruby type, Persian Levant " 2.65 

No. 03265x Emerald type, Lev. Morocco " 3.25 

No. 03464x Minion type, Persian Levant " 3.80 

No. 03554x Bourgeois type, Alaska Seal " 3.80 

No. 0358 lx Long Primer type, Pers. Lev. " 4.67 

No. 0863x Long Primer type, Alaska Seal " 5.21 

No. 0865-l/2x Long Primer type, Levant " 6.55 

Thumb Index, if desired, 25 cents extra. 

THE COMBINATION SELF-PRONOUNCING TEACHERS' BIBLE. 

This remarkable Bible is really two Bibles in the 
space of one, for it shows in footnotes on each page 
the readings of the Revised Version whenever it 
differs from the Authorized version. 

No. 932 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, Round 
corners, Gilt edge $1.15, Postage extra, 25c 

No. 934 Bourgeois type, French Seal, Div. circuit, Leather 

lined, Red under Gold edges $1.35, Postage extra, 25c 

BAGSTER TEACHERS' BIBLES. -LONG PRIMER TYPE. 

No. 8701 French Seal, Divinity Circuit, Red under Gold $1.05 

No. 8706 Egyptian Seal, Flexible, Divinity Circuit, Silk 

Sewed, Leather Lined, Red under Gold Edges 1.45 

No. 8722 Norse Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Silk Sewed, 

Leather Lined, Red under Gold Edges 2.00 

Postage on above Bibles 25 cents each, extra. 

HOLMAN PICTORIAL TEACHERS' BIBLES.-BOURGEOIS TYPE. 

These are handsomely embellished with eighty 

choice photographic reproductions of scenes in Palestine, 

which alone are worth the price of the Bibles. 

No. 8816 French Seal, Linen lined, Red under Gold edges $1.75 

No. 8836 Persian Levant, Silk Sewed, specially recommended 



for service $2.35, Postage .25 

OTHER DESIRABLE BIBLES AND TESTAMENTS. 

Lap Bibles for the Aged.— No References. 

These contain Family Registers. 

No. 01600 Small Pica type, Cloth, red edges $ .90 Post, extra, 25c 

No. 01603 " " Fr. Seal, Limp 1.25 " 25c 

No. 01605 Div. circ. 1.75 " 25c 

Ditto New Testaments for Aged. 

No. 212 Small Pica type, Roan Sq. cors 35c Post, extra, 12c 

No. 283 Same as No. 212 with Psalms added 45c " 15c 

Pocket Bibles Without References. 

No. 01 103 Diamond type, India paper, Divinity Post, extra 

circuit, Red under Gold edges $1.00 3c 

No. 178 Pearl type, Cloth, red edges 18 7c 

No. 010 " Fr. Seal, Red under Gold 50 5c 

No. 013 Pearl type, Fr. Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Red under Gold edges 50 5c 

No. 038 Pearl type, Padded, Red under Gold 50 5c 

No. 035 " Padded and clasp, Red under 

Gold edges 55 5c 

No. 01 150 Ruby type, Fr. Seal, Red under Gold 40 7c 

No. 01 153 Ruby type, French Seal, Divinity circuit, 

Red under Gold edges 55 7c 

No. 01227 Ruby type, French Seal, Gold roll, Red 

under Gold edges 80 7c 

No. 01327 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity 

circuit, Red under Gold edges 70 12c 

No. 01329 Minion type, French Seal, Divinity 

circuit, Leather lined 1.25 12c 

Pocket Bible with References. 

No. 03008 Pearl type, Fr. Seal, Divinity circ. $ .55 Post, extra, 7c 

Child's Bibles, Profusely Illustrated. 

No. 140 Ruby type, Fr. Seal, Limp $ .80 Post, extra, 10c 

No. 145 Ruby " " Divinity circ 1.00 " 10c 

Pocket New Testaments. 

No. 801 Ruby type, Limp cloth, Sq. corners 
No. 030 " Fr. Seal, Fine Design 15c 

No. 033 " " Div. circuit 25c 

No. 0130 Same as No. 030 with Psalms added 

No. 0133 " " 033 35c 

No. 287 Brevier type, Roan, gilt edge, Psalms 
No. 010 Diamond type (very small), Limp, 

Red leather, Red under Gold edge 35c " lc 



5c Post 


:. extra, 

2c 


2c 


2c 






25c 


" 


3c 


3c 






35c 


5. 


c 



No. 014 Diamond type (very small), French 

Morocco, Divinity circuit, Leather 

lined, etc 80c " lc 

The Tischendorf New Testament with footnote readings of three 
oldest Greek MSS., 50 cents, postpaid. 

"Bible Talks in Simple Language." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible Stories in simple but not childish language, and 
seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this 
class of books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible 
lesson with their children, and this book furnishes interesting 
topics, to which may be added as much concordant "present 
truth" as the age of the children will justify. Parents are responsible 
for their children's training in theology as well as 
morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this duty, and 
thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3.00. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

"Daily Food." 

Two texts and a verse for every day in the year. Have 
one on your breakfast table with the natural food. Appoint 
one of the family reader, and call for questions and comments. 
Feed the soul as well as the body. Small, neat, cloth bound, 
gilt edges. 15 cents, 2 for 25 cents, including postage. 

--WHEN ORDERING ALWAYS NAME YOUR EXPRESS 
OFFICE AND COMPANY AS WELL AS POST OFFICE.- 

ADDRESS ORDERS WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY, BIBLE HOUSE, ALLEGHENY, PA. 



page 193 

VOL. XXI. JULY 1, 1900. No. 13. 

CONTENTS. 

"Love as Brethren;" Be Sympathetic; 

Be Courteous 195 

Philadelphia Convention Echoes 198 

A Useful Stone versus a Stumbling 
Stone 198 

Peter a Useful Stone in God's House 199 

The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven 200 

Binding and Loosing in Heaven and 
Earth 201 

Cast not Pearls Before Swine 201 

Peter a Stumbling Stone 202 

A Vision of Coming Glory 203 

Least and Greatest in the Kingdom 205 

Battling for the Truth 207 

Bible Reading Indispensible 208 

The Colporteur Harvest Service, etc 194 

page 194 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2654 : page 194 

"THE SERVANT OF THE LORD MUST NOT STRIVE, BUT 
BE GENTLE UNTO ALL." 

2 TIMOTHY 2:24-26. 

We commend this text and its context to the careful consideration 
of all— especially do the "Volunteers" need to remember 



it in connection with the service they are seeking to 

render to the Lord's true sheep still in Babylon. All thus engaged 

are "ministers" and "teachers" and hence amenable to 

the same instructions as Timothy. 

Some have exposed themselves to rebuke and criticism 
justly, by intruding into church property uninvited. It is 
usually best to keep off the pavement fronting a church where 
there is any reason to think the service would give offence;— 
and to apologize if asked to move off it. If possible it is desirable 
to keep at such a distance from the building as to avoid seeming 
to want to serve its attendants more than other passers-by. 

Especially make sure that your heart is so full of the love 
of the Lord and his brethren that it will shine out in your face; 
—then it will not be necessary to urge your gift, but merely to 
say— Accept a free paper! Lay stress upon the word free, because 
some refuse thinking that either a price or donation will 
be expected in return. 

page 194 

THE COLPORTEUR HARVEST SERVICE. 

The wide circulation of the Volunteer Tower should open the 
minds of people for further reading matter: and then nothing 
will fill the place of MILLENNIAL DAWN as the text book for 
Bible study. We shall be glad to hear from such as desire to 
enter the Colporteur work— such as have the heart for it, and 
some natural ability, and freedom from family responsibilities. 



R2654 : page 195 

"LOVE AS BRETHREN; BE SYMPATHETIC; BE COURTEOUS. 



"Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; 
for God resisteth the proud, and showeth favor to the humble. Humble 
yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand 
of God, that he may exalt you in due time." 
-1 PETER 3:8; 5:5,6.- 

THE APOSTLE has been addressing the elders 
of the Church, exhorting them to give attention 
to the feeding of God's flock, and pointing out what 
should be the constraining influence to such a service. 
That they may feel his sympathy with them he points 
out that he also is an elder, and then warns them 
against a tendency, natural to all fallen humanity in 
any place of influence, to misconstrue their position, 
and to think of themselves as lords of God's heritage 
rather than as servants of the flock. 

In our day, the natural tendency in this direction 
is greatly accentuated by the long established custom 
of all denominations of Christians to regard the ministers 



or servants of the Church as of a different class 

from the others of the flock,— a class vested with authority 

from God, and not amenable to the same regulations 

which govern all the members of the body. 

But how great a mistake this is! The Apostle distinctly 

points out that a servant is not a ruler, that a 

servant has no authority. Indeed, so far as the true 

Church is concerned, the only authority in it is the 

Lord, the Head of the Church, and his Word, and the 

words of those whom he specially chose to be his 

mouth-pieces, the apostles. 

Where these speak, all of the body of Christ are 
to give attention to hear. Where these are silent, no 
one has authority to speak. And while an Elder 
should be chosen to the position of serving and feeding 
the flock because of special aptness to teach (to 
point out the instructions of our Lord and the apostles 
upon any subject), and while such an Elder should, 
therefore, in this way be specially helpful to the body 
of Christ in drawing the attention of all to the inspired 
authority of the Word, nevertheless any member of 
the body of Christ has the same privilege— not of 
exercising authority, but of calling the attention of 
his fellows to the Word of authority. The Apostle 
exhorts the Elders that so far from in any manner or 
degree exercising a lordly or authoritative position in 
the Church, they should rather be "ensamples to the 
flock." They should be examples in the matter of 
meekness, in the matter of patience, in the matter of 
brotherly kindness, in the matter of courtesy, so that 
the more any of the brethren would copy these Elders 
the more would the spirit of the Lord prevail in the 
flock, and the fruits and graces of the spirit be manifested. 
On the contrary, we know that if the Elder 
or leader of a little company of the Lord's people be 
self-assertive, dogmatic, imperious in manner, tone or 
look, the effect upon the company under his influence 
is to produce bickerings, rivalries, ambitions, strifes 
as to who is greatest, etc. 

Manifestly, whoever occupies the position of an 
Elder amongst the Lord's people, however small the 
group may be, occupies a position fraught with responsibilities 
to the Lord and to the flock, as well as 
with besetments to himself. Great care should therefore 
be exercised by every company of the Lord's people, 
to so far as possible select for the position of leaders 
or Elders in the Church such persons as would not be 
likely to be injured by the privilege of service— such 
as occupying this post would indeed be ensamples of 
the flock in humility and in all of the graces of the 
Lord's spirit. It would seem to be with reference to 
the special trial of such as occupy this position of service 
in the Church that the Apostle speaks, saying, 

R2654 : page 196 



"Be not many of you teachers, brethren, knowing 
that we [occupying such a position] shall receive the 
severer testing."— James 3:1. 

It may not be amiss that here we notice the fact 
that altho the word "Elder" has the significance of 
"older," yet amongst the Lord's brethren it is not 
merely years of natural life that is to be taken into 
consideration; in the Lord's family we sometimes see 
"babes" with gray hairs. Nor can we even count 
eldership according to the number of years that have 
elapsed since the begetting of the spirit, for some grow 
rapidly and mature quickly; others who receive the 
truth permit the "thorns" of cares of this life and the 
deceitfulness of riches to choke the word, and hence 
never get beyond the position of "babes,"— never 
bring forth the ripe fruits of the spirit. 

Nor can we reckon this matter of relationship 
merely according to the degree of knowledge of the 
divine plan attained; for, as the Apostle assures us, 
it is possible for some to have much knowledge and 
yet be but "tinkling cymbals" according to the Lord's 
standpoint of estimation. While therefore an Elder, 
in order to be "apt to teach," must have attained to 
some considerable degree of knowledge of the divine 
plan, nevertheless the real evidence of his fitness for 
the service of an elder must not be determined by his 
knowledge merely, but additionally must be measured 
by his growth in grace. So then such of the brethren 
in any place as possess clear knowledge of the divine 
plan and are "apt to teach," and who additionally 
give unmistakable evidence that they have grown in 
grace and are bearing in daily life the fruits of the 
spirit of the Lord, in considerable measure of maturity, 

R2655 : page 196 

may be considered qualified to be elders;— and 

such may properly be chosen to the eldership by their 

brethren, regardless of their age according to the flesh. 

According to the flesh Peter and several others 
of the apostles of our Lord were his elders, but according 
to the spirit our Lord is the Elder Brother of 
all accepted to the family of God. According to the 
flesh both Timothy and Titus were young men— young 
in years— so that the Apostle needed to write to one 
of them, "Let no man despise thy youth." (1 Tim. 4:12.) 
And yet these young men the Apostle recognized 
as Elders in the Church, who, because of their 
spiritual development and knowledge of the divine plan, 
and aptness to teach, were well qualified to feed the 
flock of God and to be overseers in it— but not lords, 
not rulers, not masters, and not vested with any authority 
—merely privileged to call to the attention of 
the flock the voice of the great Shepherd and his twelve 
chosen assistants, and to lead them to the green pastures 
and still waters of divine truth. 



It was after specially enjoining modesty and humility 
upon the ones most advanced and most capable 
of the flock that the Apostle, in the language of our 
text, urges that each one of the Lord's sheep, so far 
from seeking to be a leader in the sense of a ruler or 
lord or master, should seek to be subject one to another 
—to hear gladly from the humblest of the flock, and 
to be willing to yield his own preference, so far as his 
judgment and conscience would permit. A Church 
operating under this spirit would not be likely to be 
rent with contention, for each would be so anxious for 
the interests of the cause and so willing to condescend 
to the wishes of others, that even the will of the majority 
would not be considered satisfactory, but rather 
all would seek, if possible, to reach such a modified 
conclusion as would meet with nearly or quite unanimous 
approval. 

The Apostle most distinctly points out that the 
quality essential to such proper conduct on the part 
of Elders and on the part of all, is humility. How 
beautiful is his exhortation, "Be clothed with humility." 
The thought would seem to be that outside of 
every other adornment of character, and covering all 
others, should be this robe of humble-mindedness, the 
opposite disposition to pride. 

By way of clinching his argument, the Apostle 
reminds us of the principle upon which our Lord deals 
with his flock and with all;— that he disapproves of 
pride, and that all who are actuated by pride may be 
sure that the Lord, so far from receiving them, fellowshiping 
them, leading them, blessing them, will 
resist them, push them from him. The natural inference 
is that thus resisted of the Lord, the tendency 
of such as come under the influence of a spirit of pride 
and ambition will be not toward the truth nor toward 
any of the fruits and graces of the spirit, but further 
and further from these. "The Lord resisteth the 
proud, but supplies his favor to the humble." Come 
then, dear brethren, says the Apostle, let us cultivate 
this humility which the Lord so loves and appreciates 
and promises to reward. Let us humble ourselves 
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us 
in due time. 

The Lord's mighty hand has not yet been stretched 
out to take hold of mankind in general and its affairs, 
to bring order out of confusion; but it is stretched out 
over his Church, his flock. He has called us to be 
his "sheep," and we have responded and have put 
ourselves under his care, under his powerful hand for 
guidance, for direction, etc., that he may ultimately 
make us "meet for the inheritance of the saints in 
light," "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so 
be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified 
together." 

Seeing that we are under this mighty hand of 



R2655 : page 197 

God, and that too by our own volition, how shall we 

act? Shall we yield ourselves to his will, and permit 

him to "work in us both to will and to do his good 

pleasure" and our ultimate exaltation, or shall we 

resist the Lord's power, resist his Word of instruction, 

resist the example set us in the meek and lowly Lamb 

of God, and seek to exalt ourselves and to be somebodies, 

either in the world or in the Church? Nay, 

let us remember that it would be folly to attempt to 

work against the divine arrangement; we might indeed 

to some extent seemingly succeed, and bring 

upon ourselves, and perhaps upon others also, more or 

less of separation from God through such resisting, 

on account of a wrong spirit; but in the end we should 

utterly fail of God's favors, both as respects the fellowship 

of the spirit now and the fellowship of glory 

by and by, for these he assures us will be bestowed 

only upon the humble. Every proper incentive and 

inducement speaks to us, saying,— Humble yourself: 

become more like a little child, forgetful of self, devoid 

of selfish ambition: be actuated merely by a desire 

to serve the Lord, to serve his flock, and to serve 

his cause, the truth; forget self entirely. 

Perhaps, as a result, the Lord may increase our 
opportunities and responsibilities in service in the present 
life, and perhaps he may not; but no matter for 
this. It is not for the present life that we are seeking 
and striving, but for the glory, honor and immortality 
which the Lord has promised to them that love 
him;— that love him so much that they hearken to his 
Word and seek to develop those elements of character 
which are pleasing in his sight, seeking to become 
more and more copies of God's dear Son. 

The Apostle adds, "Casting all your care upon 
him." All true saints of God are care-full. They 
have an interest in the Lord's work; they have a care 
in respect to it. They cannot be indifferent to the 
interests of Zion. Altho their hearts and affections 
and cares have been lifted from a sectarian channel, 
it is only that they should be placed upon true people 
of spiritual Zion, whose names are written in heaven. 
Of course, therefore, every Elder in the Church must 
feel such a care, especially for the flock in connection 
with which he has been appointed to service, "to feed 
the flock of Christ:"— not to shear them, not to frighten 
them, not to club them, not to exercise authority and 
lordship over them, but to feed them. 

This care, affecting the chosen Elders (and all the 
elders or advanced ones in the Church), altho it is a 
right sentiment in itself, might easily be so perverted 
as to be dangerous. The Elders, either individually 
or collectively, might become so nervously careful of 
the flock as to destroy their own peace and joy in the 
holy spirit; and it might also lead them to take various 



improper steps, as in their over-zealous judgment 

necessary for the welfare of the flock. Many in times 

past have been led, under the influence of such a care, 

to in various ways take away the liberties of the flock 

in this or that or another matter: fearful that these 

liberties would be injurious to the cause. We see such 

a spirit of carefulness and over-solicitude marked prominently 

in the past by the various creeds and regulations 

and restraints put upon the Lord's flock, contrary 

to the Scriptures and to the liberty wherewith 

Christ makes free his people. The motive undoubtedly 

was in some respects a good one; the difficulty was 

that some Elders, some advanced sheep, caring for the 

interests of the flock, forgot that they were only its 

servants, and that they were not authorized to make 

any laws or restraints whatsoever for the flock. They 

forgot that the Lord himself is the Good Shepherd of 

his flock still, that he has not given over his care of 

it, nor his authority to anyone, to permit such to exercise 

lordship or to make laws of any kind for it, he 

having made all the laws and regulations necessary, 

and desiring that his sheep shall be free, with the 

liberty wherewith he made them free, in the fullest 

sense of the word. 

The remedy for all such unauthorized over-carefulness 
for the interests of Zion is pointed out by the 
Apostle, saying,— "Casting all your care upon him 
[the Shepherd of the flock], for he careth for you 
[all]." Each sheep is to remember that the Shepherd's 
mighty hand (mighty power) is still in the 
midst of his people, and that because of his care we 
do not need to overburden ourselves with care, nor to 
feel that we must make changes in his plans and arrangements 
to meet what we might fancy to be new 
exigencies in the case. All such over-carefulness leads 
to fear, and fear indicates a lack of faith, a lack of 
confidence in the Shepherd; and is generally used by 
the great Adversary as one of his most powerful levers 
to lead the Lord's people into a wrong course. 

Let us all, then (all of the advanced or elder 
class), have a care for the flock; yea, a deep solicitude; 
but let us cast the weight of this care upon the Lord, 
and let our faith trust him that he who has been working 
out so grand and glorious a plan as his Word reveals 
to us now, "the plan of the ages," has made full 
provision for every feature, every circumstance, every 
condition; and let us thus be ready to cooperate with 
him in harmony with his Word, but not to run where 
we are not sent, nor in any manner to take our Lord's 
place, nor attempt to do his work. But only the 
humble-minded are likely to receive any lasting blessing, 
present or future, at the hands of our Lord; for he 
resisteth the proud and showeth favor to the 
humble. 



R2656 : page 198 

PHILADELPHIA CONVENTION ECHOES. 



ALL WILL REJOICE to know that the Philadelphia 

Convention, June 16-18, was a blessed 

success: so far as we have heard all who attended got 

a blessing, as we had hoped. Indeed, quite a few expressed 

themselves as so much refreshed and profited 

that, the Lord permitting, they would also attend the 

next Convention, at Chicago. 

The attendance was about two hundred, except 
on Sunday, when it ran up to about four hundred. 
The three cities which have been leading in the "Volunteer" 
work were best represented at the Convention; 
—Boston 19, Washington City 13, Scranton 13. Thus 
it is always: those most awake to note and use opportunities 
for serving the truth are the most blest of the 
Lord every way,— warmer in their love and service, 
they are less exposed to the besetments of the Adversary: 
laying down their lives in the Lord's service in 
fulfilment of their covenant they are in the way which 
leads not only to fellowship in the sufferings of Christ 
but also in the glories to follow. 

Nineteen states were represented— Maine, Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, 
New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, South 
Carolina, Georgia, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Kansas, 
Wisconsin, Nevada, California and District of Columbia; 
—and Great Britain was represented by Brother 
Randle, who, after doing a little further "Pilgrim" 
work here, will for a time make England his home 
and labor-field. 

At the baptism service thirty-nine adults, after 
making a good public confession, symbolized their 
consecration to the Lord, even unto death, by immersion 
in water. It was an impressive service to us all, 
and the entire congregation gave hearty thanks to 
God for the privilege of witnessing and participating. 
The janitor of the Baptist church remarked that not 
only had there never been such baptism service in that 
old church, but that never before had it contained a 
congregation all of whose faces were so happy looking. 
We were glad that the inner light of truth and 
its spirit of love was manifest to others. We trust 
that they took knowledge of us that we had been with 
Jesus and been "illuminated" by his holy spirit. 

We cannot present the subjects discussed, but in 
a word would say,— It was the old, old story of God's 
love exhibited in Jesus, and the coming glory of the 
Church and blessing of the world: the story that is 
as fresh as ever to all in heart-harmony with the Lord, 
and which daily becomes more precious in the light of 



present truth;— things new and old. 

None, we believe, were more blessed than the 
Philadelphia brethren who so kindly and efficiently 
and generously entertained us. They provided a splendid 
hall for the meetings, paid for the use of the baptistry, 
looked after the arriving friends and saw to 
their comfort, and provided free entertainment for those 
of the visitors too poor to pay their own way. May 
rich blessings of spiritual kind be their reward for all 
these services to the Lord's body. By an oversight 
we neglected to call for a united vote of thanks from 
the Convention; and as this was owing chiefly to the 
fact that the last meeting was a Question Meeting, we 
think to remedy the matter by having the closing service 
of future Conventions a "Love Feast." 



R2656 : page 198 

A USEFUL STONE VERSUS A STUMBLING STONE. 

-MATT. 16:13-26.~JULY22.~ 

"If any man come after me, let him deny himself, 
and take up his cross, and follow me." 

PETER, THE APOSTLE, was a grand character, 

as this lesson well illustrates; yet, like all 

strong characters, he had proportionate opportunities 

and liabilities to misuse his strength for evil. This 

lesson, relating considerably to him, points a moral respecting 

the necessity for meekness, humility, and wise 

direction of those who possess strength of character. 

The incidents of this lesson transpired toward the 
close of our Lord's ministry, probably about six months 
before his crucifixion. For about three years the Lord 
had, with his disciples, been proclaiming the Kingdom 
near at hand and working miracles which testified that 
he was Jehovah's Anointed One. Meantime, his fame 
had of course spread in every direction. Herod, who 
had beheaded John the Baptist, seems to have started 
the suggestion that Jesus was John risen from the dead 
—probably having little information respecting Jesus 
while he had considerable knowledge of John. Others, 
wishing to properly credit our Lord's wonderful works 
and mighty acts, claimed that he was the Elijah prophesied 
to precede Messiah's coming. Others thought of 
him as Jeremiah or some of the great prophets risen 
from the dead; but very few seemed to have thought 
of him as the Messiah,— expecting Messiah, when he 
would come, to be very kingly, very great, and of very 
high standing with the nation and the ruling class. 
They no doubt thought they greatly honored Jesus in 
crediting him with being the forerunner of the Messiah. 
And apparently our Lord had not particularly expressed 



the matter of his Messiahship during these years, leaving 
it rather to be recognized by those who should obtain 
the opening of the eyes of their understanding. He 

R2656 : page 199 

spoke of himself as the Son of God; he spoke of his relationship 

to the Father, and testified that his mighty 

works were done in the Father's name and power, but 

he said little, if anything, respecting his being the Messiah 

until now. 

Now the proper time had come that the disciples 
should recognize definitely his office, and his question 
regarding what people in general said of him was merely 
to introduce the matter to the disciples, and give the 
opportunity to ask them, "Whom say ye that I am?" 
Then it was that Peter displayed not only the strength 
of his faith in the Lord, but also his own strength of 
character and his zeal, answering promptly, "Thou art 
the Christ [Hebrew, the Messiah], the Son of God— 
the Living." And altho we may safely assume that 
Peter spoke for all of the apostles, in harmony with our 
Lord's question, nevertheless, the fact that he was the 
spokesman would imply that he was the most thoroughly 
imbued with the sentiment that he expressed. His 
statement is quite comprehensive, too: not only did he 
recognize Jesus as the Messiah, but he recognized his 
divine authority and paternity; and while it is possible 
that Peter meant to say "the Son of the living God"— 
the Son of the God who is the author of all life— yet it 
is probable that he meant more than this. It is probable 
that he meant, Thou art the Messiah, the Son of 
God, the Living One,— the one who has a right to life 
according to the Law, while all others, being imperfect, 
are under condemnation of the Law and under sentence 
of death. 

Evidently it was a refreshment of heart to our Lord 
to have this full and frank statement from Peter. One, 
at least, of his disciples had profited by the lessons of 
the preceding three years, and had come to the point 
of full assurance of faith in him: and the others, while 
less expressive, were probably making progress nevertheless, 
and would be greatly helped and strengthened 
and built up by this good confession. 

PETER A USEFUL STONE IN GOD'S HOUSE. 



Our Lord's response, "Blessed art thou, Simon, 
son of Jona," does not so much signify, I wish or will 
grant a blessing upon you because of this confession, 
but rather, You have been blessed of God greatly in 
that you have been enabled to discern this great truth, 
hidden from so many. Flesh and blood (mankind in 
general) do not so believe, and could not have so taught 



you nor convinced you; you have been drawn of my 
Father in heaven, and through responding to the leadings 
of his providence the eyes of your understanding 
have been opened that you are thus able to see and appreciate 
this great truth. 

Then followed a blessing, a prophecy of coming 
usefulness, partly, at least, the result of this good confession, 
as it was the result of a proper condition of 
heart:— "Thou art Peter [petros, a stone, a rock] and 
upon this rock [petra— this great stone or rocky mass 
—the great truth which you have confessed, namely, 
my Messiahship] will I build my Church." 

The Lord did not propose to build his Church upon 
Peter, but upon the great truth which the Father had 
laid as a foundation for his plan and had revealed to 
Peter and which Peter had so nobly expressed. But 
Peter, indeed, might be one of the living stones of the 
spiritual temple erected upon this great foundation-fact. 
Peter himself gives us this interpretation of the matter 
in his Epistle (1 Pet. 2:4-7), assuring us that the whole 
Church as a building of God is growing more and more 
complete through the addition of each member, who, 
as a living stone, is built up into and under the headship 
of Christ, the great chief corner-stone and capstone 
of the whole— the figure being that of a pyramid. 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap, v.; Vol. III., 
Chap. x. 

The same thought is given in the description of 
the New Jerusalem, in which Peter is represented by 
one of the Twelve Foundation Stones, the other apostles 
being equally foundation stones, and all the faithful in 
Christ being built upon the foundation of the divine 
plan, and upon the testimony of these twelve apostles. 
Rev. 21, see verse 12. 

R2657 : page 199 

This was probably the first intimation the Lord 
had given of his intention to build a Church, or that 
any period of time would elapse between the work he 
was then doing and the establishment of the Kingdom. 
This was a gradual way of bringing great matters to 
the attention of the apostles,— matters which necessarily 
would conflict with many of the ideas and hopes 
that already had taken possession of their hearts. 

It cannot be claimed that our Lord referred to any 
of the Christian sects when thus speaking of his Church: 
all are forced to admit that these earthly systems are 
entirely ignored, not only in this statement, but in every 
other statement which our Lord ever made respecting 
his Church. He never recognized more than one, nor 
did the apostles; and both Jesus and the apostles reckoned 
that every true sheep, every true grain, every 
wise virgin, and every faithful servant of this Gospel 
age would belong to the one Church of Christ, of which 
the Apostle says that "their names are written in 



heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) They need no earthly record, 
and such of them as are rightly informed will want no 
sectarian name, but will be thoroughly satisfied with 
the name of their Lord; and they will want no earthly 
creed-fences to separate them from each other, but will 
desire more and more to be one in fact and in theory. 

The Church of Rome, as being the oldest of all 
human church systems, claims the name of Christ, and 

R2657 : page 200 

holds that Peter was its founder, but it can produce no 
evidence to this effect, for there was no Roman Catholic 
Church in existence until centuries after Peter's day. 
The primitive Church, authorized by our Lord and 
built upon the testimony of the apostles and through 
their ministry, after the day of Pentecost, was a very 
different institution from any of the present-day man-made, 
creed-bound and clergy-lorded systems. We 
understand that the Lord is now calling his true people 
out of this Babylon or mixed condition of present-day 
"churchianity" into the light, the liberty, the fellowship, 
with him and with all who are his, which properly 
belongs to the one flock, which has but "one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism." 

Our Lord's declaration that "the gates of hell 
[hades, the death state] shall not prevail against" his 
Church, is worthy of careful notice; especially in view 
of his words following this declaration, to the effect that 
all who would be his disciples must follow him in sacrifice 
into death. This must have been an astounding 
thought to the apostles, as they had, so far from expecting 
death, expected some kind of transformation 
to glory, honor and immortality. Our Lord's declaration, 
therefore, that the gates of hell, the gates of the 
grave, shall not prevail against his Church, signified 
not that his followers should not enter those portals of 
death, but that eventually those prison-doors of death 
would open,— would not be permitted forever to prevail 
against the faithful. As a matter of fact, the gates 
of hades did close over our dear Redeemer himself for 
portions of three days, but they did not prevail. On 
the contrary, God's power prevailed and he arose from 
the dead, he left the prison-house, he came forth a victor. 
And so likewise throughout this Gospel age, the 
gates of death closed behind the apostles one after another, 
and after all the faithful of the Lord's people, 
as well as others, and our Lord's assurance then is still 
comforting to his followers, that the prisonhouse of 
death, with its strong bars and gates, the grave, shall 
not prevail, shall not in the end conquer, but that he 
who was raised from the dead by the power of the Father 
will raise us up also, making us also victors over death 
and over the grave, so that eventually we can say, "O 
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" 
But we cannot say this so long as we are subject 



to death, nor so long as we are under death's power; 
but only when the deliverance shall come in the 
resurrection. 

Altho our Lord does not here speak of others than 
the Church prevailing against the gates and bars of the 
tomb, he does elsewhere give us the assurance that 
through his prevailing and our subsequent prevailing 
through his name and assistance, ultimately the whole 
world of mankind, or so many of them, at least, as will 
accept of the favor, will be delivered from the power of 
death into perfection of life: and then shall be brought 
to pass, in the fullest, most absolute sense of the word, 
the prophecy just referred to. (Isa. 61:1-3.) Adamic 
death and its victory over the human family will then 
be completely annulled, through the atonement accomplished 
by our Lord, and the restitution which he, with 
his Church, will accomplish as a result. And any who 
shall fail of eternal life shall not fail because of the 
present prevalence of so-called Adamic death, but will 
be the victims of their own wilful sin, and will experience 
its penalty, the Second Death, whose bars and 
gates will never open, and against which they can never 
prevail, for Christ dieth no more and will release none 
from the Second Death.— Rom. 6:9; 2 Thess. 1:9; 
Acts 3:23. 

THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. 



The apostles, of course, could not understand our 
Lord's words at the time, as they did afterward, and 
as we now understand them. (John 7:39.) Nevertheless, 
these various declarations respecting the future 
immediately followed, our Lord declaring, "I will give 
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven." What a 
riddle this must have seemed to poor Peter and his associates! 
They would doubtless conclude that it meant 
that in view of Peter's confession he would make him 
grand treasurer of the Kingdom, or something of that 
kind; and only in the light of their fulfillment in subsequent 
events can we judge accurately the meaning 
of these words. But looking through the experiences 
of Peter and the Church, we find that there were two 
doors which required to be opened, and that Peter was 
used of the Lord in opening both of them, and hence 
that it was properly stated of him that he had the keys, 
the power, the opportunity, the authority to do the 
work in both instances; and he did it. 

Our Lord himself did not open the door into the 
Kingdom, in the full sense of the word. He merely 
called out faithful laborers, who should afterward in his 
name open wide the doors. Indeed, the doors into the 
Kingdom could not be opened to any until first of all 
the great transaction of Calvary had been accomplished. 
Our Lord came to give himself a ransom for mankind, 



because a ransom was necessary before mankind could 
be released from the Adamic condemnation, or have 
any part either in the Kingdom proper or in the hoped-for 
blessing promised through the Kingdom to all the 
families of the earth. Hence the apostles (whom the 
Father had specially given to Jesus, and of whom none 
were lost save the son of perdition, whose place was 
subsequently filled, through the Lord's appointment, 
by the Apostle Paul-John 17:12; Rom. 1:1), did not 
and could not receive recognition from the Father until 

R2657 : page 201 

after our Lord Jesus had finished his sacrifice and had 
arisen from the dead and had ascended up on high to 
appear in the presence of God on their behalf,— and on 
behalf of all men for whom he died. So soon as the 
sacrifice for man's sin was presented to the Father, the 
evidence of its acceptance was indicated to mankind by 
God's acceptance of the faithful apostles and of all who 
then were in the proper condition of heart, to the plane 
of sonship and their begetting of the holy spirit to a 
new nature,— and this was marked or indicated by the 
outpouring of the holy spirit at Pentecost, accompanied 
by "gifts" of the spirit. 

It was then that Christ's Kingdom was established 
in those who had received him; and then began the 
work of declaring the good tidings of great joy, which 
must eventually be to all people, but which at first was 
restricted for three and a half years to fleshly Israel, 
in fulfillment of God's covenant with them, that favor 
should continue to the full end of seventy weeks mentioned 
by the prophet. -Dan. 9:24. See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. III. 

In this work of opening the door of the Kingdom to 
Israel we find, according to the record, that Peter took 
the first, most prominent and initiatory part, as we 
read: "Peter, standing up with [the others of] the 
eleven, lifted up his voice and said." (Acts 2:14.) 
Peter was the spokesman, Peter used the "key," Peter 
opened the door, the other apostles cooperating and 
assisting. 

The other of the two "keys" was not used for three 
and a half years afterward, because not until then could 
the door of favor be opened to the Gentiles. But when 
the time came for opening the door, we find that it was 
Peter who was specially designated of the Lord to do 
it, being sent from Joppa to Cornelius, to tell him words 
which should be to the saving of his house— the opening 
to him of the privilege of membership in the Kingdom 
of Christ, he being the first Gentile converted, the 
first one to whom the Lord authorized the preaching of 
the high calling of joint-heirship with Christ in his 
Kingdom. And the Apostle Peter referred to this matter 
subsequently, saying, "Ye know how that a good 
while ago God made choice amongst us that the Gentiles 



by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel." 
-Acts 10; 15:7. 

BINDING AND LOOSING IN HEAVEN AND EARTH. 



Our Lord further said to Peter, "Whatsoever thou 
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and 
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in 
heaven." This statement has given rise to the claim 
amongst Romanists that Peter was the first pope, and 
that he had an authority superior to the other apostles; 
but we find that very nearly the same words were used 

R2658 : page 201 

to all of the apostles as recorded by the same Evangelist. 
(Matt. 18:18.) Again, a very similar declaration 
was made to them all, as recorded by John, saying, 
"Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto 
them, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained." 
(John 20:23.) We understand these declarations not 
to be general and applicable to all of the Church, but chiefly 
to the apostles, on the strength of our Lord's words. 
(John 6:70; 15:16; Rev. 21:14.) We deny that the 
popes of Rome, or any other persons, ever have been 
apostles, or ever have exercised apostolic authority. In 
a word, we deny the central claim of Romanism and 
Episcopacy, viz., "Apostolic Succession." 

We understand this investment of Peter and the 
other apostles with special authority to bind and to loose, 
to remit and to hold, to signify that God would specially 
control their utterances, so that their decisions and 
writings might properly be considered authoritative. 
Not that God bound himself to do and to decide according 
to the imperfect judgments of the apostles, but that 
he has guaranteed us that he would so guide and providentially 
overrule in the affairs and in the language of 
these chosen and faithful ones that his people might 
rely upon it that such things as the apostles fixed had 
the divine approval. For instance, it is at their mouth 
that we learn that we are justified from all sin through 
faith in the redemption; they did not make it so, but 
under divine direction they were guided in the stating 
of it so; and we may implicitly rely upon their statements, 
which, moreover, we find to be in full accord 
with the principles of righteousness and the various 
declarations of the divine Word. 

They inform us also that certain sins can be remitted 
or forgiven— sins of weakness and of ignorance, traceable 
to our fallen nature, which we have received by heredity, 
and the penalty for which our Lord has already 
borne. They inform us also that other sins, viz., wilful 
sins, are not forgivable, and may be indeed sins 
unto death, unto the Second Death. And we see herein 



reasonableness also; for we perceive that Christ did not 
die for any except the Adamic transgression, and those 
sins which directly or indirectly may be traceable to it; 
and that wilful, deliberate transgressions cannot therefore 
be forgiven, but must be expiated— if committed 
with considerable light, but not full light, the expiating 
penalty may be "stripes," but if committed with full 
wilfulness and against full light the penalty could be 
nothing short of death— the Second Death.— 1 John 5:16; 
Luke 12:47,48; Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26,27. 

CAST NOT PEARLS BEFORE SWINE. 



Following this conversation with the disciples, our 
Lord charged them particularly not to make his Messiahship 
generally known to the people. This corroborates 

R2658 : page 202 

the thought that neither the disciples nor our 

Lord had previously been enunciating his Messiahship, 

but rather preaching that the Kingdom of heaven 

was at hand, near at the door, without saying precisely 

who was to be the King. The command not to make 

the matter known was evidently because the result of 

such a program would have been to have aroused at 

least a party spirit amongst the people, some of whom 

accepted his miracles, etc., and would have espoused 

his cause, while others, with the Pharisees, would have 

opposed, and thus an insurrection would naturally have 

followed;— besides, it would have interfered considerably 

with the program which our Lord saw marked out 

for him in the divine Word,— his death as the sin-offering. 

He did not need to proclaim his Messiahship, for 

he already knew, as he had stated, that whomsoever 

the Father would draw would come, and that those not 

drawn of the Father, and not disposed to become his 

disciples, should not be specially drawn by the proclamation 

of his Messiahship and the prospects of the 

Kingdom. 

PETER A STUMBLING-STONE, AN ADVERSARY. 



Having prepared the minds of the disciples, by the 
foregoing declaration, that hades, death, would not be 
permitted to triumph over his Church, etc., our Lord 
from that time forward began gradually to break to 
them information respecting his own decease and his resurrection 
from the dead. It was then that the same noble 
Peter forgot himself, as we would say, and undertook 
to correct the Lord and to outline for him other things. 
He was moved to this, not merely by selfish motives of 



prejudice and hopes of sharing in the Kingdom, and 
avoiding the ignominy, but doubtless also by his love 
for the Lord and his desire to see him honored and exalted, 
rather than to be set at nought and killed. But, 
as on another occasion this noble Apostle said things 
"not knowing what he said," so now he evidently did 
not realize the import of his language, and how, if it 
were followed, it would mean to our Lord the rejection 
of the Father's plan and the substitution therefor of a 
plan more agreeable to the flesh. 

The text says that "Peter took him," and this we 
may understand to signify that Peter took him apart 
from the others— it was a private interview and exhortation, 
and no doubt Peter intended to bring in various 
supporting arguments; for instance, that the disciples 
would be discouraged with such talk, etc. However, 
he only "began," and did not get to finish his argument, 
the Master being so full of the spirit of loyalty 
to the Father and his plan that he could not even endure 
a suggestion to the contrary, and must needs hasten 
to repudiate such a disloyal suggestion. His answer 
was a severe rebuke to Peter, yet doubtless was a blessing 
to him so long as he lived, and probably helped 
him afterward to be much more modest in the matter 
of opposing his plan to that of the Lord. 

When our Lord said, "Get thee behind me, Satan," 
he did not mean that he considered Peter possessed by 
the Adversary: rather, the word Satan in the original 
is "adversary," and was properly used in respect to 
any person taking a position adverse or in opposition 
to another. The Adversary is called Satan, that word 
being used for him as a proper name. Our Lord turned 
from Peter at this time, and addressed his words so that 
all the apostles might hear him, that the matter might 
be the more impressive and all the more a valuable 
lesson to them: that they might all know that their 
Master never compromised his Father's will in any 
sense or degree. "Get behind me, Adversary; thou 
savorest [partakest] not the things that be of God, 
but the things that be of men"— you are viewing matters 
not from God's standpoint, but from the standpoint 
of fallible, fallen men. 

So it is to-day, and ever has been with the Church, 
the body of Christ; if they are intent upon following 
the footsteps of the Lord they must expect adversaries 
to arise who will seek to turn them away from the path 
of sacrifice and duty: to make it seem too difficult, or 
to attract their attention to other plans or methods less 
costly— more in harmony with the fleshly mind. We 
should remember the Master's course and take a similar 
one, and point out to these, if they be friends, and 
in the truth (and such they frequently are, as was Peter), 
that their influence is being exercised in a wrong direction, 
against the truth, against our best interests, against 
the divine plan, and hence that they are not only adversaries 
to us, but also adversaries to the Lord. We 



should thus seek to reclaim them and to help them to 
walk in the same way with us,— instead of leaving the 
narrow way to follow their kindly meant but pernicious 
influence. 

The word here rendered "offence" would more 
properly be translated, as in the Revised Version, "a 
stumbling block," or a stone of stumbling. Thus we 
see that it was the same Peter whose noble confession 
had so refreshed the Lord and blessed the disciples and 
himself, and who on this account was designated a 
stone, indicative of strong character, that was now, by 
reason of the same strength of character, strong-mindedness, 
strong will, in danger of becoming, not a stone in 
the Lord's Temple, but a Stumbling Stone. And should 
some of the Lord's people, strong in character, become 
stumbling stones to us, we have here our Lord's illustration 
of our proper course— to turn from them, refusing 
to be stumbled, refusing to be lead away from the 
consecration which we have made. 

Our Lord took this occasion to lay pointedly before 

R2658 : page 203 

his disciples the fact that if they loved the present life, 
with its advantages, etc., more than the future one, 
with its present disadvantages, they had no business 
amongst his disciples: that anyone who would be his 
disciple should reckon self-denial, self-negation, absolutely 
necessary to discipleship; and should be prepared, 
with no uncertainty of mind or purpose, to follow after 
Jesus with a cross,— not a literal cross, but the crossing 
of human self-will with the divine will. 

Then come the terms of discipleship very clearly 
stated. All who become disciples, and who hope for 
life in the Kingdom, must expect to sacrifice the present 
life, and whoever does not sacrifice the present life shall 
not find that glorious eternal life which God has in 
reservation only for the overcomers. But, our Lord 
reasons, what would a man be advantaged were he to 
gain all of this world, all of its advantages and riches 
(which none could hope to do) if thereby he should 
lose his own being, his own soul, his life, his existence; 
or what would a man not be willing to give in exchange 
for the perpetuation of his life eternally. (The word 
soul, in this verse, is psuche, the same Greek word rendered 
life in the preceding verse.) Surely anyone possessed 
of a sound mind and able, therefore, to rightly 
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of the present 
life, as compared with the eternal life in God's Kingdom 

R2659 : page 203 

of righteousness, must confess that it would be a 
bad bargain to gain the whole world in every sense and 
to lose his own being. 
It is in view of the logic of this argument that our 



Lord and the apostles urge all true followers of Christ 
to present their bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, and their reasonable service;— to lay down their 
lives for the brethren, that by these means they may 
attest their devotion to the Lord and attain to his Kingdom 
and life everlasting.— Rom. 12:1; 1 John 3:16; 
2 Cor. 5:14,15; Phil. 3:10,11. 



R2659 : page 203 

A VISION OF COMING GLORY. 

LUKE 9:28-36.-JULY 29. 

—"This is my beloved Son: hear him."— 

CONTINUING his lessons to the apostles, showing 

them that his glory and Kingdom could not 

come until after his suffering and death, our Lord declared, 

"There be some standing here who will not 

taste of death until they see the Son of Man coming in 

his royal majesty." (Matt. 16:28; 17:1.) Then, six 

days later (or eight days, counting the one in which 

this was uttered and the one in which it was fulfilled) 

our Lord took Peter, James and John, the three apostles 

most advanced in faith and zeal, into a high mountain, 

and while praying with them the transfiguration 

scene of our lesson ensued. 

It was a further lesson of instruction in harmony 
with what he had already explained, viz., that the 
Son of Man must be set at naught by the chief priests 
and the elders, and must be crucified, and must rise 
from the dead, ere he could enter into his glory;— the 
Kingdom in which he had promised them a share. 
The transfiguration scene was therefore a picture or 
"vision" of the Lord's glory in his Kingdom, and was 
intended to assure the apostles respecting the certainty 
of the Kingdom, notwithstanding the apparent failure 
of all kingdom-hopes in our Lord's crucifixion. And 
this vision was doubtless essential as an assistant to the 
apostles' faith in Jesus as the promised Messiah, since 
the course of events which would follow in the next few 
months would be so different from everything that they 
had expected. 

Peter, one of those present on this occasion, fully 
substantiates this view— that the transfiguration was a 
vision of Christ's dignity and glory in the Kingdom— 
for writing respecting it he says: "We have not followed 
cunningly devised fables in making known to you the 
presence and power of our Lord Jesus, but were eye-witnesses 
of that majesty, for he received from God the 
Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice 
to him from the excellent glory— This is my beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased.' And this voice which 



came from heaven we heard when we were with him in 
the holy mount. "-2 Pet. 1:16-18. 

The several accounts show that our Lord entered 
into the mountain to pray, and that the apostles fell 
asleep during the prayer, but subsequently awakened 
and beheld the vision, the Master's face shining like 
the sun, and his garments glitteringly white, and in his 
company two persons who, for some reason, they recognized 
as Moses and Elijah, altho of course they had 
never seen either of these men, and would not have 
known them without assistance. These they overheard 
talking with the Lord, the subject of the conversation 
no doubt being intended for the ears of the disciples— 
to convince them that the matters which would occur 
before long in Jerusalem and on Mount Calvary would 
all be features of the divine plan, harmoniously working 
out the blessed results promised and longed for, 
through the Kingdom. "They spoke of his decease 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem." 

What is the interpretation of the picture? is a 
proper question. We reply, that it represented, first 
of all, that altho our Lord Jesus must suffer death, even 

R2659 : page 204 

the death of the cross, in harmony with the divine 
plan, "being made a curse for us" (Gal. 3:13), nevertheless, 
he was still the Son of God, whose glorious 
majesty and kingly power would later on be fully shown 
forth. And Moses and Elijah, representing the Law 
and the Prophets, illustrate how the death of Christ 
was fully attested beforehand. Moses spoke of the sufferings 
of Christ in all the arrangements of the Law, 
its sacrifices, etc., and the prophets declared not only 
the coming glories, but also the sufferings which must 
precede them, as our Lord subsequently pointed out to 
the two disciples on the way to Emmaus, saying, "O 
fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets 
have spoken: ought not Messiah to have suffered these 
things, and to enter into his glory?"— Luke 24:25-27. 
Again, this picture may be understood to represent 
the Kingdom during this Gospel age— the Kingdom 
as recognized by the Lord's people, but not recognized 
by the world. In this view of the vision, our 
Lord's face shining as the sun, and his garments glistening 
white, would represent him in his present condition, 
as no longer the man Christ Jesus, but the 
risen, glorified Son of the Highest, a spirit being. In 
this view of the matter, Moses might be understood to 
represent the faithful of the past ages, and Elijah the 
faithful of this Gospel age, the body of Christ in the 
flesh,* who are to be associated with him in the glory 
of the Kingdom, and who meantime behold his glory 
with the eye of faith, and recognize the great transaction 
of Calvary as the basis for all Kingdom hopes and 
blessings. 



In harmony with this view is the fact that at the 
same time that this vision was taking place the other 
disciples of the Twelve at the foot of the mountain were 
contending with the Adversary, seeking to cast out the 
devil from the young man. Thus the Lord's people of 
the present time are still in the valley of conflict, still 
contending with the will of the flesh and the devil; yet 
their eyes of faith behold at the top of the mountain 
the glorious Lord, with all power in heaven and in 
earth, their Friend, their Teacher, and soon to be their 
deliverer, who will cause them to share in the glories 
of his Kingdom into which he has already entered. 

We have called this scene on the mountain a vision, 
and so indeed our Lord calls it, in the account given 
by Matthew (17:9): "As they came down from the 
mountain Jesus charged them saying, Tell the vision to 
no man until the Son of Man be risen from the dead." 
And indeed a vision was just as useful to the purpose 
as a reality could have been. Thus it was that the Lord 
showed many things later on to one of these three witnessing 
disciples on the Isle of Patmos. He showed 
him in vision, angels and thrones and crowns and multitudes 
and dragons, etc., in a manner which served 
the purpose equally as well as tho all those beasts, 
dragons, etc., had been actually created for the purpose. 
So in this vision: Our Lord's transfiguration was merely 
an appearance— actually he had undergone no change. 
He appeared like as spiritual beings are described, bright, 
shining like the sun, etc., yet he was not yet a spirit 
being, and did not become such until his resurrection 
from the dead; he was still "the man Christ Jesus." 
But in the "vision" his countenance and his garments 
were caused to appear to be bright, glistening, etc., and 
the appearance served every purpose. Likewise, Moses 
and Elijah appeared to be present, but they were not 
actually present, because it was merely a "vision." 
The Apostle distinctly informs us that Moses and Elijah 
and the others of the ancient worthies are not yet made 
perfect— and that they cannot be made perfect until 
after the Church, the body of Christ, is complete and 
glorified with the Head, "God having provided some 
better thing for us, that they without us should not be 
made perfect."-Heb. 1 1:40; John 3:13; Acts 2:34. 

As a part of the "vision" came a misty cloud of 
light, which enveloped the group, including the disciples, 
who were fearful as they entered the cloud. This 
cloud, as a part of the vision, might properly be understood 
as saying to the apostles and to us, Altho the 
glory and majesty of the Lord Jesus are unquestionably 
his, as testified to by the Law and the Prophets, and as 
a result of his faithfulness unto death, nevertheless 
that glory will in a considerable measure be hidden, 
covered, obscured for a time, so that you will see your 
glorious Lord and King only with the eye of faith, 
which, altho more or less cloudy, will nevertheless be 
bright to those who look unto him. And the voice of 



God speaking in that cloud and testifying to Jesus as 

the Son of God, and instructing that we should hear 

and obey his word, would seem to represent how that 

all through this Gospel age, while the misty cloud surrounds 

the glory of the Lord, we will have great need 

to continually hearken to the Word of the Lord, and to 

repose faith in its declaration respecting the Son of 

God, our Redeemer. 

After the vision the Lord and the apostles descended 
from the mount to engage in the duties of life— to complete 
the lessons of faith and obedience, battling against 
the world, the flesh and the devil; and yet, as the quotation 
from the Apostle Peter's letter clearly shows, the 
influence of this vision continued with the apostles 
through coming days, as it still encourages us today. 
And may we not learn a lesson to the effect that as this 
vision was granted when Jesus and the disciples were 
at prayer, so all those who seek God in prayer may, to 
a large extent, with the eye of faith realize this same 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II, Chap. 8, "Elias Shall 
First Come." 

R2660 : page 205 

blessed vision of the Kingdom— the glories to come— 
and may, to some extent, with the hearing of faith recognize 
the voice of God saying, "This is my beloved 
Son"— to some extent be enabled to realize that as 
members of the body of Christ their sacrifice must also 
be accomplished in actual death before they can enter 
into his glory, since it is written that "if we suffer with 
him we shall also reign with him." 

We cannot build tabernacles on the mountain 
heights of faith and hope, and expect to dwell there in 
enraptured vision always. We must remember that 
the duties and trials of present experiences in conflicts 
with sin and with self and with the Adversary are essential 
to our development and part of our covenant; 
but like the Master we should frequently seek the heavenly 
Father's blessing in prayer; and in proportion 
as we use this privilege will our hearts and our faces 
shine; and proportionately we will be enabled to "show 
forth the praises of him who called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light," and who has shined by his 
grace into our hearts, "to give the light of the knowledge 
of God as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord." 



R2660 : page 205 

LEAST AND GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM. 



--MATT. 18:1-14.~AUGUST5.~ 

GOLDEN TEXT:— "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and 
forbid them not, for of such [like] is the Kingdom of God." 

THE GOLDEN TEXT chosen for this lesson is most 
inappropriate and misleading. It was spoken 
respecting children, and as indicating our Lord's sympathy 
and love for them. Indeed, we cannot think of 
any truly great man or woman who would not look 
upon childhood with loving sympathy and interest; and 
viewing the blank pages of the life represented in them 
be awakened to tender feelings respecting the trials and 
difficulties and disappointments which must lie before 
them in the path of life, and with hopes and good 
wishes respecting their possible victories and attainments 
of desirable characters, as a result of those experiences 
and conflicts. That Jesus loved children, 
yea, loved everything guileless and pure, is not to be 
questioned, and our Golden Text substantiates this 
conviction. 

The Kingdom of God will not be composed either 
wholly or in part of infants who died without either 
knowledge, experience or character attainments. Had 
such been God's purpose it would not have required 
nearly nineteen centuries to complete the "little flock" 
of "one hundred and forty-four thousand;" nor would 
it have been said that a good fight must be fought and 
victory achieved and graces of the spirit attained by 
"patient perseverance in well doing," and that all in all 
it must be through much tribulation to the flesh, voluntarily 
and joyfully accepted, that any can enter into the 
Kingdom. Infants can have no share under this Gospel 
call; but they will surely share the great world-blessing 
that will speedily follow the completion of the 
Church and its glorification as God's Kingdom. 

This text is misleading, in connection with this lesson, 
because in the latter the expression "little ones" is used 
in a figurative sense, not literally,— the Lord referring to 
his humble and trustful disciples as God's little ones, 
God's children, whom he pities and cherishes as do 
earthly parents their little ones. Nor is this an exceptional 
case, for we find that repeatedly in the Scriptures 
the young Christian and the less developed are likened 
to babes, to children. Thus the Apostle Paul exhorts: 
"Brethren, be not children in understanding; howbeit, 
in malice be ye children, but in understanding be ye 
men." And the Apostle Peter exhorts the brethren, 
"As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the 
Word, that ye may grow thereby."— 1 Cor. 14:20; 
1 Peter 2:2. 

It was apparently after the journey back from 
the Mount of Transfiguration to Capernaum that the 
discourse of this lesson occurred. Comparing the accounts 
as given by Mark and Luke, we gather that 
the apostles on the way had a discussion respecting who 



of their number were the greatest, and who would be 
the greatest or most honored in the Kingdom which the 
Lord had promised and in which they hoped to share. 
This discussion quite probably was instigated by the 
fact that only three of their number had been specially 
favored by being with the Lord in the mount. The 
discussion between them, altho carried on probably in 
subdued tones, not intended for the ears of Jesus, had 
become animated as the various sides and claims were 
advocated. It was a little later that our Lord inquired 
of them what had been the subject of their earnest and 
animated converse as they followed him in the way. 
According to Luke's account they were reticent, not 
liking to answer his question and to tell of their dispute, 
no doubt feeling rather ashamed of it. But, realizing 
that they could not hide the matter from the Lord, and 
some of them evidently anxious to have his decisive 
word on the subject, they asked him to settle the question 
for them. 

Our Lord desired just such an opportunity for presenting 
to his faithful ones a needed lesson along this 
line; and according to his usual custom he illustrated 
it. Calling a little child, and seating it in the midst, 

R2660 : page 206 

he made the astounding declaration that only such as 

would become childlike could enter the Kingdom at all. 

As natural men, and most of them rather unlearned, 

the disciples had no doubt been aiming as far as possible 

from childlike simplicity, and striving rather to assume 

the dignity of mind and of bearing which would 

suggest itself to the natural man as being appropriate to 

those who hoped soon to share regal honors in the Kingdom 

of God. What astonishment it must have caused 

them to learn that the Lord was looking rather for simplicity, 

meekness, teachableness, child-likeness, than 

for astuteness, wisdom, dignity, etc.! 

Yet our Lord's words were not merely a condemnation 
of the spirit which they had been cultivating, 
but a lesson of instruction regarding a change in this 
respect, his words intimating not merely the possibility, 
but the necessity of a change of course on the part of 
those who desired a share in his Kingdom. If, instead 
of reading our Lord's words as in the Common Version, 
"Except ye be converted," we read them as in the Revised 
Version, "Except ye turn," more will get the 
true thought our Lord wished his followers to learn, 
the word "convert" having lost its primary meaning 
to many by reason of misuse. They must turn their 
ideas on the subject, and study and practice lessons in 
the opposite direction— lessons of meekness, of humility, 
of child-likeness: and our Lord's declaration that those 
who attain to the greatest development in meekness and 
simplicity of heart will be greatest in the Kingdom, 
implies that those who strive after simplicity and meekness 



will be granted a share in the Kingdom, but that 
none who are self-seeking and boastful will have part 
or lot in this matter. 

Having thus defined the humble-minded and unostentatious 
amongst his followers as those upon whom 
he would bestow the highest honors and dignities of 
the Kingdom, Jesus proceeded to give a general lesson 
respecting such "little ones" of his followers, saying 
that all who receive such humble disciples in his name 
will be reckoned as having received him, and whoever 
stumbles or injures one of these humble or "little ones" 
will thereby commit a crime so serious that it would be 
better for him to have lost his life— better that a millstone 
were fastened to his neck and he be cast into the sea, 
and thus all hope of saving his life effectually destroyed— 
better that this great calamity should come upon 
one than that he should do an injury to one of the 
Lord's "little ones"— one of the humblest of the 
disciples, child-like, meek, following in the way of the 
Lord. 

As we thus see how great a value the Lord places 
upon humility it should encourage all true disciples to 
cultivate this quality daily, that thus they might grow 
more and more guileless, honest, truly humble, and in 
the sight of the great King become more and more great, 
more and more fit for the high exaltations of the Kingdom 
to come. Seeing that without this meekness none 
can enter into this Kingdom, we need not wonder that 
the Scriptures everywhere exhort the Lord's people to 
humility— "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand 
of God [now] that he may exalt you in due time" in 
the Kingdom. Yet notwithstanding all these exhortations 
of the Scriptures the perversity of human nature 
seems to be such that those who become the Lord's 
people and who engage to run in his way seem to find 
more trouble, more to contend against, in this matter 
than in any other. And some who feel themselves to 
be little enough seem very anxious that others of the 
brethren shall esteem them very highly. Would to 
God that all of the Lord's dear people, and especially 
all who seem to be leaders, and who have some natural 
qualifications for leading, and helpfulness in the Church, 

R2661 : page 206 

would study well this lesson, and learn from it how to 
advance themselves in the Lord's favor, and how to be 
truly great according to his standard, which alone 
shall prevail. 

The word rendered "offend" in verse 6 and onward 
would be better rendered "stumbled," the thought being 
that of placing a stumbling-block in the path. The 
Lord intimates most distinctly that there will be plenty 
of such stumbling-blocks in the way of those who are 
truly his, and that too in proportion as they are "little" 
—humble. He declares it necessary that these difficulties, 



these trials, these "offences," shall come. It 

is necessary, because it is the divine will that all the 

elect Church shall be thoroughly tested and developed 

in character, that thus they may become strong characters, 

copies of God's dear Son, willing to suffer for 

the truth's sake, and that gladly, joyfully, the loss of 

earthly things, that thereby they might please the Father 

which is in heaven,— thus developing humility and 

obedience, that by and by they may be ready for the 

exaltation which he has promised to those only who 

faithfully follow in the footsteps of Jesus. 

Yet however necessary that the stumbling-blocks 
shall be in the way, and that the Church, the body of 
Christ, shall be tested thereby, this does not lighten the 
responsibility of those who, as the agents of the Adversary, 
lend themselves to his influence in placing those 
stumbling-blocks before the feet of the saints; and our 
Lord's words, without indicating exactly the nature 
of their punishment, assure us positively that such 
evil-doers will have a reward from him who says, 
"Vengeance is mine; I will repay." 

In all probability many to-day are putting stumbling-blocks 
before the Lord's little ones, his faithful 
little flock, who do not realize what they are doings- 
just as Peter unconsciously became a stumbling stone, 

R2661 : page 207 

a rock of offence, to the Master, when he attempted to 

dissuade him from the performance of his consecration 

vow. Those who place stumbling-blocks before the 

Lord's "little ones" now similarly seek to lead them from 

the narrow path of full consecration and self-sacrifice 

—seeking to persuade them that another and an easier 

way, a way less humbling to the natural man, a way 

more politic, more crafty, more wise according to the 

course of this world than the narrow way, is just as 

good as or a great deal better than the narrow way. Such 

testings are necessary, and it is also necessary that all 

who do not walk closely in the footprints of the Savior 

shall be sifted out, for the Lord seeketh only a little 

flock,— all of them copies of his dear Son. But there 

is a great responsibility upon those who aid in turning 

aside any of the flock— who to any extent are stumbling-blocks, 

causes of stumbling or "offence" in the 

pathway of the Lord's people. 

Following this line of thought, that offences or 
trials and testings must come to all, our Lord urges that 
tho these tests mean the sacrifice of pleasure or hopes 
or aims or customs or privileges, precious to us as a 
right eye or a right hand, or useful to us as our foot, 
they must nevertheless be overcome, if we would enter 
into the Kingdom. This is another way of saying what 
he at another time expressed in the words, "Through 
much tribulation shall ye enter the Kingdom." Whoever 
has gotten the thought that the Kingdom is to be 



granted merely on condition of believing in Jesus has 

gotten a wrong thought that is not imparted by the 

Scriptures. Faith is necessary to our justification, before 

we can do anything in the nature of self-sacrifice 

that God could accept; but whoever stops with the faith 

without the works, without the self-sacrifice, loses every 

hope and privilege in connection with the Kingdom. 

To attain it we must "strive," must "fight the good 

fight," must "endure hardness as good soldiers," 

must be willing to cut off, not only sinful pleasures, 

but all things that would interfere with our full devotion 

to the Lord's service and our fulfillment of our 

covenant to be dead with him; must "work out our 

salvation with fear and trembling,"— assisted by divine 

grace sufficient for every time of need, and by the exceeding 

great and precious promises of God's Word 

working in us both to will and to do of his good 

pleasure. 

We are not to understand that any may be lacking 
a foot or a hand or an eye in the Kingdom; but rather 
we should understand that as the offending eye represents 
besetments which appeal to our natural tastes as 
beautiful and likely to charm and attract us to earthly 
things, and as the offending hand would represent the 
doing of things that would be contrary to our highest 
spiritual interests, and as the offending foot would represent 
the going into forbidden paths of sin of self-gratification, 
so the lopping off of these would properly 
signify that it would be better that we should enter the 
life eternal and into the share in the Kingdom without 
having enjoyed certain earthly privileges and gratifications, 
than that having enjoyed all the earthly gratifications 
we should thereby have missed our calling and 
failed to make our election sure. 

The "everlasting fire" and the "hell-fire" mentioned 
are equally symbolical with the other parts of 
the figure, and undoubtedly refer to the destruction 
which is the wages of sin to be visited upon wilful sinners 
—"everlasting destruction from the presence of the 
Lord and from the glory of his power." That fire is 
used here and elsewhere in the Scriptures to represent 
not torture, but destruction, is clearly set forth in a 
pamphlet entitled, "What say the Scriptures About 
Hell."* 

Branching out further along the same lines, our 
Lord gives the general caution to us all: "Take heed 
that ye despise not one of these little ones"— these humble 
ones that belong to the Lord. They may seem humble 
and insignificant when viewed from the worldly 
standpoint, but they are God's friends; yea, they 
are God's children, for whom he cares; and hence whoever 
does injury to them is insulting and antagonizing 
their Father which is in heaven. Moreover, our Lord 
assures us that each of his little ones, his faithful, humble 
little flock, have a constant representation in the 
Father's presence. There is a guardian angel for each 



of the Lord's people, and we are to get the thought 

that there is no delay in the bringing of any and everything 

which pertains to their welfare and interest before 

the attention of the great King. What a thought is 

here for those who are inclined to be heady and to despise 

or in any manner over-ride or mistreat the humble 

ones of the body of Christ! And what a lesson is here 

also for the humble ones— that they are the special objects 

of divine care and providence, for whom, therefore, 

all things must work well, because they belong to 

the Lord! 

The remaining four verses seem not to be properly 
a part of this lesson, and inasmuch as they will come 
up in another lesson later on and in their proper connection, 
we omit the discussion of them here. 



*We will supply these free to applicants who so request. 



R2661 : page 207 

BATTLING FOR THE TRUTH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-At a recent meeting 
of the Church here the 28th chapter of Isaiah was 
brought up, and it seemed plain to us that this is an 
exact description of the condition of the nominal 
church of the present time, from the prophets and 

R2661 : page 208 

seers, who err in vision, down to the tables which are 
full of vomit, the bed which has become too short and 
the covering which is too narrow.— See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN Index references. 

Now in regard to that part of the chapter which 
refers to those who drive back the battle to the gate, 
the thought was expressed that possibly this might 
refer to the present "Volunteer" work, and that the 
volunteers are pressing back the battle to the gate, 
and that the word "gate" might possibly be a symbol 
of dominion, representing Satan's stronghold, and 
that this stronghold is the doctrine of eternal torture, 
against which doctrine the present ammunition of the 
volunteers seems to be specially directed. Then again 
it was thought that this gate (or doctrine) might represent 
the restraint which the enemy has exercised 
over the race of mankind during all these centuries, 
lest the glorious light of the gospel should shine into 
their hearts. 

Do you think the interpretation correct? And if 



so, do you not think that if the attention of the brethren 
were called to this chapter at the present time it 
would serve to strengthen those who are already in 
the volunteer service and encourage others to enlist, 
inasmuch as the same chapter promises strength to 
those who drive the battle back? With best wishes, 

Yours in the service of the King, 

CONRAD KUEHN,-Ohio. 

[In reply: We certainly do understand this chapter 
to portray events of our day; and while all true 
soldiers of the cross are now battling for the Truth 
against error we concede that none are doing more 
valiant service than are the "Volunteers." Nor do 
we know of any other service or method so likely to 
yield the desired results. 

As to turning the battle at the gate: it might be 
viewed aggressively, as you suggest, or defensively. 

R2662 : page 208 

Really we are on the defensive— the stronghold Zion 

is attacked by enemies from without and within. The 

Bible is attacked by so-called Higher Critics, and the 

cross, the doctrine of the ransom, is attacked by Evolutionists 

and hosts of others, and the long entrenched 

errors of doctrine are now stumbling many who want 

to be on the Lord's side of this battle— the side of 

Truth. The enemy of Truth, Satan, and his deluded 

followers must be shown up and driven completely 

outside Zion's walls that now at last "wheat" may be 

distinguished from "tares." We know of no better 

aid in this conflict than the "Volunteer TOWER." It 

is an inspiring scene to see the Allegheny Church 

Volunteers going forth every Sunday morning, and it 

must be still more so to witness the larger company 

of the Boston Church— about 80 per cent, of the entire 

Church, we understand, are "Volunteers." The influence 

of such preachers and their message is bound 

to tell on the right class. -EDITOR.] 



R2662 : page 208 

BIBLE READING INDISPENSABLE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I can heartily appreciate 
the advice given by you in the last WATCH 
TOWER, under caption of "Attention, Watch Tower 
Readers!" inasmuch as I am always benefited by a 
re-reading of the DAWNS, but permit me to say that I 
believe there are some who may misconstrue the last 
two sentences of the above article and think into them a 
meaning it is not intended they should contain, viz., 



that you are advocating the reading of the DAWNS 
exclusive of God's Word. I have learned from observation 
that those who merely read the DAWNS without 
examining the context of Scriptures quoted do 
not become well established in the truth, so that when 
the fire that tries every man's faith becomes more intense, 
they are unable to endure the ordeal. It has 
further been my experience that those who state that 
"they" have the Bible to read, and that it is sufficient 
for them without reading the DAWNS, never 
come to a clear knowledge of the truth, because they 
thereby ignore the instrumentality that God has been 
pleased to honor in setting forth his truth in these 
last days. And in ignoring the instrumentality they 
ignore not man, but God, "who worketh all things after 
the counsel of his own will;" and hence, as long as 
they maintain such an attitude, they cannot hope to 
be led into all truth. But happy are those who keep 
their minds in a receptive condition for truth, willing 
to receive it through whatever agency the Lord may 
be pleased to send it to them. May the Lord enable 
each one of us so to be. 

Before closing I must tell you that I was greatly 
encouraged by the article, "Keep yourselves in the 
love of God." How it has refreshed me in spirit! I 
appreciate more fully now the fact that it is one thing 
to possess the "love of God" and another thing to 
maintain it to the end of our course. How much effort 
on our part is implied in the word "keep!"— continuous 
effort, yet ever mindful of the fact that the Lord 
is the "author" as well as the "finisher of our faith." 
It is to "pray without ceasing," to "quench not the 
spirit," to "despise not prophesying," to "prove all 
things and hold fast that which is good." 

Some three years ago, when I began to appreciate 
the beauty of "present truth," I realized I had lost 
much precious time, and desiring to make the best of 
the little I had left, I thought over several plans and 
finally decided on this one, "Every day I will try to 
become a little more like Jesus, and then he will make 
plain to me those things I do not now understand." 
And I find that my knowledge of the "deep things of 
God" has ever been commensurate with my progress 
in becoming more and more like God's dear Son, but 
herein I became aware of the greatest struggle of my 
life, a struggle to the death of the old nature, and oh, 
what a struggle it is, only those who have tried to 
stem the current of a fallen and depraved nature know. 
I found arrayed against me the world, the flesh and 
the devil, but "thanks be to God who giveth us the 
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!" How appropriate 
are the words,— 

"Keep striving: the winners are those who have striven 

And fought for the prize that no idler has won; 
To the hand of the stedfast alone it is given, 

And before it is gained there is work to be done." 



Enclosed find order for DAWNS. With much 
Christian love, I am, 
Yours in our Redeemer, E. J. COWARD,— Texas. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. JULY 15, 1900. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 211 

Is the China Trouble Prophetically 

Significant? 211 

The Shepherds Disappointed and 

Chagrined 212 

The Ministry of Comfort 214 

"Forgive Us our Debts as We Forgive 

Our Debtors" 216 

The Parable of the Two Debtors 218 

"Who did Sin, this Man or his 

Parents?" 219 

Orientalism, Mormonism, 

Theosophy 220 

Is All Sickness of the Devil? 220 

Christian Science Misbeliefs 222 

Out of Darkness Into Light 224 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2664 : page 210 
PROGRESS OF THE CAUSE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 

The Lord's blessing attends the British Branch. Four colporteurs 
are at work there with good success. Brother Henninges 
writes of their work thus,— "The results of their labors 
for the last two months show that any one of average intelligence 
and activity can, with the Lord's blessing, sustain himself 
in the work. Give a clarion call from the WATCH TOWER 
for more laborers for this great field, advising would-be laborers 
to write to the British Branch for terms, territory, etc." 

Respecting the "Volunteer" service Bro. H. says,— "The 
Volunteer work is progressing well; particularly in this city 
(London), where we have so far put out 14,000 copies. The 
work is going on in four sections of the city. Yesterday was 
the first day on "double turn" (A.M. and P.M.) and the total 
number of copies of the Volunteer TOWER distributed was 4000. 
At this rate we shall soon be obliged to call on you for funds 
for another 100,000 edition." 

Our Society has just rented a very desirable meeting place 
where Sunday meetings will be regularly held. It is a public 
hall opposite the Great Eastern Ry. station, and near Wansted 
Park station of Midland Ry. The entrance is No. 79 Woodgrange 
Road, Forest Gate, London E. All who trust in the precious blood 
of Christ will be cordially welcomed. Seats free. No collections. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK AT HOME. 

We have had many additions to this service lately, but still 
there is room for consecrated laborers. The harvest is great, 
the laborers few, comparatively, and the time is short— "the 
eleventh hour." Write us for particulars if you have the desire 
and the opportunity to thus "preach the Word." 

page 210 

CHICAGO CONVENTION, SEPT. 1,2,3. 

ONE RAILWAY FARE FOR ROUND TRIP,-PARTICULARS NEXT ISSUE. 



R2662 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



IS THE CHINA TROUBLE PROPHETICALLY SIGNIFICANT? 



Apparently a serious crisis in the world's affairs 
is being reached in China. For the past sixty years 
Europeans have been intruding themselves upon the 
Chinese, ostensibly for the benevolent purpose of blessing 
the Chinese with European civilization, but really 
for commercial purposes;— supplying their needs for a 
money consideration. Subsequently, about forty years 
ago, under compulsory regulations forced upon the 
Chinese, Christian missionaries were permitted to enter 
the Flowery Empire to contradict its religious 
and moral ideas cherished for centuries. The new 
religion brought family strife— especially because it 
taught the people that their ancestors (whom the Chinese 
worship as demi-gods), not being believers in the 
only name wherein is salvation, were lost eternally- 
doomed to everlasting torments. 

These missionaries, and all foreign merchants who 
lodged with them, were specially protected by treaty 
laws and regulations, and thus were exempted from 
Chinese laws and became a favored people, possessed 
of greater privileges and liberties than the natives. 
Moreover, the missionaries (especially the Romanists, 
from all accounts) attempted to extend these special 
treaty rights to such Chinese as professed conversion 
—the priests became the attorneys of their people, and 
by arguments and threats, etc., generally got their 
faithful free from charges brought against them. 

Thus inch by inch the white man forcibly intruded 
upon the yellow man, until the war between 
China and Japan, which displayed to the civilized world 
the helplessness of China, the second greatest nation 
of the world numerically (400,000,000). Since then 
the white man's arrogance has increased, and the 
newspapers of the world have told the Chinese that it 
is only a question of time until their nation will no 
longer exist, being divided among the nations of Europe, 
who have grasped ports and whole districts, 
compelling a nominal acquiescence on the part of the 
Chinese. 

The Chinese are a thrifty people and peaceably 
disposed and not specially patriotic,— else they would 
not have submitted to these intrusions so long as they 
have. Indeed, they are quite tolerant toward foreigners 
who will adopt their civilization, submit to their 
laws and mind their own business. Understanding 
the circumstances, we cannot so much wonder at the 
recent uprising against foreigners under the auspices 
of an athletic society called the "Boxers." It is worthy 
of note that the present outbreak, while it has extended 
to all missionaries and all foreigners, nevertheless 
began with Roman Catholics exclusively. Much 
as we must deprecate the killing of many missionaries 
and many native converts, we must admit that such 
an uprising would have occurred long ago among 



white men of any nationality. Lack of patriotic sentiment 

amongst the Chinese, and inferior armament, 

etc., accounts for the delay of this outbreak: the people 

have been kept so busy providing for life's necessities 

that love of money has crowded out love of 

country. 

Europe is astounded at the late uprising, for two 
reasons. (1) It offers a suggestion that a patriotic feeling 
may yet take hold of the Chinese, which with 
their overwhelming numbers would make them a menace 

R2662 : page 212 

to Europe; for they could muster an army twice 
as numerous as could all Europe combined— an army 
accustomed to obedience, and very economical. (2) 
Even should the whites succeed in coercing the Chinese, 
and hold the kingdom as a vassal empire, or 
divide it amongst the "more civilized," the danger is 
that international jealousies over shares in the spoils, 
"spheres of influence," etc., would ultimately lead to 
great wars, far-reaching in their influence, and quite 
possibly involving all Europe. 

It is from this standpoint that affairs in China are 
of special interest to those who know that we are living 
in the harvest time of the Gospel age, and who are 
instructed from the Word of God to expect this age 
to close with a great time of trouble— beginning with 
international complications, and ending with anarchy. 

R2663 : page 212 

From this standpoint we examine the Scriptures and 
note the following as seemingly pertinent, indicating 
that every nation of earth will be involved in the trouble, 
but that "Christendom," "Babylon," "Sheshach," 
will be the last to drink the cup of wrath. We quote 
from Jeremiah 25:15-33, as follows:— 

"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me: 
Take the wine-cup of this fury at my hand, and cause 
all the nations to whom I send thee, to drink it. And 
they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because 
of the sword that I will send among them. ...All 
the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, 
and all the kingdoms of the world which are upon 
the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall 
drink after them. 

"Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith 
the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Drink ye and be 
drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, because 
of the sword which I will send among you. 

"And it shall be if they refuse to take the cup at 
thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Ye shall certainly drink: 
...for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants 
of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts. ...The Lord 



hath a controversy with the nations: he will plead 
with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to 
the sword, saith the Lord.... 

"Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, 
and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the 
coasts [boundaries] of the earth. And the slain of 
the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth 
even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not 
be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried." 

It is not for us to prophesy, but to seek to interpret 
and apply prophecy: and even then we are to 
learn from the past that it is not the divine purpose 
that matters prophetically revealed shall be understood 
in detail until during or after fulfilment;— and then 
by those taught of God. We therefore merely suggest 
that, in harmony with the foregoing Scriptures, 
it will not surprise us if the Chinese are entering now 
their share of the great day of wrath upon all nations; 
—about to drink their share of the cup of divine wrath, 
which is to bring all nations low, as an experience 
preparatory to the great blessing of all the world under 
the Millennial Kingdom. And if it was appropriate 
that Israel, the natural seed of Abraham, upon 
rejection of Messiah should be punished and destroyed 
nationally, eighteen centuries ago, will it be strange 
if other nations also be compelled to drink of the same 
cup of wrath?— See verse 29. 

India has already been severely scourged with 
famine and pestilence, yet these may be only the beginnings 
of her share in the cup of wrath, which we 
understand will be to every nation, as it drinks thereof, 
a time of trouble without precedent. Probably the 
trouble will extend from nation to nation during the 
next few years, until finally, despite every effort to 
avert it (verse 28), great Babylon's turn will come- 
probably within ten years from now, when she must 
drink the very dregs of the cup, suffering more severely 
than the heathen nations, even as she has enjoyed 
greater privileges and sinned against greater 
light. "Babylon— Sheshach— shall drink after them." 
—Verse 26. 

As the "Gospel of the Kingdom" was circulated 
throughout Palestine before its trouble and overthrow, 
so we believe the same Gospel of the Kingdom will be 
preached for a witness to each nation before its trouble 
comes. China probably contains but few fully consecrated 
Christians, and these chiefly among the missionaries, 
and hence the "harvest" message might 
quickly reach them all. In this connection it will be 
interesting to note, (1) that under divine providence 
our dear Brother H. A. Randle sent a special personal 
appeal to each Christian missionary in China, and 
later many tracts and DAWNS, about a year before this 
trouble broke out; (2) the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society sent tracts and booklets extensively to 
the same missionaries last year. True, we cannot say 



that many have received the truth; but we had no 
reason to expect that many would receive it. Yet the 
witness was given to all before their great time of 
trouble came. And who knows but what this interruption 
of mission work, backed by the truth, may 
set others to thinking in another direction— to looking 
and praying for God's Kingdom to come, as the only 
hope of the world. 

THE SHEPHERDS DISAPPOINTED AND CHAGRINED. 



Reverses in the mission fields of the world, one 
after another, will be very discouraging to ministers 
who have been preaching to themselves and others 
that a peaceful conversion of the world to Christ is 
near at hand: that thus the Millennial Kingdom will 
be introduced. They will find that they have been 

R2663 : page 213 

uttering a false cry, saying, Peace, Peace, when there 
is no peace, and can be no peace satisfactory or lasting 
until the Prince of Peace, Immanuel, shall establish 
it through his Kingdom, by breaking in pieces the 
nations as a potter's vessel, and establishing his Kingdom 
on a different basis in their stead— on their ruins. 
Note now how the same prophecy refers to this despair 
of the pastors, etc., of nominal Christendom, at 
the spoliation of their pasture fields, as follows:— 

"Howl, ye shepherds [pastors], and cry; and 
wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the 
flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersion 
are come; and ye shall fall [and be ruined] 
like a delicate vessel. And the shepherds shall have 
no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape. 
A voice of crying from the shepherds [pastors] and 
an howling from the principal of the flock shall be 
heard; for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture."— 
SeeJer. 25:34-37. 



Lord Salisbury, the British Prime Minister, addressing 
The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel 
in Foreign Parts, recently said:— 

"Just look at this Chinese matter. You observe 
all the people who are slaughtered. Do you imagine 
that they are slaughtered simply because the Chinese 
dislike their religion? There is no nation in the world 
so indifferent on the subject of religion as the Chinese! 
It is because they and other nations have got the idea 
that missionary work is a mere instrument of the 
secular government to achieve the objects it has in 
view. In the East they have the proverb, 'First the 



Missionary, then the Consul, then the General.' 



The London Spectator, commenting on the general 
dislike of Europeans by Asiatics, now being exemplified 
in China, says:— 

"There is in China no race hatred, or color hatred, 
or, as we believe, hatred of creed for Chinese Christians. 
They could be tolerated quite well as mere 
idiots, but that those who dislike their ideas fear them 
also, and believe that unless those who propagate 
them are extirpated the ideas will win. The Europeans, 
they say, are already convincing many; they 
have almost persuaded our Emperor; year by year 
their views are advancing among the people,— if they 
and their disciples are suffered to live, our religion, 
our civilization, our social system, all are lost together. 
As for our literati, they will be ruined first, for they 
are our officials. People wonder that the harmless 
missionaries should be the objects of such a passion, 
that they should be disemboweled instead of merely 
beheaded; but think of the treatment of the Christians 
by the Roman Judges and we shall begin to understand 
the Chinese movement. Add but a little fear 
to the feelings already generated, and who would answer 
for the lives of Jews in France, or Germany, or 
Russia, or for those of Anarchists in any part of Europe? 
Asiatics in all ages have believed the amalgam 
of beliefs and social ways which constitutes their civilization, 
to be divine and unimprovable, and regard 
those who despise it, and preach against it, and shake 
it, as the intrusive Europeans certainly do, with a 
horror which of itself extinguishes the feeling of a 
common humanity. They have no more sense that 
slaughtering such is wicked, than the Parisians had 
when they massacred the Huguenots, or than English 
sportsmen have when they organize a battue of birds." 



General Lord Wolsley, of the British War Department, 
takes a very pessimistic view of the outlook in 
China, which is corroborated by the accumulating 
evidences that since the China-Japan war China has 
been quietly drilling her troops and arming them with 
modern weapons, machine guns, etc. He said 
recently,— 

"China possesses every requisite for overrunning 
the world. She has a population of 400,000,000, all 
speaking the same language, or dialect, readily understood 
from one end of the empire to the other. She 
has enormously developed wealth, and still enormous 
natural wealth awaiting development. Her men, if 
properly drilled and led, are admirable soldiers. They 
are plucky, and able to live on next to nothing. Moreover, 



they are absolutely fearless of death. Begin 
with the foundation of millions upon millions of such 
soldiers as those men are capable of being made, and 
tell me, if you can, where the end will be." 

A Chinese gentleman of education explains that 
the present trouble is occasioned by the Chinese lack of 
conscience: that well-meaning missionaries are duped 

R2664 : page 213 

by many of those professing conversion. He says for 
instance,— 

A Chinaman, an executor of a relative's will, may 
decide to cheat the orphans under his care. He arranges 
the matter readily with the Mandarin ruler by 
promising him one-half the booty. Later he concludes 
to give him but one-eighth, and to pave the way attends 
mission meetings, etc. Then he represents himself 
as terribly persecuted because of his new religion, 
and through the missionary secures consular protection 
which hinders him from being tried in a Chinese 
court. This step is taken months in advance of 
his refusal to give the Mandarin the promised one-half 
of his booty. 

The missionary, unused to such duplicity, labors, 
as he supposes, for justice for the oppressed, but the 
result of his efforts may be summed up thus,— 

"Net result: A misled missionary confirmed in 
his wrong-headedness; a would-be dishonest mandarin 
baffled and infuriated; two orphans robbed of their 
inheritance; food for nine days' gossip, and stirring 
up of hatred of 'foreign devils'; the whole a piece of 
rank injustice. 

"Let me deliberately state that I am quite certain 
there is not one town in the whole length and breadth 
of China that has been visited by missionaries, in which 
you could not at this moment find indisputable evidence 

R2664 : page 214 

of a case similar in all essentials to the example 
I have given you." 

We wonder how long it will require our dear 
friends interested in missions to learn that God 
is seeking as his "elect" not the lowest, but 
the highest types of man;— that now is not 
the Lord's time forjudging the heathen— that as the 
Apostle declares, "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial day— 2 Pet. 3:8] in the which he will judge 
the world in righteousness." (Acts 17:31.) When they 
learn this they will see the un-wisdom of attempting 
to forestall Jehovah's plan, and will cooperate rather in 
his great and gracious arrangement of first calling and 
preparing an "elect" Church, which by and by shall, as 
God's "royal priesthood," with their glorious Lord, 
Jesus, as fully competent missionaries, bless the heathen 



with the gracious opportunity of salvation promised. 
Perhaps a signal failure of present missions, and 
spoiling of pastures, may be God's method for awakening 
his true servants now deluded and blinded by false 
doctrines contrary to the Word. 



R2664 : page 214 

THE MINISTRY OF COMFORT. 



"The Lord hath anointed me. ..to comfort all that mourn; to appoint 
[promise] unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty 
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise 
for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of 
righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified." 
—Isaiah 6 1: 1-3. — 

OUR TEXT is surely good tidings in a very 

broad and a very deep sense. Its message is 

one of "comfort," not only to Zion, the consecrated 

Church, but to all who mourn; and as mentally we 

cast our eyes over the world we are deeply impressed 

with the thought that the vast majority of mankind 

are in mourning: as the Apostle expresses it, "The 

whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 

There are undoubtedly a few who are full, 

satisfied, and who mourn for nothing, and who, therefore, 

under these conditions, are excluded from any 

share in this promised blessing; but they are exceptions 

to the rule. Some of them are wealthy in this 

world's goods, and feel that they have need of nothing, 

and are kept busy with their efforts to enjoy themselves. 

There are others of the same full class who, 

tho not wealthy, have a very self-satisfied feeling as 

respects their moral status: they do not realize themselves 

as sinners; they do not realize their daily imperfections 

nor their need of a Savior; and are not 

mourning for anything, and not therefore in the way 

to be comforted with any of the comforting assurances 

and promises and provision which the Lord has made 

for those who mourn. 

So far as the world is concerned, our Lord's ministry 
of comfort to them is chiefly a future work. We 
rejoice, however, that the time is sure to come when 
all that mourn, all the "groaning creation," shall be 
brought under the blessed influences and provisions 
of the Millennial Kingdom, and shall there come to 
know the consolations which God has provided in 
Christ:— the balm for every trouble, every wound; the 
cure for every blight, every sin and every imperfection; 
and their privilege of profiting by these to the 
fullest measure by giving themselves unreservedly 



into the care of the Good Physician. But the poor 
world, blinded and deceived by the god of this world 
as respects the character and plan of Jehovah, can 
neither see, hear, nor appreciate now the wonderful 
provisions made for them, and hence they cannot receive 
the blessing, the consolation, the "comfort" 
now, but must wait for it until the establishment of 
the Lord's Kingdom, the binding of Satan, and the 
opening of their understanding with the eye-salve of 
the truth. 

But as respects Zion, the consecrated Church, 
this comfort is now her privilege, and all children of 
Zion need to be comforted. First of all, they need the 
comforting knowledge that their sins are forgiven, 
and that they are no longer strangers and aliens and 
foreigners, but children of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ their Lord, if so be that they suffer with him. 
They need to be comforted, too, with the assurances 
of the Lord's Word that our God is very sympathetic, 
"very pitiful," and that if anyone be overtaken in a 
fault he may be restored, and "not be utterly cast 
down." If the children of Zion had no such consolations 
as these they surely would be utterly discouraged, 
disheartened, and faint by the way; hence the 
Lord has provided these comforting assurances, pointing 
out to them that having begun a good work in 
them he is desirous of completing it, if they will permit 
him to do so, and that to this end they must abide 
in Christ by faith, coupled with obedience to the extent 
of their ability. What Christian is there who 
has not shared these consolations, these comforts; and 
what Christian has not needed them, and realized that 
without them he would long since have been undone? 

The Scriptures point out to us that our comfort 
comes through fellowship with the heavenly Father 
and with our Lord Jesus: we are comforted, not by 
believing that they are ignorant of our weaknesses and 
shortcomings, nor that they have a low standard of 
righteousness and a sinful basis of fellowship, but 
quite to the contrary of all this, they comfort us with 
the assurance that altho our every imperfection is 

R2665 : page 215 

known to the Lord he is yet very sympathetic, very 
merciful; and that having provided, in the great sacrifice 
at Calvary, a full propitiation (satisfaction) for 
all sins, the Lord is very pleased to apply, on behalf 
of each of his adopted children, in full measure, the 
riches of grace necessary to the covering and offsetting 
of every unintentional, unapproved error and failure. 
What comfort is here! What consolation! What privileges 
of fellowship with the Father and with the Son! 

And this comfort, the Scriptures assure us, comes 
to us through the holy spirit— it is the channel, and, 
hence indeed, called the Comforter. (John 14:26.) 



Those who have the holy spirit may have the comfort; 
those who do not have the holy spirit may not have 
this comfort, this consolation. It is only as we receive 
of the spirit of the Lord, the mind of the Lord, his 
disposition, that we are able to understand and appreciate 
the lengths and breadths, the heights and depths 
of his love and compassion and provision for us, and 
to be comforted thereby. 

Nevertheless, this comfort of the holy spirit (the 
channel of divine favor), reaches us through the Scriptures, 
for the Scriptures are the medium, or sub-channel 
through which the knowledge of God's grace and the 
comfort of all knowledge reach us; in the Apostle's 
language, "Whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning, that we through patience 
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope."— 
Rom. 15:4. 

Yet while this comfort is of the Father, through 
the Son, by the holy spirit, communicated through 
the Scriptures, we are informed that in great measure 
it is communicated by the members of the body of 
Christ one to another, as the Apostle, for instance, after 
relating certain features of the divine plan respecting 
the deliverance of the Church, says, "Wherefore, 
comfort one another with these words." (1 Thess. 4: 18.) 
Similarly, the Apostle declares that he sent 
Timothy to the Church at Ephesus, and again to the 
Church at Colosse, that he might comfort their hearts. 
This, of course, signifies that he was to draw their attention 
to the exceeding great and precious promises 
of the Lord's Word, and that thus they might drink 
in the holy spirit of all the promises, and that thus 
they might be comforted, not only with respect to the 
things promised, but with respect to the loving compassion 
and sympathy of him who promises them. 

Writing to the Thessalonians, the Apostle says 
that he sent Timothy— "to establish you and to comfort 
you concerning your faith, that no man should be 
moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that 
we are appointed thereunto: for verily, when we were 
with you we told you we should suffer tribulation, 
even as it came to pass and ye know. For this cause, 
when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your 
faith, lest by some means the tempter had tempted 
you." (1 Thess. 3:2-5.) Here again it is evident that 
the comforting signifies and implies establishment in 
the faith once delivered to the saints, that all the terms 
and conditions of our covenant should be clearly held 
in mind, and that the promises of reward at the end 
of the journey might serve to comfort, strengthen and 
establish the children of Zion in their endurance of the 
tribulations as good soldiers. This comfort, again, was 
of the Lord, through the holy spirit, through the 
agency of Paul and Timothy. Again, the same Apostle, 
speaking in the same strain, says, "Wherefore, 
comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, 



even as also ye do."— 1 Thess. 5:11. 

All of the Lord's people need to remember that 
in proportion as they are ambassadors of the Lord, 
and his representatives, it will be their privilege not 
only by and by in the Kingdom to "comfort all that 
mourn," and to be the trees of righteousness, whose 
leaves will be for the healing of the nations (Rev. 22:2), 
but they should remember that in the present life they 
have a ministry of comfort to perform also, toward all 
who mourn in Zion— toward all of the Lord's people 
who are in any tribulation, physical or mental disquiet, 
dis-ease; and they should remember, too, that 
just in proportion as they are filled with this spirit 
now, it is their privilege to bind up the broken-hearted, 
and comfort the mourning ones. No one can have 
this spirit of helpfulness, this disposition to comfort 
and to strengthen, and to edify, and to upbuild the 
household of faith, except he have in considerable 
measure the spirit of the truth, the spirit of the Lord, 
the spirit of love: and in proportion as each seeks to 
cultivate this privilege of brotherly helpfulness, in 
comforting and upbuilding and strengthening, in that 
same proportion he will find the spirit of love developing 
and abounding in his own heart, and that his 
likeness to the Lord Jesus, the Head of the body, is 
becoming more pronounced from day to day and from 
year to year. 

Finally, in view of what we have seen respecting 
the Lord's goodness toward his people, and the methods 
by which he comforts them through the holy spirit, 
the Scriptures and the brethren, let us note one of the 
Apostle's expressions respecting the great comfort and 
consolation which God has provided for his consecrated, 
faithful people, saying— 

"Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, the God of all 
comfort, who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that 
we may be able to comfort them which are in any 
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God."— 2 Cor. 1:3,4. 

R2665 : page 216 

So then, all of our lessons and experiences in life 
in connection with trials and difficulties and tribulations, 
if we are rightly exercised by them, should 
bring us larger experiences in the Lord's comfort, 
through the gracious promises of his Word and the 
spirit of the same; and should make us the more capable 
and efficient agents and representatives of the 
Lord, his Word and his spirit, in communicating 
comfort to others about us in their trials and 
difficulties. 



R2665 : page 216 

"FORGIVE US OUR DEBTS AS WE FORGIVE OUR DEBTORS. 

--MATT. 18:21-35.-AUGUST 12.- 

APPARENTLY this lesson grew out of the preceding 
one on the necessity for guarding against 
stumbling the least of the Lord's little ones. It would 
appear that Peter had immediately attempted to put 
into practice the instructions of the previous lesson, and 
it was his inquiry as to how often it would be his duty 
to exercise forgiveness toward a repentant brother, that 
gave our Lord the opportunity to inculcate a lesson upon 
the subject of forgiveness. 

The teaching of the Jewish rabbis on the subject 
of forgiveness was, that if the wrong-doer repented of 
his evil words or actions and came to the aggrieved person, 
acknowledging his wrong and asking forgiveness, 
he should be granted forgiveness as often as three times. 
They based their teaching on this subject on the statements 
of Job 33:29— margin, and Amos 2:4. Our Lord's 
teaching on the subject was, in many respects, the reverse 
of this, and required the offended one to go to the 
offender to make inquiry respecting the matter, and to 
show him his fault. This would require great humility 
on the part of the one who felt himself aggrieved, for it 
is much easier to resent and avoid the injurer, than to 
go to him according to the rule which our Lord has 
laid down. Peter seems to have gotten the impression 
that the Lord's rule, being different from that of the 
rabbis in this respect, would also probably be more 
generous and require that forgiveness be granted a larger 
number of times; hence Peter adds together the three 
and the four times mentioned by Amos, making seven 
in all, and inquires whether the Lord would have his 
followers be generous and forgiving to those who trespassed 
against them to that extent— seven times. What 
must have been his astonishment, and that of all the 
apostles, to hear the Lord say that forgiveness should 
be accorded, practically, times without number— seventy 
times seven. 

The thought would seem to be that those who become 
the Lord's people, partakers of his spirit, the 
spirit of love, will, in proportion as they are filled with 
that spirit and led by that spirit, be so generous, so 
magnanimous, so loving, that they would not only be 
willing but glad to forgive a repentant brother;— glad to be 
first to extend the olive branch and to make his way back 
to reconciliation and harmony as smooth as possible. 
From hearts full of pride, envy, malice and other elements 
of the spirit of selfishness and sin, and merely 
topped off with a coat of benevolence and generosity, 
it will be impossible to dip out very much of the spirit 
of forgiveness, without dipping out with it some of the 
bitterness and hatred; and even with this mixture forgiveness 



could not be granted very freely by an unregenerated 
heart. But with a heart emptied of malice, 
and hatred and envy, and filled with brotherly kindness, 
meekness, patience, gentleness, forbearance, love, we 
may dip a cup of forgiveness on every occasion and as 
oft as it may be applied for, and it will be without a 
mixture of evil, bitterness, sarcasm, etc., but pure and 
unadulterated, generous, loving forgiveness. 

We are to remember, however, that this holy spirit 
which we have in our earthen vessels did not abound 
there at first, but with all was merely a surface coating, 
as it were, to begin with. Gradually, as the holy 

R2666 : page 216 

spirit increased in our hearts and abounded, it displaced 

the wrong spirit; hence those who are able from their 

hearts to dip the cup of forgiveness repeatedly and without 

a mixture of evil thereby give evidence that they 

have been with Jesus and have learned of him, and 

that they have drunk deeply of his spirit, and that they 

have been purging out the old leaven of malice, and 

are being sanctified by the truth, being made meet for 

the inheritance of the saints in light. We are to remember 

that this growth in grace, while it has a positive 

time of beginning, in our consecration vow, is nevertheless 

a gradual work, requiring patient perseverance 

in well-doing, requiring also that the old nature, with 

its evil disposition, be mortified continually— deadened 

—so that our minds may be renewed under the transforming 

influence of the spirit of the truth, in which 

we are to grow daily. 

The "seventy times seven," mentioned by our 
Lord, we would not understand to signify a limited 
number of times, but rather an unlimited number- 
that whoever has the Lord's spirit will be glad at any 
time to witness a repentance of evil-doers and to accord 
them forgiveness. This does not imply, however, that 
there may be no penalties attached with the forgiveness; 
as, for instance, in the dealing of a parent with a child, 
the moral obliquity of the misconduct may be forgiven, 

R2666 : page 217 

and the parent's indignation against the disobedience 
or misbehavior pass away immediately, and yet it may 
be proper at times to impose some penalty on the trespassing 
child. In every such case, however, it should 
be clearly understood by the child that this is not because 
of the parent's disfavor, which has ceased in the 
forgiveness, but that his peculiar parental duty requires 
that a lesson shall be taught which will be helpful to 
the child in the formation of character. In such a case 
the love of the parent will of necessity be generous, 
sympathetic, and careful that the punishment shall be 
only such as might properly be of benefit to the child— 



correction in righteousness, not in wrath. However, 
such corrections as this belong only to parents and 
guardians, and do not properly extend to brethren in 
the Lord's family, who are not commissioned to judge 
and to punish one another, but to assist one another,— 
the Master's words to such being most positive and 
emphatic, "Judge nothing before the time." "Dearly 
beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place 
unto wrath." "Remember him who hath said, Vengeance 
is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." 
"Heir of the same inheritance, 
Child of the self-same God, 
He hath but stumbled in the path 
We have in weakness trod." 

In the family of God, the saints, begotten of the 
holy spirit, are all to be recognized as brethren, and to 
be dealt with accordingly. It is the new creature, and 
not the old creature, that is the brother in Christ; hence 
we may love the new creature, and in some respects 
have very little love for the old, just as all have disrespect 
for certain blemishes in their own mortal flesh, 
as they realize its weakness and imperfection,— and the 
more so in proportion as they grow in the divine likeness 
as new creatures. If, therefore, a brother should 
trespass against us it should be our first thought that 
this wrong done us is not by the brother, the new creature 
in Christ, but by his mortal flesh, which for the 
moment has gotten the upper hand with him or to some 
extent blinded him. Accordingly, instead of feeling 
angry with the brother, we should feel sympathetic, and 
our hearts should go out to him, and our desire be strong 
to do him good and to help him to overcome the weaknesses 
of his earthen vessel. 

It is in line with this thought that our Lord suggests 
that the proper course is for the aggrieved one to 
go quietly, without saying a word to anyone else, and 
have a kindly conference with the one who is doing him 
wrong, seeking to point out the merits and demerits of 
the question at issue, and if possible to gain the brother 
back to fellowship, righteousness, harmony with the 
Lord. If this shall be unavailing, the next step shall 
be still a secret one— the taking of two or three brethren 
of supposedly good heart and large experience, and that 
without attempting to prejudice their minds, and to ask 
these to hear the cause and to give counsel as to which 
one is in error. Whichever of the brethren is in error 
should be convinced by his fellow-pilgrims, whose arguments 
with him should be based upon the Scriptures 
and the spirit of love; but if differences still exist between 
them, and cannot be harmonized, then, as a court 
of last resort, the matter should be taken before the 
Church— the consecrated— and after being heard by the 
Church, its decision should be considered final, and be 
accepted by all. If either of the brethren still have 
doubts as to his receiving justice in the matter he may 
console himself with the thought that he will surely obtain 



a blessing by giving full and hearty assent to the 
Lord's arrangements, even if he have so large a measure 
of self-conceit that he still believes his side of the question 
to be right, notwithstanding the judgment of all 
the brethren to the contrary. 

Whoever will thus humble himself in obedience to 
the voice of the Church will have a blessing, and as we 
understand the Lord, it will be reasonable for him to 
expect that the voice of the Church in such a matter 
will be supernaturally guided, that truth and righteousness 
may triumph. But amongst the Lord's people, let 
us not forget that this is the highest tribunal, and that 
brother should not go to law with brother in the worldly 
courts, however much he may feel himself aggrieved: 
if he have the forgiving spirit he certainly will rest the 
matter where the Lord directs, and that too without 
harboring any unkind or ungenerous sentiments. This 
will be the certain effect of the indwelling of the spirit 
of holiness, the spirit of love. 

In respect to dealings with those who are without, 
in the matter of forgiveness, believing husbands dealing 
with unbelieving wives, or believing wives dealing with 
unbelieving husbands, or believing persons in business 
relationship with unbelievers: the same spirit of love 
and generosity and forgiveness will apply in every case, 
but not exactly the same way. The believer should be 
generous toward the unbeliever— he should expect in 
himself a larger measure of generosity than he would 
expect from the unbeliever, because he has had lessons 
and experiences in the school of Christ which the unbeliever 
never had; he has received the new mind, which 
the unbeliever knows not of. He should not only, 
therefore, be just in his dealings, but additionally, in 
proportion as he may be able, he should be generous, 
forgiving, not too exacting. 

However, if an unbelieving partner have attempted 
a fraud, the believing partner, while exercising a spirit 
of generosity toward him, if the matter appears to have 
been wilful, should deliver the offender to the world's 
courts, which he acknowledges, not prosecuting in a 

R2666 : page 218 

spirit of anger or malice or hatred, but as doing his duty 
toward society for the suppression of evil-doers in proportion 
as the laws and arrangements of the world are 
reasonable from a Christian standpoint. And even if 
he should fully forgive, concluding that there were extenuating 
circumstances which would not require that 
he should deliver the guilty one to the judges of earthly 
courts, he might properly enough esteem it to be his 
duty to have no further dealings with such a person, 
whom he could not trust. This would not imply any 
lack of forgiveness, but merely a reasonable and commendable 
prudence. 
Indeed, the consecrated people of God are admonished 



by the Apostle not to be unequally yoked with 
unbelievers, and this might not unreasonably be applied, 
not only to marriage, but also to business engagements 
and alliances. Similarly, the Apostle informs 
us that if the unbelieving husband or wife choose to 
depart from the believer, the latter may conclude that 
it is providential and for his deliverance from an unequal 
yoke, as the Apostle says, "Let the unbeliever 
depart"— permit him to cancel the marriage contract 
if he will. 

THE PARABLE OF THE TWO DEBTORS. 



As was his custom, our Lord illustrated his teaching 
on this subject with a parable: the king, in the 
parable, first forgives one of his servants a very large 
indebtedness— that is, he permits him to go free, as tho 
he had no such indebtedness against him, that he might 
do what he could toward the payment of the debt. 
This servant in turn finds a fellow-servant who owes 
him a trifling sum, and who likewise promises its payment: 
but the unmerciful servant, not having the spirit 
of the king, is ungenerous and exacting, and refusing forgiveness 
attempts to exact it through force. The matter 
reaching the ears of the king, he is justly incensed 
at such conduct on the part of one who has himself 
been so generously treated, and, in consequence, he puts 
in operation the machinery of justice which will punish 
the unmerciful servant by now requesting of him the 
payment of his full debt; and our Lord followed the 
parable with the statement, "So likewise shall the heavenly 
Father do to you if ye from your hearts forgive 
not everyone his brother their trespasses." 

Not only did our Lord address these words to the 
disciples and not to the multitude, but additionally he 
declared that the illustration was applicable to those 
reckoned members of his Kingdom, saying, "The Kingdom 
of heaven is likened unto" this parable. The parable, 
therefore, is not an illustration of the Lord's 

R2667 : page 218 

dealings with the world of mankind, but rather an illustration 
of his dealings with those who have become separated 
from the world through the forgiveness of their 
sins, and who additionally have become heirs of the 
Kingdom through consecration of themselves to the Lord 
Jesus, to suffer with him, if so be that they may also 
reign with him. The parable, therefore, is to the 
Church, and suggests to us that our original sin was 
not blotted out, not forgiven in the absolute sense of 
the word forgiven, but in the language of the Scriptures, 
"covered." "Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, 
to whom the Lord doth not impute iniquity."— Psalm 32:1,2; 



Acts 3:19. 

Our sins were covered from the Lord's sight, and 
we were treated as tho we owed him nothing, by his 
grace, exercised toward us through Christ Jesus and 
his atoning sacrifice; and this reckoned forgiveness will 
be made actual by and by, and the debt entirely canceled, 
if, according to the New Covenant we have made 
with the Lord, we shall prove faithful in cultivating 
his spirit of love and in becoming copies of his dear 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,— forgiving others as we 
would be forgiven by the Lord, loving, sympathizing 
with and helping others as we have been treated by 
the Lord, etc. 

The parable is but an illustration of the Golden 
Text of our lesson, taken from the Lord's prayer: it is 
only so long as we are willing to forgive our debtors 
that we may pray with confidence to our heavenly Father 
and hope for his forgiveness of our trespasses. If we 
forgive not our fellow-creatures, and that not merely 
in word, but in deed and from the heart, neither will 
our heavenly Father forgive our trespasses, and altho 
he has generously covered them from his sight, and 
treated us as justified by faith, he would immediately 
remember our trespasses against us, and thus our justification 
would lapse or be abrogated, by a failure on 
our part to exercise the holy spirit toward the brethren 
and toward all men as we have opportunity. 

From this standpoint the question of forgiveness 
of the brethren and forgiveness of all others is a very 
serious one to the Lord's people. It means that if they 
do not in a reasonable time develop this spirit of forgiveness, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of God, the holy 
spirit, they cannot continue to be recognized as Christ's 
disciples, they cannot continue to be recognized as children 
of God, they cannot be recognized as having their 
sins covered, but, on the contrary, will be treated as 
even more responsible than the world of mankind in 
general, and have executed upon them severer punishments 
than will be exacted from others who knew not 
the Master's will, and who have never tasted of his 
grace, and who therefore would be less culpable in the 
exercise of a selfish, uncharitable, ungenerous, unforgiving 
spirit. 

We cannot suppose, however, that the Lord would 

R2667 : page 219 

expect perfection in this matter at once, from those who 

are still but "babes" in Christ. But his expectations 

are reasonable, that we should grow in grace as we grow 

in knowledge of him, and as expressed in the lesson of 

the Vine and the Branches; every branch which in due 

time, after due opportunity, does not bring forth the 

fruitage of the vine, the grapes of love (including forgiveness), 

will be cut off by the great Husbandman,— 

no longer recognized as a branch. So in this parable, 



the one who had experienced such great blessing from 
the king, and who had been reckoned for the time an 
honored member of his kingdom-class, ceased to be so 
regarded and so treated, and, on the contrary, was 
treated by the king without favor. 

The statement that the unmerciful servant would 
be delivered to the tormentors, until he should pay the 
uttermost farthing of his debt, might be understood in 
either of two ways. First, we might understand it to 
represent the original debt resting against every member 
of the human family— the penalty of death— a 
penalty from which our Lord Jesus redeemed all, and 
from which he proposes to set free all who will obey him. 
In this view of the matter the unmerciful servant's penalty 
would signify a delivery to the Second Death. Or 
if the debt be understood as representing, in whole or in 
part, the obligations of his covenant as a new creature, 
then the penalty upon him for failure to develop and 
manifest the characteristics of the new creature during 
the trial-time might be understood to signify that such 
an one, tho an accepted servant of the Lord, would be 
required to comply with the full details of his consecration 
vow, by going into the great time of trouble, 
and there meeting to the full the demands of his covenant, 
and learning effectually the lesson of love and 
sympathy, and to appreciate the grace of God in the 
forgiveness of sins, as he never before appreciated it. 
However, we are inclined to think of this matter from 
the first of these standpoints, that the exaction of the 
uttermost farthing would signify a hopeless case, in any 
of the Lord's people who, after experiencing divine 
favor in forgiveness of their own sins, should fail within 
a reasonable time to learn to exercise mercy and forgiveness 
toward the brethren,— that such would, as a 
result, suffer the Second Death. 

The Lord's people very generally find themselves 
in considerable trouble along the line of justice. We 
all recognize justice as the very foundation of all order 
and righteousness, and when we feel that justice is on 
our side it is proportionately the more difficult to freely 
forgive the person whom we believe to have been acting 
from the standpoint of injustice. There is a general 
tendency to require others to measure up to our standard 
of justice, by some sort of penance, before we forgive 
them. It is against this very spirit that our Lord was 
teaching, and to counteract which he gave this parable. 
We are to remember that the Lord will require us to live 
up to the standards we set for others. If our standard 
in dealing with others be one of exact justice, we may 
expect no mercy at the Lord's hands. (See James 2:13.) 
And what would this mean as respects the sins that are 
past through the forbearance of God, and what would 
it mean as respects the obligations upon us every day 
and every hour, to whose full requirements we are unable 
to measure? As we cannot come to the Lord ourselves 
on the score of justice, so we are not to deal with 



others upon that standard. As we must ask of the Lord 
mercy, grace, forgiveness, so we must be willing to extend 
to others mercy, grace, forgiveness, when they trespass 
against us; and as heartily, quickly and freely as 
we ourselves hope for. 

The Lord has not laid down this rule in an arbitrary 
fashion, as simply saying, If you do not forgive 
others I will not forgive you. There is a deeper reason 
for it than this. He wishes to develop in us his own 
spirit, his own character, a likeness or copy of which 
was exhibited to us in the person and life of his dear 
Son, our Lord Jesus. It is absolutely essential, therefore, 
that we shall have the character he desires, or else 
we can never attain to the join t-heirship in the Kingdom 
which he is pleased to extend. Hence we are to 
understand that this requirement or command of forgiveness, 
etc., is with a view to develop us as copies of 
his dear Son, in order that he may bestow upon us, in 
due time, all the riches of his grace, contained in the 
exceeding great and precious promises of his Word. 



R2667 : page 219 

"WHO DID SIN, THIS MAN OR HIS PARENTS?" 

--AUGUST 19. -JOHN 9:1-17.- 

EVERY traveler in eastern countries is sure to be 
impressed by the fact that blindness is much 
more common there than in Europe and America. 
Tabulated information on this subject, in Encyclopedia 
Americana, shows that in 1 870 the proportion of blind 
in America was one in 1900 population; in Europe the 
proportion was larger; viz., 1 in 1094; while in China 
the average was 1 in 400 population. According to no 
less an authority than Dr. Geikie, Egypt has one blind 
person to every 100 of population. Palestine lying near 
to Egypt, and having conditions very similar, especially 
amongst the lower classes, may be supposed to have 
had at least half as many; viz., the terribly large proportion 
of 1 in every 200 of population. 

R2667 : page 220 

Canon Tristan, writing on the subject, says:— 

"Blindness is common in Palestine to a degree 
which we in western lands can scarcely realize. There 
is probably no country in the world, except Egypt, 
where this affliction is so prevalent. At Gaza, for instance, 
it is said that one-third of the population have 
lost one or both eyes; and from my own observation in 
that city I should unhesitatingly say that the statement 
is not exaggerated. But amongst these cases it is difficult 
to find any born blind." 



This blindness is in great measure the result of the 
scarcity of water and the neglect of children, whose 
eyes are in consequence attacked by the flies. The miracle 
brought to our attention in this lesson differs from 
the five other instances of the healing of the blind by 
our Lord, mentioned in the Scriptures, in that this man 
was born blind. In our Lord's time the science of surgery 
had not advanced so far as at present, and consequently, 
as herein stated by the one healed, the cure 

R2668 : page 220 

was a marvel, the like of which had never been heard 
of. Even yet we believe that there are only five cases 
on record of successful operations upon those born blind. 
Our Lord's cure of such blindness, with the simple 
prescription used, would therefore be a remarkable 
miracle to-day, and much more so was it in that day. 

ORIENTALISM, MORMONISM, THEOSOPHY. 



The question of the disciples, whether it was this 
man's sin or the sin of his parents that caused him to 
be born blind, implies either an extreme simplicity on 
their part, not to see that the man could not have sinned 
before his birth, or quite possibly it implied that some 
of the absurd notions of the far East— of India— had 
reached the Jews: one of these was and still is that each 
child born into the world had a previous existence, in 
which it had done either good or evil, the rewards or 
punishments of which were represented in the conditions 
of the present life. This absurdity is being revived, 
even in Christian lands, by so-called Theosophists, 
and by two bodies of people known as "Mormons," 
in the United States. It is scarcely necessary 
to point out that such a theory finds no support whatever 
in any statement of the Scriptures. Quite to the 
contrary, it is most emphatically contradicted by the 
Scriptures, which declare man's creation to have been a 
direct creation from God— not a reincarnation of some 
being which had previously existed. This thought is 
consistently maintained throughout the Bible, in that 
we are distinctly told that the child receives its life from 
its father, and inherits good or evil according to his 
course of life, and not according to any course of life 
of its own in a previous condition or in another world. 
Thus the Lord declares that he visits the iniquities of 
the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth 
generation, and shows mercy unto thousands of them 
that love him and keep his commandments.— Exod. 20:5; 
Deut. 5:9,10. 

This heredity, we see, comes in the natural order 
of things. The tendency of sin is not only to break 
down the moral character, but also to vitiate and impair 



the physical system, while godliness, altho it cannot 
repair and make good the impairments of sin, can check 
these, and hold them measurably in restraint. The 
Scriptures again contradict this thought, in the declaration, 
"By one man's disobedience sin entered into the 
world, and death as a result of sin, and thus death 
passed upon all men because [thus] all men became 
sinners"— by heredity. And if by heredity then not 
as Theosophy, Mormonism and Orientalism declare;— 
not in consequence of some previous existence and sin 
on the part of the child. 

The whole matter is squared by the doctrine of the 
ransom, as all may readily see: for if our present blemishes, 
with which we are born into this world, were the 
results of sins committed in some previous condition 
of existence, the death of our Lord Jesus could not 
cancel them, and the doctrine of a ransom would be 
disproved. The doctrine of the ransom is unchangeably 
linked to the doctrine that Adam was a perfect 
human being in his creation, and that it was his sin and 
condemnation that passed to all of his posterity, through 
the channel of natural birth. The ransom ("corresponding 
price") given by our Lord Jesus, was a man's life 
for a man's life: that, "as by a man came death, by a 
man also should come the resurrection of the dead." 
Our Lord's ransom sacrifice, being the complete and 
corresponding price and offset to father Adam's sin, was 
constituted thereby an offset to all the results of his 
sin as they appear in his posterity— and thus we all 
were redeemed by the one sacrifice of Christ, the just 
for the unjust. 

IS ALL SICKNESS OF THE DEVIL? 



An increasingly large number of Christian people 
—including those who refuse medicines— are reaching 
the conclusion that all sickness is the direct result of 
sin and the work of the devil; and therefore that godly 
living will prevent sickness: and that in the event of 
sickness, if it be punishment for sin, medicines should 
not be used, but, on the contrary, prayer should be 
made to God for the forgiveness of sin for which sickness 
is a punishment, and that the cure of the disease 
should be expected as a reward of repentance and faith 
exercised. 

We wonder how these Christian friends view this 
lesson. Like the disciples, they evidently would conclude 

R2668 : page 221 

that a man born blind must have been so born on 
account of sin— if not his own sin, the sins of his parents 
—for they account for all disease from this standpoint. 
Unfortunately they feel so satisfied with their 



conclusions on the subject that they do not inquire of 
the Lord, as did the apostles. And they do not hear 
his answer here given— that it was neither sin on the 
part of the man, nor on the part of his parents, which 
occasioned his blindness. 

If they were students of the Word they would note 
also the numerous statements of Scripture which clearly 
point out that calamities are not always punishments 
for sins: for instance, our Lord's declaration respecting 
the Galileans whose blood was mingled with the sacrifices, 
and those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell 
and slew them. (Luke 13:1-5.) Our Lord distinctly 
declares that these calamities did not indicate that the 
sufferers were sinners above other men. Likewise, in 
the case of the sickness and death of Lazarus. Our 
Lord declares, not that it was because of sin on the 
part of Lazarus, but that it was permitted in order to 
be for the glory of God. So in this lesson he declares 
that the fact that the man was born blind was not on 
account of sin, but on the contrary, "that the works of 
God should be made manifest in him." 

We are not denying that sin frequently brings sickness; 
on the contrary, we affirm this, and confirm this 
view with our Lord's words to some of those whom he 
healed, "Go, sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon 
thee." There is a great difference, however, between 
claiming that all sickness is of sin and the devil, and 
admitting that much of it is produced or intensified by 
sin. We go even further than this, and admit that in 
a general way all the blemishes of the present time may 
be indirectly traced to our great Adversary, Satan. For 
had it not been for his fall, and for the temptations 
which he presented to our first parents, we may suppose 
that there would have been no sin in the world; consequently 
no imperfection, no sighing, no crying, no dying. 
But it is thoroughly wrong to credit to Satan's 
power all the difficulties which we experience. We are 
glad indeed that he is limited and restrained; because 
under the weaknesses with which we are born we find 
quite sufficient of evil disposition and weakness received 
by heredity, and operating, not only between 
parent and child, but between neighbor and neighbor. 
We may be glad indeed that Satan's power to deceive 
is not permitted to vitiate our minds contrary to our 
wills, and not permitted to break down our wills, except 
as we give them over to sympathy and contact with 
evil things. We may be glad also that sickness and 
death working in man are not wholly subject to the 
prince of darkness, for altho the Scriptures declare that 
Satan's power is deathward, they also show us that he 
does not have this power unlimitedly, but can exercise 
it only under restraints and restrictions. This is most 
clearly indicated to us in the case of Job and his family. 
Rather, the Scriptures teach that Satan's power or 
influence is the result of the Adamic death operating 
in mankind and rendering all amenable to Satan's devices 



and deceptions.— Heb. 2:14. 

And, by the way, Job's case is another illustration 
of sickness and calamities of various kinds which were 
not the punishments of sin; for have we not Job's own 
testimony of his love for God, his confidence in him, 
and his faithful reliance upon him? "Tho he slay me, 
yet will I trust in him!" And more, we have the 
Lord's testimony to the same effect, in favor of his 
servant Job, and in reproof of his friends who wrongly 
represented that his sickness and calamities were punishments 
for sin. 

We conclude, then, upon Scriptural grounds, that 
not all sickness is in the nature of sin penalties, but 
that some sicknesses are as penalties. Hence, when 
the Christian shall find himself overtaken with sickness 
or other disasters, he should first of all inquire of himself, 
before the Lord, whether or not his difficulties are 
the result of— 

(1) A direct violation of the laws of his reason, 

as, for instance, indiscretion in eating, gratification of 
the appetite in respect to food which he knows is not 
suited to his physical conditions: or violation of recognized 
principles of conduct, as, for instance, the endorsing 
of a note, contrary to the instructions of the 
Lord's Word (Prov. 6:1,2), which has brought disaster 
to many. If he does not find his troubles to be the 
result of personal indiscretion he should look— 

(2) To see whether or not sin lies at his door; 
whether or not he has been living inconsistently, and 
might properly recognize his sickness or trouble as a 
punishment for his sin, his inconsistency. If he finds 
it to be so, he should of course immediately rectify the 
wrong to the extent of his ability, and seek forgiveness, 
mercy, at the throne of the heavenly grace, and expect 
that after suffering some chastisements he will be 
released. 

(3) Should he fail to find a cause for his difficulties 
in either of the foregoing, he should consider 

that quite possibly his difficulty, whatever its nature, 
was one of the ordinary casualties of life from which 
God does not wholly forfend his children— desiring 
them to walk by faith and not by sight: such casualties 
are necessary, that we may be very sympathetic with 
the world's troubles. 

(4) In some instances, as in Job's case and the 
case before us in this lesson, troubles may ultimately 
be found to have been permitted by the Lord, to be 

R2669 : page 222 

channels of mercy and blessing, if rightly received, as 
in these cases. 

(5) In all troubles, whether for discipline or for 
instruction in righteousness and the development of 
character, the children of God (and we are not considering 
others now) should forthwith begin to seek the 



blessing which they may be sure God has in store for 
them when he permits adversities. And this should 
not hinder their use of any means for relief upon which 
they can conscientiously ask the divine blessing: on 
the same principle that we labor for and eat the daily 
bread for which we pray, and which is none the less of 
divine provision. 

The work of God made manifest in this blind man 
was not merely in the miracle performed upon his natural 
eyes. It extended beyond this, and testified to 
the beholders the power of God, operating in Messiah. 
And it extended still further, in the case of the man 
who was healed: leading to the opening of the eyes of 
his understanding, it inducted him into discipleship to 
Christ. Had he not been born blind, had he not passed 
through just the experiences through which he did pass, 
how can we judge that he would have been in a better 
condition of heart to receive the Messiah than the educated 
Pharisees, who, with good natural sight, were 
thoroughly blinded respecting Messiah, his teachings 
and his work, so that they crucified him? 

And so it is in many instances with many who 
become the Lord's people. Looking back they can clearly 
see that things which at the time seemed to be adversities, 
disappointments, troubles, disadvantages, 
hardships, were really great blessings, in that they led 
to the opening of the eyes of their understandings- 
were really providences and blessings in disguise. Those 
who do so realize the divine care, looking back can 
praise the way God has led them day by day. 

CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MISBELIEFS. 



Amongst the various false doctrines of to-day none 
appears more inconsistent from the standpoint of science 
and Christianity, than the system which brazenly and 
defiantly, and in perversion of truth and conscience 
unites these two words as its name. It would be amusing, 
we may be sure, to hear one of the devotees of this 
theory explain this Scripture. For, notwithstanding 
the fact that their entire system is in opposition to the 
Scriptures, they make a cloak, a pretense, of believing 
the Scriptures, and of using them in support of their 
theory— chiefly with novices. We may be sure that 
they would attempt to twist and juggle it in some manner, 
and get it so far away from the truth and the subject 
as at least to confuse many people, who have very 
little knowledge of the Bible and shallow powers of 
reasoning, especially those "who have not their senses 
exercised by reason of use," in connection with Scriptural 
subjects.— Heb. 5:14. 

Their theory is that there is no such thing as blindness, 
that it is simply a mistaken thought, a misbelief: 
since the parents of the blind man could not have misbelieved 



that their child would be born blind, the child 
itself, we presume they would say, got this misimpression 
before its birth. And then we have the inconsistency 
increased, for every one of intelligence knows that 
the infant at birth has no thought, correct or incorrect, 
on any subject. The fallacy of this theory is likewise 
proven, in the case of those born deaf and dumb. But 
argument and reason have no more force with "Christian 
Scientists" than have the Scriptures. Their infatuation 
with their delusion is so great that they are 
fully prepared to wrest facts, reason, and Scripture— 
and then, in perversion of all truth and consistency, 
they call this "Christian Science." 

We are not contending with them respecting their 
use of the word "Science," for the most stupid should 
be able to see that there is nothing scientific in connection 
with their theory: but we do contend respecting 
their use of the word "Christian," because many do 
not recognize that they have not the slightest right to 
the use of this term. Our contention is that a Christian 
Scientist of full development, cannot be a Christian 
in any Scriptural sense of the word. 

(1) A Christian is one who believes in God the 
Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent 

to be a propitiation for our sins, our Redeemer, and, ultimately 
the Deliverer of all these who obey him. But 
Christian Science denies the very existence of God, 
claiming to believe merely in a principle of Good. To 
whatever extent a man has a good principle, the God-quality 
is in him, say they; and to whatever extent a 
horse or a dog may have the good principles, to that 
extent these are Gods, and to be loved, etc., accordingly. 
Denying the Father, they of course deny also the Son 
whom he sent: and altho they acknowledge Jesus, it is 
not with a Christian acknowledgement. On the contrary, 
they hold that he was merely a member of the 
Adamic family, and that his preeminence above others 
was in respect to his character and teachings. And they 
claim that while, in these respects, he stood higher than 
other men of his day, yet he but feebly grasped at certain 
principles or truths which are to-day brought to 
the world by her distinguished highness, "Mrs. Dr. 
Eddy," who thus poses as being greater than Jesus, as 
an elephant is greater than a mouse; tho there be certain 
resemblances. 

(2) A Christian is one who believes in Christ as a 
Savior from sin as well as from its consequences;— death 
and its concomitants of pain, etc. But Christian Scientists 
deny that there is any sin, and deny also, that 

there are any consequences of sin; hence, logically, 
they deny the ransom, for how could there be a ransom 
for sinners, if none are sinners? Thus do they deny 
and ignore the very foundation of Christian faith, without 
which no one is a Christian— Scripturally. 

The absurdities of Christian Science commend 
themselves only to those who are either Scripturally 



ignorant, or mentally weak; and their chief attractions 
are therefore— 

(1) The fact that they put on, as a garment of 
light, gentleness and kindness of word and manner. 

That these do not grow out of hearts thoroughly converted 
to the Lord, and begotten of his spirit of love, 

R2669 : page 223 

is manifest: for altho kindness and patience and gentleness 
are manifested, the true essence of these is lacking, 
namely, love. Instead of manifesting love to be 
the mainspring of their meekness, patience, gentleness, 
they manifest ambition and money-love as their inspiring 
motives— so far as we are able to judge the tree by 
its fruits. So far as we are able to learn, their efforts 
to promulgate their views are confined to those who are 
able and willing to pay for the instruction good round 
prices; and so far as we are able to discern, their care 
of the sick shows a love of money, and love of fame; 
and hence very few of the poor of this world have been 
injured by the doctrines of Christian Science, or cured 
of disease by its treatment. 

(2) The cure of disease without medicine, and 
sometimes almost miraculously, is in the nature of 
things calculated to attract and interest the "groaning 
creation"— just as the advertisements of patent medicines 
attract them. We unhesitatingly assert our conviction, 
that this power, manifested through Christian 
Scientists, is not of God, but of the Adversary, directly, 
or indirectly. He no doubt directs his servants into 

the use of channels and means of which humanity in 

general, and even many learned physicians, are comparatively 

ignorant— channels of human nature which, 

possibly, in the future may be used by the Lord during 

the times of restitution of all things. Our justification 

in ascribing their cures to an evil source, instead of to 

a good source, lies in the fact that they utterly repudiate 

the principles of Christianity, and we may be sure 

God would not cooperate to assist with his power those 

who deny his very existence, and who make void the 

gospel of the redemption through the blood of Christ. 

The miracle-working power in them we believe to be 

the same as the miracle-working power in Spiritism and 

in Orientalism, and in the charms of other Occultists 

—namely, Satanic power. 

If it be asked, How could Satan be interested in 
doing a good work? we answer: He does no such work 
amongst those who are thoroughly and stupidly ignorant: 
he is doing these works merely in the most civilized 
lands, and especially amongst the most enlightened 
of the people in the various denominations of 
Christendom. The Adversary thus assumes the garment 
of an angel of light and mercy, not to lead to 
the Light of the world— not to lead to the cross of 
Christ— not to lead to the Bible— but to lead away from 



these, to another hope of salvation, and to another 
teacher: to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 
And be it remembered that our Lord's words indicate 
that when matters come to this condition, where Satan 
will cast out Satan and heal disease, it is a marked evidence 
that his throne is tottering to its fall— that, so to 
speak, this is the last extremity of the Adversary's efforts 
to deceive. 



The Lord's method of giving sight to the blind 
man, we may reasonably suppose, was parabolic— that 
is to say, it contains a lesson under a figure. Since 
our Lord did not explain the significance of his action 

R2670 : page 223 

in making a clay ointment out of dust with his spittle, 

and anointing the man's eyes with this, and sending 

him to wash them and receive sight at the Pool of Siloam, 

we may exercise our mental powers in thinking 

of what these different things would signify. But we 

are limited in our speculations, nevertheless, and 

may not run wild, but must restrain ourselves 

within the limits of plain statements of the Word of 

God respecting his plan of salvation. 

In harmony with these plain statements we may 
interpret our Lord's symbolical act thus: The blind 
man would fitly represent the world of mankind in 
general, who during the present life are mentally blind 
—who cannot now see the goodness, mercy, and love of 
God as these may be recognized by others who are now 
able to see them. His being born blind would harmonize 
with this thought, for the blindness that is upon the 
world is, to a large extent at least, a matter of heredity. 
His blindness does not represent a blindness on the 
part of those who have once seen God's grace, represented 
in his Word and plan, and who have then become 
blind thereto, and who would represent the class 
mentioned by the Apostle as having once been enlightened, 
and who subsequently lose that enlightenment. 
(Heb. 6:4-6.) If then the blind man represents 
the blind world (who do not see, in the sense 
that the Church sees, of whom the Lord said, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see"), the time of the healing of 
such blindness is in the Millennial age, as Scripturally 
pointed out, when "All the blind eyes shall be opened, 
and the deaf ears unstopped." (Isa. 35:5.) And 
this agrees with the conditions of our Lord's miracle, 
because we are informed that this miracle took place 
on the Sabbath, or seventh day, which corresponds to, 
and typifies the Millennial day, the seventh-thousand 
year period. 

Our Lord's words, nevertheless, seem to indicate 
that some part of this symbolical picture relates to the 



present age, for he said, "I must work the works of him 

that sent me while it is day: the night cometh wherein 

no man can work." In this statement the word "day" 

would seem to belong to the present time, and to be illustrated 

in the making of clay with our Lord's spittle, 

and the anointing of the blind man's eyes. The washing 

of his eyes and the cure would seem to belong to 

the next age, the Millennial age. The Lord's spittle, 

the secretions of his mouth, might represent the truth 

as fitly as would the words of his mouth— it is another 

figure, but seemingly of the same force and meaning. 

He uttered the truth, brought it in contact with the dust 

of the earth— not in contact with all the dust of the 

earth, but with a limited portion, an elect or select portion, 

—and of this he made the anointing clay. The 

Scriptures do inform us, in harmony with this, that 

the Word of God's grace, delivered through and by our 

Lord Jesus, is designed in the present age to act upon 

a small fragment of humanity, and to consecrate them 

and make them meet for the Master's use in the blessing 

of the world, in the anointing of the eyes of the 

blind. From this standpoint of view, the making of 

the clay would represent the formation of the elect 

Church for the blessing of the poor, blind world. And, 

quite possibly, not only in this work of making the clay 

now in progress, but perhaps some portion of the anointing 

work is now being done, as is intimated by the 

Scripture which declares that the Gospel must first be 

preached for a witness in all the world, before the end of 

this age. The world must be witnessed to during this 

age, but the world will not have the eyes of its understanding 

opened during this age: it must wait until the 

R2670 : page 224 

great washing time of the Millennial age, of which the 
Scriptures declare, "In that day there shall be a fountain 
opened to the house of David for sin and for uncleanness." 
(Zech. 13:1.) In full agreement with this 
is the significance of the word Siloam. It signifies 
"The sending forth," or "The fountain." 

The Pharisee objected to the Lord's goodness, because, 
forsooth, it infracted some of their hypercritical 
dogmas and traditions. This is interesting, as showing 
to what extent religious forms and ceremonies may bind 
and blind intelligent and reverential people. And this 
should be a lesson to all the intelligent and reverent, 
leading them to great care in judging righteous judgment, 
according to the standard of the divine Word, 
and not according to their prejudices and revered creeds, 
and the traditions of the fathers. 

Still another lesson may be found in the fact that 
the man who confessed our Lord Jesus, and who stood 
up in bold defence of righteousness, was greatly blessed, 
in that after he had thus demonstrated his loyalty to 
principle, and had suffered as a result excommunication 



from the Church— then the Lord found him. Thus his 
faithfulness under trials and difficulties, and his willingness 
to suffer the loss of earthly fellowship and honor 
amongst men, led directly to a still greater blessing, 
even direct fellowship and communion with the Lord 
himself. How many are there whose mental eyes have 
been opened to the truth, who have been so loyal to the 
Lord and so appreciative of his goodness as to be faithful 
in declaring the facts? How many of these have 
found that such faithfulness means separation from the 
synagogue, from the church nominal? How many of 
these have feared to lose prestige and influence, through 
confessing the light of present truth? But all who have 
followed the noble course of thankfulness, loyalty, and 
obedience to God, have found that such obedience, 
while it led to a loss of fellowship in the nominal 
church, led also to a greater fellowship and communion, 
and a more intimate acquaintance with the Lord 
himself. 



page 224 
"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I find DAWN VOL. V. 
a grand spiritual feast. I have read it and studied it 
and sent it away to a friend, and oh, how many good 
things we get from the TOWER office! I had thought, 
years ago, that we had all we needed to help us on to 
God, but it keeps coming, more and better. "Bless 
the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, for his 
goodness and his wonderful works to the children of 
men." And bless his holy name that he ever stooped 
to the low estate of his handmaid, to give insignificant 
me the privilege of reading the MILLENNIAL DAWN publications 
and learning the plan of the ages and of his 
will concerning us! "Great and marvellous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, 
thou King of saints." And you, dear Brother Russell, 
the Lord has made you a dispenser of his present truth. 
May his grace continue with you as it ever has done! 

How many times I have had a vague idea of something 
and could not form it into words or thoughts intelligently, 
and the next WATCH TOWER would explain 
that very thing so nicely, that, even tho unlearned, I 
could understand it. Last fall I was thinking, Well, 
I believe Brother Russell is inspired, and his writings 
are equal to the Bible; but the next paper we got said 
that all matter, whether oral or printed, from any quarter, 
should be considered quite secondary to the Bible. 
Oh Lord, help us to resist the devil successfully and 
pity our helplessness! 



You remark that we should not judge too harshly 
those who make us trouble, because Peter, even after 
denying the Lord, became one of his most ardent followers. 
What courage and patience this thought gives 
us. Such words are as Solomon says, "Like apples of 
gold in pictures of silver." Bless the Lord! Oh, my 
dear brother, how much comfort I get from your counsel. 

The Scripture Index for the WATCH TOWER, prepared 
by the dear sisters, has done me a world of good. 
Lord bless them, indeed. Surely if prayers will bring 
blessings we shall all live in a rainshower of blessings 
night and day, for we are all praying for each other. 

I get great encouragement from some of the letters 
you print in your papers, especially Sister Sencerbeaux's, 
for I too had been feeling much discouraged 
on the account of my failings and blunders. Oh, the 
richness of the spiritual food we get from God through 
the TOWER! Can the Marriage Supper be much better? 
Yours in the love of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
MRS. H. K. TOWNSEND,-Wisconsin. 

R2678 : page 224 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About one year ago 
your book, called THE PLAN OF THE AGES, fell into my 
hands. It came like the day-star arising in my soul, 
flooding my mind with new thoughts and conceptions 
as to the great plan of redeeming this old, lost world. 
Since 1897 I have been out evangelizing, preaching 
"Christ and Him crucified," to men throughout the 
States, but my "advanced" views soon gave dissatisfaction 
among the orthodox preachers, especially among 
the set to whom I belonged, the Methodist Episcopal 
Church Society. It was then that I began to read in 
earnest every thing I could find along the line of 
prophetic truth. I have read and re-read with great 
pleasure and profit the first five volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and am only awaiting now further issue of 
Volume VI. I can not express to you my indebtedness 
to you for the light I have received from the perusal 
of the WATCH TOWER publications. 

May God continue to bless you with light, that 
you may be the means in his hands of leading many 
more pilgrims into the glorious light of the liberty of 
the gospel of Christ. Since seeing the fulness of God's 
truth, I have withdrawn from the M.E. Church and 
ministry. Pray for me that I may continue "to walk 
in the light as he is in the light." 

Yours in the Light, R. K. RICHARDSON.-Alabama. 

[To the Lord be all the praise for the light now 
"in due time" shining upon his Word and revealing to 
us his gracious character. I am glad to hope that withdrawal 
from human institutions and their service means 
a fuller appreciation and closer membership in "the 
Church of the first-born, whose names are written in 
heaven" and a more zealous and more wise participation 



in its ministry of the truth.— EDITOR.] 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY 



VOL. XXI. AUGUST 1, 1900. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



"Let Us Draw Near" 227 

Privileges of the Royal Priesthood 227 

Having Our Hearts Sprinkled 228 

Washed With Pure Water 228 

Ye Are Complete in Him 229 

Poem:-Unto Him Belongeth All 229 

The Great Shepherd and His Son, 

the Good Shepherd 229 

Christ the Door of the Sheep-Fold 231 

The Lord Appointed Seventy Others 
Also 232 

Rejoice in Things Unseen 235 

Is the Restitution Call Now Open? 236 

Chicago Convention— New Date 240 

The Pilgrim Harvest Service 226 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2672 : page 226 



THE PILGRIM HARVEST SERVICE. 



We will be glad to have at once postal card requests for Pilgrim 
visits from all parts of the United States and Canada. 
(British friends please address cards to our British branch office, 
London.) We are re-arranging our "Pilgrim" routes and want 
the following information in few words on postal cards (not 
letters) for easy reference. Remember that these "Pilgrim" 
visits involve no expense for the Pilgrim or his traveling expenses 
—all of which are borne by the Society. We merely request 
entertainment for the Pilgrim during his two or three 
days' stay. Answer the questions by number as follows:— 

(1) Do you hope for public meetings,— as well as for private 
ones for those already interested? 

(2) Could and would the friends secure the use of a school 

or church building or a public hall if public meetings are desired? 

(3) Would a suitable room in a private house be provided 
for the private meetings? 

(4) How many friends of present truth reside in your 
vicinity? (5) How many of these have been consulted and 
concur in the answers you are sending us? (6) How many of 

these are WATCH TOWER readers? (7) Do you now meet regularly 
for worship and study of the Word, as per Hebrews 10:25? 
Most of these questions can be answered by either Yes or 
No or by figures. Number your answers, and add whatever 
may seem expedient, but do not crowd the card and make it 
difficult to read and understand. 



R2670 : page 227 

"LET US DRAW NEAR. 



"Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, 

having our hearts sprinkled from a consciousness of evil, and our bodies 

sprinkled with pure water."— Heb. 10:22. 

NOT TO SINNERS is this invitation addressed. 

The invitation to them is a very different 

one, vis.,— Repent, and believe on the Lord Jesus 

Christ, and thus obtain the remission of your sins, 

and then you will be in the attitude to receive the invitation, 

Draw near to God. The Apostle is addressing 

those who have already believed unto justification, 

receiving to themselves the benefits of the Lord's 

promise, "Their sins and iniquities will I remember 

no more." (Verse 17.) The Apostle is addressing 

the brethren, and not sinners, and urges them, saying, 

"Having therefore, brethren, boldness [courage, confidence, 

privilege] to enter into the holiest by the 

blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, ...let us 



draw near." 

The Apostle's words carry our attention to Israel's 
Tabernacle in the wilderness, and the spiritual things 
which it illustrated. The Court, entered through the 
gate, signified the state or condition of the justified, 
who must pass the Altar representing Christ's sacrifice 
for sins; secondly, approach the Laver of water for 
cleansing from defilements; and then be ready to pass 
under the first Vail into the apartment of the Tabernacle 
called "The Holy." This "Holy" apartment 
represented the state or condition of God's consecrated 
people (typified by Israel's priests) while yet in the 
flesh, and had its Golden Candlestick for their enlightenment, 
its table of Shewbread, representing their 
privilege of fellowship with God,— drawing near to 
him in prayer, praise and communion. The next step 
beyond the "Holy" was the "Most Holy," representing 
heaven itself; but this could be entered only from 
the "Holy" and by passing under the Second Vail, 
which represented the actual death of the priest, even 
as the First Vail represented the reckoned death or consecration. 
The Apostle has this same thought in mind 
when elsewhere he mentions the consecrated Royal 
Priesthood as "seated together with Christ in heavenly 
places"— in the heavenly condition, the condition represented 
by the first apartment or "Holy" of the 
Tabernacle and of the Temple. 

PRIVILEGES OF THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD. 



It is in reference to this proposition to advance 
from the "Court" condition of justification into the 
"Holy" or heavenly or spirit-begotten condition, 
reached through consecration (and the closest possible 
approach to God) that the Apostle urges, "Let us 
draw near." His language implies that there may 
properly be a diffidence on our part in respect to this 
privilege. We might properly hesitate to expect to 
have communion, fellowship, close approach to the 
great Creator, realizing that by nature we are imperfect, 
"children of wrath, even as others," and that in 
whatever degree we differ from others and are accounted 
worthy of such a privilege of drawing near to God, it 
is not on account of personal worth on our part, but 
on account of God's grace bestowed upon us through 
Jesus our Lord. The Apostle therefore speaks to believers 
in an encouraging voice: "Let us draw near;" 
let us have courage to draw near; let us have faith in 
God, who has made us such gracious arrangements 
and promises. 

The Apostle intimates that a close approach to 
God cannot be effected, except we have first a "full 
assurance of faith." Only those who trust the Lord 
implicitly, "as a little child" (Luke 18:17) would trust 



R2671 : page 228 

its earthly parent, can expect to progress and to have 
the courage, the confidence, necessary to approach 
God in this very intimate manner; and the desire to 
draw nearer and nearer to God must be in the justified 
believer's heart, else he will never go on and attain 
to this his privilege. And this desire to draw near to 
God is a manifestation of our hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, which the Lord expects to see before 
he fulfils to such his engagement that they shall be 
filled, satisfied. -Matt. 5:6. 

Satisfaction will not be attained fully in the present 
life, tho the believer who progresses and draws 
nearer and nearer to God will have more and more 
of this satisfaction to the end of his journey in the 
present life, receiving the full measure of satisfaction 
in righteousness and perfection on the other side the 
vail. Similarly, in our drawing near to God, we may 
continue to draw nearer and nearer to him, as we obtain 
deeper experience in his grace, growing also in 
knowledge and love in the present life; but the full 
attainment of our privilege of drawing near to God 
will not be reached until we shall have passed the 
Second Vail— passed through death, and been changed 
from human to spirit beings, and have entered into 
heaven itself, the perfect heavenly condition. There 
and then we shall be fully at one with the heavenly 
Father and with our Lord Jesus, having drawn near 
to the full extent of the invitation and to the full of 
the opportunities granted us in the new and living 
way, the narrow way to life, consecrated for us, through 
the vail, by our Lord's death as our ransom price. 

There are, however, certain conditions specified 
as necessary to progress along these lines. As no one 
can draw near to God except by attaining a "full assurance 
of faith," neither can he have a full assurance 
of faith unless he have his "heart sprinkled from a 
consciousness of evil," for, as the Apostle elsewhere 
declares, "If our heart condemn us, God is greater 
than our heart." (1 John 3:20.) We may be sure that 
if our course as new creatures is condemned by our 
own consciences it would also be condemned by God. 
Whoever, therefore, would make progress in drawing 
near to God must seek continually to have "a conscience 
void of offence toward God and man" (Acts 24: 16); 
—a conscience that is clear, that can say, I am 
striving to do that which would be pleasing to God, 
in harmony with my covenant of self-sacrifice, and I 
am striving to do that which would be approved also 
by righteous men. Nothing short of this is at all permissible 
in those who have consecrated themselves to 
be royal priests, to offer themselves as living sacrifices 
in the Lord's service, and to draw near to him in the 
name and under the merit of the great High Priest of 



our profession, Christ Jesus. 

HAVING OUR HEARTS SPRINKLED. 



How very much is implied in this expression, 
"Having our hearts sprinkled from a consciousness 
of evil" ! It not only means that we are to avoid sin, 
and to take heed that the words of our mouths and 
the meditations of our hearts are acceptable to the 
Lord, but it means additionally that our hearts, having 
covenanted self-sacrifice, shall be able to look up 
to the Lord confidently and realize his blessing and 
approval, because of the honest, earnest efforts on our 
part to comply with the terms of our consecration. 
But since we cannot fully comply with the terms ourselves, 
it is requisite that we shall apply to ourselves 
by faith the merit of the precious blood of Christ, the 
blood of sprinkling, the blood of consecration, and 
that we shall realize that our acceptance is only in the 
Beloved One. 

WASHED WITH PURE WATER. 



The expression, "Having our bodies washed with 
pure water," figuratively represents the continued process 
of "cleansing ourselves from all filthiness of the 
flesh and of the spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord," as elsewhere enjoined by the Apostle. 
(2 Cor. 7:1.) By nature we are all imperfect, 
sullied, more or less depraved; and our devotion to 
the Lord is manifested, first, by our full acceptance and 
full assurance of faith in the merits of Christ's sacrifice; 
and secondly, by our earnest efforts to put away 
from our flesh, as we have already put away from our 
hearts, all things defiling and displeasing in the Lord's 
sight: that thus we may more and more become copies 
of his dear Son, our Lord. This "washing of water 
through the Word" is elsewhere represented (Eph. 5:26) 
in a similar manner as being a part of the duty 
and privilege of all of the Lord's people throughout 
the remainder of their earthly lives. And we can see 
how beautiful is the illustration here used, that the 
Word of God, like water, is purifying, cleansing; as 
the Apostle declares, speaking of the Christian's good 
hopes in the precious promises once delivered to the 
saints, "He that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, 
even as he [who called him] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

As it is necessary to a thorough cleansing of our 
natural bodies that we should wash with "pure water," 
so much the more is it necessary to this cleansing of 
which the Apostle speaks, the cleansing of our moral 
characters, that we should have the pure water of 



divine truth, and not the muddy and polluted teachings 
of the Adversary, or of those whom he has blinded. 
And as we look about us upon the many streams of 
Babylon— the various sectarian theologies which profess 
to be the truth— we find that altho there is something 

R2671 : page 229 

of truth in them all, yet it is sadly befouled and 
wholly incapable of cleansing their votaries from filthiness 
of the flesh and of the spirit,— wholly incapable 
of perfecting them in holiness of the kind which the 
Lord requires. For instance, false ideas of God and 
of his character and his plan are incentives to those 
who so believe to copy these misrepresentations and 
perversions of justice and love, and are well calculated 
to develop in the devotees of such a theory a low standard 
of character, because the low standard which they 
set for themselves and other fellow-mortals is really 
higher than that which they ascribe to the Creator. 
How important, then, is the truth, and how much 
meaning we find in our dear Redeemer's prayer to the 
Father on our behalf,— "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy Word is truth." Let us not attempt to 
sanctify ourselves through any other washing than 
this; let us not be satisfied with anything short of the 
"pure water," the pure Word of God, the pure truth. 

"YE ARE COMPLETE IN HIM. "-Col. 2:10. 

Now view the class described by the Apostle: 
they are believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thus 
accepted with the Father through the Beloved One. 
More than this, to them has been opened up the narrow 
way to life, consecrated, made possible, through 
the sacrifice offered by our great High Priest. They 
are invited to become under-priests, sharers both of 
the sufferings, and also later on, if faithful, sharers 
of the glories of Jesus, the Chief Priest of this order. 
As a means of attaining the glorious end of their calling 
they are to cleanse themselves from defilement, 
and for their use in this respect the Word of God has 
been provided: it is at once a mirror to show them 
their blemishes, and water wherewith to cleanse themselves 
—the stimulus for the correction of life being 
the exceeding great and precious promises set before 
them in the Scriptures. Their hearts, justified by 
faith, and honest before God, are fully consecrated to 
him and to his service, and are to be so kept continually 
—by obedience to the best of their knowledge 
and opportunities, and by the blood of sprinkling 
which covers unintentional errors and failures. This 
is the class that is called to be associated with the 
Lord in his Kingdom; they are styled his Brethren, 
the Royal Priesthood, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, 
and various other names representing their near and 



dear relationship to the heavenly Father: and all of 
these who are faithful to the end of the race-course 
are to be made partakers of the divine nature, with 
its glory, honor and immortality. 

But let us not deceive ourselves in this matter of 
having hearts that do not condemn us; let us remember 
that our covenant was unto sacrifice and not unto 
self-preservation; that it was a covenant to lay our all 
upon the altar— time, influence, means of every kind; 
and that we agreed with our Lord that we would reckon 
this our reasonable service. Do our hearts condemn 
us in this matter, or do they justify us? Do we feel 
that we are doing all in our power to serve the Lord 
and his truth and our brethren? If so, let us rejoice, 
and let us continue in the same way, patiently hoping 
for the glorious results promised to the faithful. But 
if our hearts condemn us, let us not be discouraged; 
but on the contrary remember that this is a part of 
the cleansing of the flesh and of the spirit necessary 
to our preparation for the Kingdom, and let us afresh 
bind our sacrifices to the altar (Psa. 1 18:27), and be 
more and more zealous in expending our little all in 
the service of him who loved us and who bought us 
with his own precious blood. Thus doing, it will be 
our privilege day by day to draw nearer and nearer to 
the "Most Holy," and thus finishing our course with 
joy we shall have share in the first resurrection, awaking 
in our Lord's likeness.— 2 Cor. 5:14,15; Rom. 6:5; 
1 John 3:2; Psa. 17:15. 

R2678 : page 229 

UNTO HIM BELONGETH ALL. 



"Just why I suffer loss 

I can not know; 
I only know my Father 
Wills it so. 
He leads in paths I cannot understand; 
But all the way I know is wisely planned. 

"My life is only mine 

That I may use 
The gifts he lendeth me 
As he may choose; 
And if in love some boon he doth recall, 
I know that unto him belongeth all. 

"I am his child, and I 

Can safely trust; 
He loves me, and I know 
That he is just; 
Within his love I can securely rest, 
Assured that what he does for me is best.' 



R2672 : page 229 

THE GREAT SHEPHERD AND HIS SON, THE GOOD SHEPHERD. 

JOHN 10:1-16.-AUGUST 26. 

"The Good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." 

DAVID, THE PSALMIST, wrote prophetically, 
"Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want" 
(Psa. 23); for in David's day the arrangements for the 
Shepherd and the flock of this lesson had not been 
completed. True, the heavenly Father had purposed 
his entire plan as respects humanity's redemption and 
return to his care as his flock, but he had not yet sent 
his only begotten Son, the Good Shepherd, to give his 
life for the sheep, to call the flock, to open the door 
and to lead them out and into pasturage and to rest. 
Nevertheless, in the Lord's providence the nation of 
Israel had already been gathered, as those who would 
be prepared to be the flock of the Good Shepherd when 
he should come. These were "shut up under the Law" 
(Gal. 3:23), waiting for the coming of the Good Shepherd 
to open the door and to call them by name as his 

R2672 : page 230 

own sheep. Others, indeed, came before the Messiah, 
affecting to be the true shepherd, leaders sent of God, 
but they were mere pretenders, who sought their own 
good and glory, and not that of the sheep. They were 
thieves and robbers, who sought to gain possession of 
the sheep for their own selfish ends. 

The "porter" (representing the Law) would not 
recognize any of these pretenders, nor approve them, 
nor open to them access to the sheep. But when the 
true Shepherd came he satisfied the Law (the porter), 
and bought the sheep from Justice, giving his own life 
as their redemption price. Thus he gained the full 
right to open the door, the full sanction of the porter, 
the full authority to lead forth the sheep to the green 
pastures and still waters of divine truth which then became 
due to them. 

At the time of the giving of this parable our Lord 
was laying down his life, and at the same time uttering 
his voice, that the true sheep might learn to know him. 
And not only will all the true sheep learn to know the 
Shepherd, but, precious thought! the Shepherd knoweth 
his own sheep individually, so that he calleth each 
by name as he leads them out. This suggests to us the 
intimacy of the relationship between Christ and each 
member of his flock. 

The treatment of sheep in this part of the world is 



very different from that described in the parable, which 
is still maintained in Oriental countries. Here sheep 
are driven, and have little or no acquaintance with the 
herdsmen. But in Palestine, for instance, every sheep 
has a personal acquaintance with its shepherd, and he 
with it, and it is said that this acquaintance is so particular 
that the shepherds have a separate name for 
each sheep, and know each individually by its name, 
and that the sheep knows its own name and will respond 
to a call from its own shepherd at any time. How 
beautifully this illustrates the close relationship between 
Christ and his flock, the Church! He gives to each one 
of us a new name, and we are each personally known 
to him— our peculiarities of character, temperament, 
etc., our strong points and our weaknesses— he knoweth 
them all. He loves us, cares for us, helps us over our 
trials and difficulties, and shields us from the temptations 
which would be too strong for us. "He will not 
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but will 
with the temptation provide also a way of escape," 
and causes that "all things work together for good 
to them that love God, the called ones according to his 
purpose"— his "little flock" of this Gospel age. 

We note also the care of the Shepherd over the 
sheep, for he says, "He putteth forth his own sheep 
and goeth before them." The words "putteth forth" 
have the significance of looking after them, that they 
all get started in the way to the green pastures and 
still waters for soul refreshment. He is not heedless, 
careless, respecting them, whether they go or do not 
go; nevertheless, having started them in the way he 
will not drive them: he goeth before them to lead, that 
they may follow. Our Good Shepherd has indeed set 
us a noble example, so that we may walk in his steps; 
and whoever will, to the extent of his ability, trustfully 
do this, will find his wants abundantly supplied, for 
"No good thing will he [the Shepherd] withhold from 
those who [thus] walk uprightly." "He will guide 
them with his counsel, and afterward receive them to 
glory."-Psa. 84:11; 73:24. 

Our Lord's parable does not tell us about the disciplines 
which the sheep are sure to receive, but these 
are set before us in the prophetic psalm on the subject, 
in the words, "Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort 
me." The thought is that the Shepherd, while going 
before and not driving the sheep, nevertheless has such 
an interest and care that he will not suffer one of the 
sheep to wander away without administering certain 
chastisements designed for its good, and to correct it and 
to bring it back into fellowship in the flock. This is a 
comfort, and yet it should certainly be the desire of all 
true sheep to follow the Shepherd so closely that the 
rod shall not often be necessary. 

The link between the Shepherd and the sheep, as 
here indicated, is love. The Shepherd loves the sheep, 
and has demonstrated this in having laid down his life 



for them; and the sheep speedily learn to love the Shepherd, 
as their care-taker; they recognize him through 
his voice— the Word of God. This voice appeals to 
the hearts of all the true sheep, who quickly respond, 
"Never man spake as this man." 

The voice of the Good Shepherd is a blending of 
various sounds in a manner in which they are blended 
by no other voice. His voice sounds forth the chord 
of justice commingled with the chord of love, and the 
whole intoned with wisdom and with power. Other 
theories, plans and schemes of men and of devils, have 
no such harmony of sound as has the message which 
the great Shepherd has sent us through his Son. His 
voice speaks to us of a just penalty for sins— death; it 
speaks of love, in our redemption and the forgiveness 
of our sins, and the opening to us of the way of life, 
through resurrection. This "word of grace" constrains 
all the true sheep as no other message or voice could 
do. Moreover, when the true sheep hear the voice of 
the Good Shepherd, it satisfies their longings as nothing 
else could do. They will no longer be in danger of 
being attracted by other sounds or voices, theories or 
schemes, but will reply to all, 

"Jesus has satisfied; Jesus is mine." 

There are many false voices in the world today, 
seeking to lead the Lord's sheep astray, and these are 

R2672: page 231 

sometimes sounded in deceptive tones, to imitate the 
Shepherd's call, to draw away sheep after those who 
would be shepherds, but whom the great Shepherd has 
not appointed; shepherds who not only have not purchased 
the sheep, but who seek to ignore the great sacrifice 
by which the Good Shepherd did purchase them. 
We might mention many such false voices, or false 
would-be shepherds,— Christian Science, Theosophy, 
Spiritism, Evolution, Higher Criticism, etc., but we 
have the Good Shepherd's word for it, that his true sheep 
will not be deceived by any of these. Well do they 
know his voice, and its combination of justice, love, 
and mercy cannot be duplicated by others,— its message 
of redemption by the precious blood, justification by 
faith, the high calling, the begetting of the holy spirit, 
the by-and-by deliverance of the sons of God, and eventually 
of all who will obey him of the entire groaning 
creation, through restitution. 

This voice, once heard, can never be mistaken for 
another; and those who know this Shepherd and his 
voice need never be misled by others. The Lord's true 
sheep, whom he knows by name and who follow him, 
will not heed the voice of strange shepherds, but will 
flee from them. They know when they hear a false 

R2673 : page 231 



voice, that it means that the Adversary is seeking to ensnare 
them; and such will flee from the voice of error 
that they may come the closer to the true Shepherd, 
who gave his life for the sheep. If, therefore, we see 
some whom we had supposed were of the Lord's flock 
heeding another voice and following after strange shepherds, 
and heedless of the voice that speaketh from 
heaven, we need not be fearful; for if they are true 
sheep of the Lord's flock they cannot long be deceived, 
if at all. We may indeed sound out the voice of the 
Good Shepherd, calling their attention afresh to the 
harmonies and beauties of the "voice from heaven," 
but if still they do not hear and heed, we may know 
that they do not belong to the flock which our Shepherd 
is now collecting and shepherding. 

Amongst those who heard this parable from our 
Lord's lips, not many comprehended, not many had the 
hearing ear for the true Shepherd's voice: only a small 
proportion of the Jewish people followed him and became 
his true sheep. Similarly now, many are professing 
to be the true sheep of the Lord's flock, but in 
this day of the Shepherd's presence his voice, the truth, 
becomes the test. All of the true sheep will hear and 
be attracted by the voice of truth now uttered, and will 
obey it. Those who are not of the Good Shepherd's 
flock, and who have not his spirit, he desires shall now 
be separated; to this end they will hear the voice of 
other shepherds, and be deceived thereby: because they 
are not truly of the Lord's flock. 

Dr. Porter tells of a scene he witnessed, in which 
several flocks of sheep were for a time commingled, 
and how, when the due time was come, the separation 
took place. He says:— 

"As we sat and looked, almost spell-bound, the 
silent hillsides around were in a moment filled with life 
and sound. Thousands of sheep and goats were there, 
grouped in confused masses. The shepherds stood together 
until all came out, and then they separated, each 
shepherd taking a different path, and uttering, as he 
advanced, a shrill, peculiar call. The sheep heard 
them; at first the mass swayed and moved as if shaken 
by some internal convulsion; then points struck out in 
the directions taken by the shepherds. These became 
longer and longer, until the confused masses were resolved 
in long, living streams flowing after their leaders." 

So at the present time there are many sheep in the 
nominal Church, but they are not all the Lord's sheep. 
Some belong to human leaders of various sects, and 
some are God's. The harvest, or end of this Gospel 
age, the time for separating the wheat from the tares, 
is the time for separating the different flocks of sheep. 
In harmony with this, we now hear various voices calling 
the sheep in various directions, as never before. 
This is, in the Lord's providence, for the purpose of separating 
all others from his own "little flock." His 
sheep will hear his voice and follow him— other sheep, 



consecrated to human leaders, human institutions, human 
theories, human efforts, will follow their own bents, 
and thus be separated from the "little flock," and this 
is now the Lord's good pleasure. Thus he will "gather 
out of his kingdom all things that offend and them 
that do iniquity," before the glorifying of his Church 
and the great time of trouble that will follow. 

CHRIST THE DOOR OF GOD'S SHEEP-FOLD. 



As a further explanation of the matter, our Lord 
refers to himself as the Door of the sheep-fold, the lawful, 
proper entrance-gate, by which God's people might 
enter into rest. All who had ever come previously, 
claiming to be messiahs, had attempted to climb up by 
some other way than that of keeping the divine law and 
purchasing the sheep. They were thieves and robbers, 
attempting to take what they had not secured a right 
to, and that for selfish gain. But none of the true 
sheep would heed them nor follow them. Now, however, 
the Good Shepherd had come, and had purchased 
the sheep, opening a legal door of entrance to them and 
liberty for them, and it was appropriate that all of the 
true sheep should know it. Now it had become possible 
for the sheep to have in Christ the liberty so long desired, 
and to be led out and into pasturage and refreshment 
and to rest and security. Henceforth Jehovah's 
flock should never lack for pasturage; because, 
having bought them through his Son, they shall be 
cared for. They may now say, "Surely goodness and 
mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I 
shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever." 

R2673 : page 232 

Others who had approached the sheep, seeking 
to be their leaders, had done so selfishly; had been 
willing to sacrifice the sheep in their own interest; but 
the Good Shepherd, solicitous for the best interests of 
the sheep, demonstrated this by the sacrifice of his own 
life on their behalf, that they might have life more 
abundant, better than they had ever known hitherto,— 
eternal life. Hireling shepherds labor for the hire, and 
not from personal interest in the sheep, and consequently, 
instead of being ready to lay down their lives for the 
sheep in times of extremity and persecution for righteousness' 
sake, they are ready rather to flee the trouble 
and avoid persecution. They think chiefly of their own 
ease and comfort, honor and dignity, and of how much 
of the golden fleece they can get from the sheep. They 
are not very deeply concerned respecting the spiritual 
progress of the sheep, their growth in grace, and in all 
the fatness of love and spiritual welfare; but specially 
in numbers and collections. 



Perhaps never more than at present is this truth 
clearly illustrated amongst those who are professedly 
representatives of the Good Shepherd— under-shepherds 
in his flock. Many of them give evidence of wanting 
to be on the popular side of every question— of unwillingness 
to suffer anything for the sake of the truth; of 
carelessness respecting the real spiritual condition of 
the flock: of interest rather in the human institutions 
through which they obtain their support, and with 
whose welfare their honor, dignity and titles are associated. 
Of such shepherds Milton, the poet, wrote, 
styling them— 

"...blind mouths. 
The hungry sheep look up and are not fed, 
But, swollen with wind and the rank mist they draw, 
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread." 

The Christian philosopher, John Ruskin, commenting 
upon this, says: "These two monosyllables, 
'blind mouths,' express the precisely accurate contraries 
of the right character in the two great offices of 
the Church,— those of bishop and pastor. A bishop 
means a person who sees; a pastor means one who feeds. 
The most unbishoply character a man can have is, 
therefore, to be blind. The most unpastoral is, instead 
of feeding, to want to be fed,— to be a mouth." 

Nevertheless, the Good Shepherd will always be 
represented amongst the sheep by those who have his 
own characteristics, and who are seeking to walk in his 
footsteps; and through these he will utter his "voice," 
and lead his own sheep to pasture and to rest. These 
will not only have the same voice, the same Word, the 
same good tidings, but they will have the same devotion 
to the interests of the sheep— to feed the sheep, to 
lead them into the green pastures and by the still waters 
of present truth, and to preserve their liberties in the 
Lord, and not to pen them up as their own, nor to 
make merchandise of them. 

The Father, the great over-Shepherd, Jehovah, is 
referred to by the Good Shepherd, Jesus, in verse 16. 
"The Father knoweth me" [has confidence in me— has 
entrusted the care of the sheep to me] and even so I 
know the Father [having full confidence in him, and 
recognizing him as my Shepherd, director, leader], and 
[it is in harmony with his arrangement for me and for 
the sheep that] I lay down my life for the sheep." 

The sheep that I am now calling and leading to 
pasture and caring for and calling by their own names, 
and who know me, are a very special lot of sheep; in 
all only a "little flock," for whom Jehovah, the Great 
Shepherd, has made special arrangements and provisions 
in his Kingdom of glory. However, these are 
not all of his sheep, tho they are all yet called and led 
forth. "Other sheep I have that are not of this fold." 
I bought the whole world with the one sacrifice for 
sins, and all who have the true sheep disposition, all 
who desire to be in harmony with righteousness, truth, 



and the author of these, I must recognize as my sheep, 
and must search them out far and near, until every one 
of them shall be found. But not yet: this will be by 
and by, after the present "little flock" shall be glorified 
with me. Then they, with me, shall be the shepherds 
who will gather in all of the true sheep, delivering 
them all from the power of the enemy, and bringing 
so many as will obey my voice ultimately into that 
glorious condition of oneness, harmony with the heavenly 
Father and with myself, in which condition, 
as my sheep, they will be entitled to everlasting life. 
"Then there shall be one fold and one shepherd," as 
it is written, "Of whom the whole family both in heaven 
and in earth is named."— Eph. 3:15. 



R2674 : page 232 

"THE LORD APPOINTED SEVENTY OTHERS ALSO.' 

-LUKE 10:1-1 1,17-20. -SEPT. 2.- 

"The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few." 

OUR LORD HAD previously sent forth the twelve 
apostles, as heralds of himself and the Kingdom. 
(Luke 9:1-6.) The sending forth of seventy was 
evidently some little time afterward, probably in the 
last year of his ministry. Their commission reads almost 
in the same words as that given to the twelve, tho 
they are not recognized anywhere as apostles on an 
equality of authority with the twelve. The fact that 
seventy men would voluntarily go forth as ministers of 
the Lord, without hope of earthly reward or salary, is 
a sufficient evidence that a strong influence had already 
been exerted by Jesus' teaching. In this connection 
we remember the Apostle's statement that 
above five hundred brethren were sufficiently advanced 
in knowledge and zeal to be accounted worthy of meeting 
the Lord after his resurrection, which implies a 
keen interest on the part of several times that number. 
We may reasonably suppose that these seventy were 
representatives of a much larger company of deeply 
interested ones. They were sent into the various cities 
and villages, whither the Lord himself would go. They 
were to prepare his way by announcing the Kingdom 
at hand, and by performing the miracles intended to 
demonstrate the authenticity of their message. 

R2674 : page 233 

An explanation of why they were sent forth is 
given (verse 2): it was because the harvest was great 
and the laborers too few to properly consummate the 
work in the time appointed of the Father. All interested 



were expected to share in this appreciation of the 
greatness of the work, and the necessity for more laborers 
being sent forth; and it is but reasonable to suppose 
that the seventy sent were chosen from amongst those 
appreciating the situation and anxious to be 
commissioned. 

There are several lessons for us in this matter: we 
too are in a harvest time— in the harvest time of the 
Gospel age, as they were in the harvest of the Jewish 
age. Now, as then, the harvest work is great, and the 
laborers are comparatively few; and now, as then, we 
cannot hope that any would succeed in doing harvest 
work unless specially commissioned or sent forth by 
the Chief Reaper. Hence, all who appreciate the work 
now in progress, should pray to the Lord to send them 
forth in his service, or if already engaged in it, that he 
would graciously open to them doors of opportunity 
for greater usefulness in his service. In the beginning 
of this harvest comparatively few were used of the Lord 
in connection with the harvest work; but as we progress 
we find that the Lord is graciously pleased to send forth 
and use more and more those who are zealously anxious 
to lay down their lives for the truth. 

The expression, "The harvest is great," does not 
necessarily mean that the amount of ripe "wheat" to 
be garnered is great. It means rather that the difficulties 
and oppositions, and multitudes of "tares," make 
it difficult to reach all of the "wheat" class. The work 
is great here, as it was great in the end of the Jewish 
age; yet only a "little flock" will be gathered now, as 
only a remnant was gathered from Israel, as the Apostle 
Paul pointed out. (Rom. 9:27.) The mass of Israel 
professed to be the Lord's people, but their piety 
was little more than profession. They drew nigh to 
the Lord in attendance at the synagogues, and in celebrating 
the feasts, felt full and self-satisfied, and looked 
with pity upon the Gentile nations, and had a great 
spirit of missionary aggressiveness, and "compassed 
sea and land to make a proselyte" to Judaism. Nevertheless, 
the Lord, who read the heart, recognized that 
theirs was only a formal lip service, and that their 
hearts were far from him; and we see conditions to-day 
very similar to this, in nominal spiritual Israel. 

None were fit to be sent out as heralds of the Kingdom 
except such who thoroughly believed in the Kingdom 
—such as had accepted Jesus as the Messiah; such 
as believed in his presence— such, therefore, as could 
speak forth with earnestness and power the message 
they were sent to bear. And so it seems to be in this 
harvest time. The Lord is sending forth more laborers 
continually; yet only such as recognize the Kingdom 
as nigh, even at the door; only such as recognize 
the parousia of the King; only such as have a zeal to 
tell the joyful tidings to others, are being used and 
blessed of the Lord in the gathering together of his 
elect,— the ripe "wheat," his "jewels."— Psa. 50:5; 



Mai. 3:16,17; Matt. 13:39,41. 

It is not supposable that our Lord meant that any 
should appeal to him to send forth more laborers into 
the harvest, who at the same time would not be willing 
and anxious, to the extent of their ability, to enter this 
harvest service themselves. There may be some, but 
we trust very few, who would be prepared to pray: "O 
Lord bless, I pray thee, thy work, and send forth more 
laborers; but do not send me. Permit others to sacrifice 
time and strength and zeal, that I may rest, and 
have neither part nor lot in the matter, sacrificing little 
or nothing." Only those are properly qualified to petition 
the Lord on such a subject, whose hearts are burning 
with a desire to do with their might what their 
hands may find to do, according to their opportunities. 
Such, in praying, would be anxious, first of all, to 
themselves be used as servants of the great Chief Reaper; 
for it is "he that reapeth that receiveth wages and that 
gathereth fruit unto eternal life" now, as it was also 
in the Jewish harvest. Those who are most zealous to 
serve the Lord, and most willing to sacrifice on behalf 
of his cause, are the ones who will receive the greatest 
present blessing of spiritual fellowship with the Lord, 
and who will be the best prepared to share the glories 
soon to be revealed. 

The Lord adopted with the seventy the same 
method that he started with the twelve; viz., of sending 
them two and two; and similarly we, at the present 
time, encourage the colporteur laborers in this harvest 
to go two and two, for mutual encouragement and helpfulness, 
etc. As the poet has said, 

"So when two together work, each for each 
Is quick to plan and can the other teach; 
But when alone one seeks the best to know, 
His skill is weaker and his thoughts are slow." 

It is questionable just why the Lord chose seventy 
for this work. However, we remember that Moses chose 
seventy of the elders of Israel for his assistants, and 
that this number, seventy, was from that time onward 
preserved in Israel, and known as the "Sanhedrin," or 
committee of seventy chief men and judges. In the 
light of this fact, it would appear that if the nation of 
Israel had been in proper condition of heart to receive 
the Lord, the chiefs of that nation would already have 
embraced his cause, and the seventy members of the 
Sanhedrin would by that time have been proclaiming 
the Messiah through the length and breadth of Palestine. 
But since they had not received the King, and 
had not prayed him to commission them to announce 

R2674 : page 234 

him, our Lord commissioned others, and the work went 
on, the honor and privilege passing by those of influence 
and education who might have enjoyed it had they 
been worthy. Doubtless the seventy sent forth were, 



like the apostles, chosen from amongst the honest-hearted 
of the common people, and not many, if any 
of them, were rich, wise or learned. 

Likewise, in this harvest time, there are many 
ministers, professedly servants of the truth, and possessed 
of education, influence, etc., who by now should 
realize that we are in the harvest of the Gospel age, and 
should be seeking of the Lord an opportunity to engage 
in the harvest work; but instead, they are described 
as "dumb dogs, lying down, refusing to bark"— refusing 
to awaken the household under their care, to let 
them know that the Kingdom of God is at hand, and 
that all not received into the Kingdom are about to be 
plunged into a great time of trouble. All of the spiritual 
house of to-day must either receive a more than 
pentecostal blessing, in being "changed" and made 
sharers of the Kingdom, or else, being rejected from 
the Kingdom, receive a baptism of fiery trouble— having 
their portion with the world, not being accounted 
worthy to escape those things coming upon the world. 
-Luke 21:36. 

That the Lord did not expect the seventy to convert 
and gather in all Israel is very distinctly shown 
in his statement, "Behold, I send you forth as lambs 
among wolves." The Master knew that the majority 
of the professedly consecrated Israel of God were consecrated 
to self and selfishness, to sect and party, and 
not to the truth. The majority were represented as 
voracious wolves, not sheep. Nevertheless, there were 
lambs and sheep amongst the goats and the wolves, and 
these all must hear the message, and thus be prepared 
to receive the Messiah, when he should present himself 
to them. 

Special instructions were given to these specially 
sent-forth ones. They had a peculiar work to do and 
the conditions accorded. They were not, therefore, a 
criterion for subsequent workers under different circumstances. 
They were to carry neither purse, nor valise, 
nor extra shoes, and were to salute no man by the way. 
They would thus be dependent on the generosity of 
those to whom they ministered the truth. And the 
effect of this would be beneficial in several ways. (1) It 
would test the faith of those who went forth, and keep 
them continually depending on the Lord's supervising 
care, and trusting that he who had sent them knew how 
to make provision for their necessities while they complied 
with his commands. (2) It would furnish an 
opportunity for hospitality to those to whom they 
preached, and who, by reason of the necessities of the 
case, would be constrained to reach a decision promptly 
as to whether or not they were in sympathy with the 

R2675 : page 234 

message, and hence with the messengers, and willing 
to entertain them. The same lesson of dependence on 



the Lord was implied in the provision for no change of 
raiment. Besides, it was to be but a short tour. 

The injunction not to salute any one by the way, 
may be understood to refer to the custom in Oriental 
lands of travelers stopping frequently to chat with each 
other respecting the news. The disciples had but one 
message, the good tidings, and they were to give all 
diligence to its promulgation, and not to be general 
newsmongers. On arriving at a house they were to 
take careful note respecting their reception, and were 
to anticipate this with a prayer that peace, blessing, 
favor, might be upon that house and its inmates. If a 
son of peace, a child of God, resided there, they might 
expect that under the Lord's providence they would 
have a kind reception, and were to accept it as of the 
Lord's arrangement. If they were not so received, they 
were to consider it as an evidence that that was not the 
home of God's people, living in covenant relationship 
with him, and were to take their departure, seeking 
another and another place. Peradventure they found 
no entertainer in the village, they were, nevertheless, 
to give their testimony. And it should be given in a 
striking manner; viz., by the shaking of the dust from 
their shoes, which, to the Oriental mind, would signify 
a very solemn and final testimony; and then they were 
to say, "Notwithstanding, be sure of this, that the 
Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." 

All who are engaged in the present harvest work 
may learn some very profitable lessons here, applicable, 
indeed, to the Lord's people at any time while engaged 
in his service. We have no time for the ordinary converse. 
The time is short; the harvest work is great; 
the laborers are few; our time is consecrated; we must 
labor while it is called day, knowing that a night cometh 
wherein no man can work. We have consecrated 
our lives even unto death; we are commissioned of the 
great Lord of the harvest to seek for the true "wheat," 
and to gather it into the barn. What time have we 
for frivolities or worldliness or the many social amenities? 
Rather, we must content ourselves with giving 
very little attention to these things, and must press 
along the line, engaging heartily in the work given us 
to do, if we would have the approval of our Master, his 
"Well done, good and faithful servant." 

Altho it is not customary to-day, as it was in Palestine 
nineteen centuries ago, to salute a house and say, 
"Peace be to this house!" nevertheless all of the Lord's 
people should be peacemakers, peace-promoters, peace-lovers, 
and a blessing of peace and restfulness should 
go with them wherever they go. Alas! how many of 
them are slow to learn that God has not called us to 

R2675 : page 235 

strife, contentions, bickerings, anger, etc., but to love, 
joy, peace, etc. How few, comparatively, have learned 



how to speak the truth in love; and always to give a 
soft answer which turneth away wrath; and always to 
avoid the grievous words which stir up anger. Like 
the seventy of our lesson, in our daily avocations and 
efforts to minister to others, let the peace of God go 
with us, shining in our faces, governing our actions and 
intoning our language, so that, as the Apostle expresses 
it, our speech shall be always seasoned with grace. 

Conditions in civilized lands to-day are very different 
from what they were and still are in Oriental lands, 
so that here and now it would be unusual to be expected 
to entertain strangers; nevertheless, all who are 
of the Lord's true people should be on the look-out to 
entertain hospitably any servants of the Lord, who they 
are sure carry his message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 
And, as the Apostle indicates, they should be just as 
careful not to entertain, not to assist, and not to bid 
God-speed to any who are bearing a false gospel, and 
denying that the Lord bought us.— 2 John 10. 

REJOICE IN THINGS UNSEEN. 



When the seventy returned from this mission they 
were full of joy; saying, "Lord, even the devils are 
subject unto us, in thy name." Our Lord assured them 
that this was what he expected, and intended, when he 
sent them forth, and explained respecting his own 
knowledge of Satan in his pre-human condition, that 
there and then he had been a witness to Satan's fall 
from high glory and privilege and position to his present 
attitude of chief adversary of God. "I beheld Satan 
as lightning [as a bright one] fall from heaven." 
It is for those who deny the personality of Satan and 
who deny there are any fallen angels, to explain away 
these plain statements of Scripture. The true children 
of God, the true sheep who hear the voice of the Shepherd, 
will not be deceived upon this point any more 
than upon others. What matters it to us that we did 
not see Satan fall from his glorious condition? Our 
Master did, and he has borne testimony, not only respecting 
Satan's personality, but also respecting his fall 
from brightness and honor. What is it to us that others 
deny that there are fallen angels, demons, who seek to 
impersonate the dead, through spiritualism, etc.? We 
have the Master's words, and the words of the apostles, 
to the contrary, and as true sheep we both hear and 
heed the Shepherd's voice and follow him. We heed 
not the voice of Satan, uttered through those whom he 
controls, telling us that there is no devil, that there is 
no Second Death, etc. 

Our Lord proceeded to tell the seventy that it was 
he who had given them the power they had enjoyed, 
and that it included immunity from the bites of serpents 
and scorpions, and from all the power of the enemy— 



all enemies, but specially the enemy, Satan: the same 
one mentioned also in the prayer which our Lord 
taught, saying, "Deliver us from the Evil One." It 
may not be amiss to note here the fact that these powers 
and authorities over Satan, poisons, serpents, etc., were 
confined to the twelve and to the subsequent seventy, 
and were never given to the Church in general. The 
only Scripture which even seems to so imply is Mark 16:9 
to the end, and these verses are not found in the 
oldest Greek MSS., and are evidently interpolations, 
added probably about the fifth century: they are omitted 
from the Revised Version and others. But while no 
such immunity from poisons and bites and stings are 
granted to the Gospel Church in general, we have what 
serves every purpose in this respect; viz., the Lord's 
promise that nothing shall by any means hurt us as 
new creatures,— that the Lord will permit nothing to 
happen to his consecrated ones that he is not both able 
and willing to overrule for their good, their highest 
welfare. 

While rejoicing with the disciples in their increased 
faith and joy, resulting from their activities in his service, 
and in the exercise of the gifts which he had bestowed 
upon them, our Lord cautioned them against 
thinking too highly of such miraculous gifts, and assures 
them that their chiefest cause for joy lay in another 
direction— in the fact that they had been accepted as 
sons into God's family (John 1:12); in the fact that 
their names were written in heaven, as prospective joint-heirs 
with Christ in his Kingdom— prospective members 
of the body of Christ, to suffer with him, and 
thus attest their fidelity, and by and by to be glorified 
with him to all eternity. This is in harmony with the 
Apostle Paul's statement in 1 Cor. 13:1, where he assures 
us that the miraculous gifts conferred upon the 
early Church by the laying on of the apostles' hands, 
such as speaking with unknown tongues, interpretations 
of mysteries, etc., are not proofs of spirit-begotten conditions; 
—that a greater proof is the possession of the 
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of love that never faileth. 

The more of the spirit of love we possess the greater 
is our likeness to God's dear Son, our Redeemer, and 
the more will we be fitted and prepared for a share with 
him in his heavenly glories. If, therefore, the Lord 
permits us to do some little service in the present harvest, 
or to bear some burdens in the heat of the day, or if 
he grants us the privilege of successfully contending 
against the great Adversary and his servants, and hinders 
us from being stung or "hurt" by their words or 
looks or deeds, and if he grants us opportunities for helping 
others out of soul-sickness by administering the 
good medicine of the present truth, let us rejoice in 
these privileges and opportunities; but let us rejoice 
still more that under the Lord's providence we are his 
children, begotten of his spirit,— that our names have 
been recorded as members of his family, and that by 



and by we may expect to be joint-heirs with our Elder 
Brother. Yea, in these good hopes we will rejoice. 



R2675 : page 236 

IS THE RESTITUTION CALL NOW OPEN? 



A DEAR BROTHER in the truth seems to think 
that the teachings of DAWN, VOL. V., differ 
from those of DAWN, VOL. III., on the question 
heading this article. He sees clearly that in DAWN, 
VOL. V., the view we present is that the restitution 
call cannot begin until the last member of the Gospel 
Church has been changed, glorified, but he thinks 
that the third volume teaches that the restitution call 
will be in progress simultaneously with the closing 
work of this Gospel age. This clearer statement of 
the subject in DAWN V., is the result of our having 
learned that some had gotten the wrong impression 
from VOL. III. In proof of his point, the Brother 
refers us to VOL. III., p. 218, where it is stated that 
"the stopping of the favor or call here, in 1881, is 
followed, or rather lapped upon, by the general call 
of the whole world to the Millennial blessings and 

R2676 : page 236 

favors on condition of faith and obedience." Also 
pp.365 and 367: "Further, where the special favor 
of the general Gospel call ceased, October, 1881, the 
blessings upon the world would seem to be due to 
have a beginning." "It (1881) was the date of the 
closing of the high calling, and hence the date for 
the beginning of the restitution call for mankind in 
general." 

On questions of so much intricacy it is sometimes 
difficult to use language sufficiently exact; 
especially if at the time of writing objections or 
criticisms are not fully anticipated. Were we to 
express the above points again we would try still 
harder, as in DAWN V., to guard our statements, and 
thus to prevent any misunderstanding. Our thought 
is, that the close of the high calling in the year 1881 
was a marked date, and that from that time onward we 
should expect manifestations along the line of restitution 
—evidences that restitution blessings were in process 
of development. We had no intention of conveying 
the thought that restitution, physical, mental and 
moral, should be expected in 1881, and onward. As a 
matter of fact, we see no such process of general physical 
restitution in operation, nor ought we to expect it 
until the Day of Atonement sacrifices (of this Gospel 



age— Christ and the Church, his body) are complete. 

We have already pointed this out in the pamphlet, 
"Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices," published 
in 1881. We there show that the high priest does 
not put on the glorious garments, representing the 
dignity and authority of rulership and blessing, until 
the "Lord's goat" has been killed, its body burned without 
the camp, its fat burned upon the altar, and its blood 
carried into the "Most Holy" and sprinkled upon the 
Mercy-Seat. (We there show also that this goat 
typified the Church, all of whose experiences there 
typified cannot be accomplished until the last member 
of the body of Christ has finished his sacrifice completely.) 
Then it was that the high priest went to 
the altar, lifted up his hands, and began to bless the 
people, who meantime lay prostrate in the dust 
awaiting that very blessing, which typically represents 
restitution. 

In the above statement that "the stopping of 
the favor or call here, in 1881, is followed, or rather 
lapped upon, by the general call of the whole world 
to the Millennial blessings and favors," we hoped 
that the reader would have in mind our further statement; 
that altho the call, in its open or full sense, 
ceased in 1881, it would be prolonged in a special or 
private sense for a time, just as Israel's national 
favor ceased five days before our Lord's crucifixion, 
when he said, "Your house is left unto you desolate," 
yet in an individual sense of the word, God's favor 
continued with Israel exclusively for three and a half 
years following that date; only that instead of being 
a national favor, it was a private, an individual favor. 
On p. 219 we endeavor to explain this continuation 
of the Gospel call, in another form, using the following 
language: 

"But tho the general 'call' has ceased, the 
'door' is not yet shut. The end of the call, and the 
shutting of the door are distinct and separate. The 
'door' stands open for some to enter the race for the 
great prize of joint-heirship in the Kingdom after the 
general 'call' has ceased. God has predetermined a 
fixed number to constitute the Church, 'the body of 
Christ,' and there can be neither one member superfluous 
nor one lacking. (See this typically taught 
in Lev. 21:17-23.) It follows that he could not 
call or invite to that honor more than would complete 
the number that he had determined, and God's 
Word shows that this number had been secured 
[called] in October, 1881. But since some of those who 
responded under the general call, and made the 
covenant with him, will fail to keep that covenant, 
fail to so run as to obtain the prize, the 'door' stands 
open after the general 'call' has ceased, to permit the 
entrance to the race, to self-sacrifice in the service of 
the truth, of some [under the private or individual 
call] to take the places of such as may, during the 



inspection, cast aside the wedding garment of Christ's 
righteousness; and also of such others as, having 
made the covenant of self-sacrifice in the service, 
love the present evil world, become overcharged with 
its cares or pleasures, and fail to perform the requirements 
of their covenant." 

Our thought is that this secret extension of the 
privileges of the call, after it has ceased as a general 
offer, must of necessity precede the beginning of the 
restitution privileges, and hence that only preparatory 

R2676 : page 237 

work in respect to the restitution and the proclamation 
of it, will be in order until the harvest of this Gospel 
age has been fully gathered. The knowledge of 
restitution is granted to the Lord's consecrated people 
now, to the intent that they should not be in darkness 
with the world in respect to the divine plan, and 
especially in view of the approaching great time of 
trouble, and also in view of the falling of the systems 
of error, false doctrines, etc. It is necessary that the 
restitution should be recognized by God's people, in 
order to keep them from falling in this day of trouble. 
But the message or call to restitution is not due to the 
world, to our understanding, in any sense of the word; 
hence it is that the efforts being made in connection 
with the dissemination of present truth are confined, 
so far as seems reasonable and possible, to the Church 
—to those, at least, who professedly claim to be the 
Lord's people, and not to the world. 

Our brother's letter suggests several questions, 
which we here propound and answer, hoping that the 
answers may be helpful, not only to him but to others. 

(1) Question.— May it not be, that both the high 
calling and the restitution call are now open? Or, if 
only one of them, would it not seem the more probable 
that the restitution call alone is open now? I fail to 
see the force of your claim that the "door" stands 
open after the "call" ceases. 

Answer.— We believe that we have shown, foregoing 
that the restitution call could not begin until 
the sacrifice of the Church is completely finished, and 
until the High Priest, with every member of his body, 
is fully clothed with the honors and dignities of his 
office, represented in the garments of glory and 
beauty. We doubt if we can make the matter of the 
open door after the general call has ceased, any 
plainer than above set forth. We think it beyond 
question, that the Lord could not call at any time a 
greater number than the elect number, even tho his 
foreknowledge assured him that many of the called 
ones would not make their calling and election sure, and 
therefore would not be amongst the chosen. We hold, 
therefore, that at such time as the full number of the 
elect had been called, the general call must of necessity 



have ceased; and yet, since the Lord clearly foretold 
that a casting out of some during the inspection 
of the guests would follow (Matt. 22:10-14), and 
since the elect number must be complete, it follows 
that there must be some way of bringing in others to 
take the places of those who would be cast out, after 
the general call ceased and the work of inspection 
began. To our understanding this work of inspection 
of the guests has been progressing for some time- 
since the call ceased. As some were found unworthy 
of their privileges and "cast into outer darkness," 
similar to that in which the whole world is, others 
were admitted to the favors of the called, and the 
attendant testings. And this work must continue 
until the full quota of elect ones shall have passed 
divine approval. We can think of no other way that 
would permit God to be just and reasonable in his 
dealings, since he will not accept less than the foreordained 
number, and since he will not call to that 
number any who, in any sense of the word, might be 
open to disappointment. "Just and true are thy 
ways, thou King of saints!" As pointed out (DAWN, 
Vol., III., page 222) these additions are illustrated 
in the parable by those admitted to labor in the vineyard 
at the eleventh hour,— after the regular calls had 
ceased. 

(2) Question.— Did not the restitution call precede 
the Gospel call? Were not Enoch, Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob, and all Israel called to restitution? If 
this be true, then the Gospel call was merely a supplementary 
one, for the time being, and in that event 
its closing or cessation would at once put in force again 
the original call which it had temporarily superseded. 

Answer.— No: none of the patriarches were called 
to restitution, nor was it possible that either they or 
others could attain restitution blessings until after the 
ransom had been paid; until after all the Atonement 
Day sacrifices had been offered. If restitution had 
been possible without the ransom, then Christ died in 
vain, so far as the world of mankind is concerned. 
But no; all that anyone enjoyed of restitution favors 
in the past, was what we now enjoy; viz., a knowledge 
of them. A slight knowledge or hint at restitution 
was given to father Adam and mother Eve. Subsequently 
a clearer statement of the same was made to 
Abraham, and confirmed to Isaac and Jacob. There is a 
vast difference between the promise of a thing and the 
thing itself. Had the restitution call gone forth in 
the true sense, anyone responding properly would have 
been restored to perfection and everlasting life. True, 
there was a kind of offer of restitution made to Israel 
under the Law Covenant— an offer that they would 
be restored to perfection and life if they would keep 
their Law Covenant inviolate. But, as we have seen, 
the keeping of that Law was impossible; and hence the 
attainment of restitution under it was equally 



impossible. 

The special merit of the patriarchies consisted in 
the fact that, living before any call to everlasting life 
was made, and with merely a hint of God's gracious 
purposes, they exercised so great faith respecting the 
same,— enduring much in their endeavors to please 
God, and because of their confidence in his promises. 
From the Apostle Paul's account, some of them endured, 
faithfully, experiences which, had they lived 

R2677 : page 238 

during this Gospel age, would have constituted them 
overcomers in the highest sense of the word, and joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom. But living before 
this high calling or any other call had been issued, 
and suffering and enduring valiantly and faithfully, 
they are promised a better resurrection, a more favorable 
resurrection than that of the world,— tho it will 
not be so wonderful a resurrection as that of the 
Church. As the Apostle remarks, God has promised 
some better thing for us (than for them), "that they 
without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

Their resurrection will be better than that of the 
remainder of mankind, except the consecrated Gospel 
Church, in that it will be an instantaneous raising to 
perfection, while the world's resurrection will be a 
gradual one, accompanied by disciplines and testings, 
and called by our Lord "the resurrection by judgment" 
—a gradual raising up of the obedient and willing 
throughout the Millennial age, step by step, to all 
that was forfeited and lost in Eden. 

(3) Question.— Will not the restitution call be 
a call to faith and to obedience, without sacrifice? If 
we cannot imagine such a call as being now in process, 
let me ask, Why not? Was not this call the one that 
was open to Cornelius and to everybody else, both before 
and since his time, as mentioned by the Apostle 
Peter, "I perceive that in every nation he that feareth 
God and worketh righteousness is acceptable to him"? 

Answer.— Peter did not mean to be understood 
that he that feared God and worked righteousness to 
the best of his ability had always been acceptable to 
God. Peter had just learned that a new dispensation 
had been ushered in, and that since Christ had 
redeemed, not the Jew only, but the whole world of 
mankind, therefore now repentance and remission of 
sins were proper to be preached in Christ's name to 
every creature, Gentiles as well as Jews; and that 
whoever sought to do the Lord's will to the best of 
his ability would be acceptable in the Lord's sight. 

The restitution call will be a very different one 
from any that has ever gone forth as yet. It will not 
be a call to faith and to reckoned forgiveness of sins, 
but a call to obedience and to the actual blotting out 
of sins. During the Millennial age the world of mankind 



will be dealt with according to the condition of 

each, and obedience to the extent of ability will be 

required of each individual. Every obedience will receive 

its reward, in the way of mental, moral and 

physical recuperation, restitution; and every disobedience 

will receive a just chastisement, and thus 

throughout that age all who will shall have the opportunity 

of development, mentally, physically, morally, 

until, at its close, if he has been obedient to the great 

Teacher, Christ, he will again be in the image and likeness 

of God, as was Father Adam, but with additional 

experience gained,— not only during the fall, but especially 

the experiences gained under the administration 

of Christ's government, during the Millennial 

period, while rising again; while being restituted out 

of sin and death conditions, into conditions of righteousness 

and life. 

What is now known to the Church of this Gospel 
age as "justification by faith" (in like manner also the 
ancient worthies were justified) will not be in operation 
during the Millennial age, nor be necessary; because 
the conditions then will be so different from 
present conditions. It is because "we walk by faith 
and not by sight,"— because faith is now so difficult, 
and therefore so rare, that it is so highly appreciated 
and rewarded of God. But when the Millennial age 
will have been ushered in, the age of faith will have 
passed— that will be the age of knowledge,— the age 
of evidences so clear, so unmistakable, that even "the 
wayfaring man, tho ignorant, shall not err therein, 
for the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the whole earth, 
as the waters cover the face of the great deep." With 
knowledge thus abundant, so that there shall be no 
need to say to one's neighbor, "Know the Lord, because 
all shall know him," it follows that special faith 
will be impossible, and hence the rewards of special 
faith will no longer be offered. 

We do not mean to say that mankind during the 
Millennium will not believe; on the contrary, none can 
do otherwise than believe: we do mean to say, however, 
that there is a difference between believing and 
exercising faith. We now believe various things by 
faith, which the world in the next age will believe, 
not by faith but on evidence, by knowledge— it will 
be impossible for them to doubt them, seeing that the 
evidences will be so indisputable. For instance, now 
God tells us to reckon all of our past sins forgiven, 
and ourselves fully justified in his sight. Nevertheless, 
we continually see evidences of our own weaknesses 
in our minds and bodies. The sins are not 
blotted out; they are merely reckonedly covered. In 
the case of the Church's sins: they will not be blotted 
out until death shall destroy these mortal bodies, and 
until the Lord, in the first resurrection, shall grant us 
glorious, spiritual, perfect bodies. In them there will 
be no trace of sin or weakness or imperfection; all our 



sins will then be actually blotted out. But now we 
are required to believe in the covering of our sins; to 
exercise faith in God's declaration. Our next step of 
faith is in connection with the high calling to sacrifice 
earthly and temporal interests for the gaining of 
the heavenly glory, honor and immortality. But the 
heavenly crown and blessing are seen only with the 
eye of faith; and whoever runs in the race now set before 

R2677 : page 239 

us in the Gospel, must not only look with the eye 

of faith unto Jesus, as the author and finisher of our 

faith, but with the same eye of faith must see the 

crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous 

Judge, has laid up for those who are faithful. Thus 

ours is preeminently an age of faith, of reckoned conditions, 

and of trust in the promises: and it shall have 

its great and precious reward. 

Not so will be the conditions of the Millennial 
age, when ushered in. Knowledge will be there, as 
we have seen; and each day's experiences will result 
either in mental, moral and physical development, or 
in chastisements for failures to make progress. Such 
experiences will give ample demonstration of what 
may be expected as the ultimate outcome,— restitution 
as the reward of obedience, or the Second Death as 
the punishment of disobedience. 

The matter is clearly set before us in the Scriptures, 
which clearly teach that, during this age, the 
rule of divine dealing is, "According to thy faith be 
it unto thee," while the rule of the judgment of the 
world in the Millennial age is clearly laid down in 
Rev. 20:12: "I saw the dead, small and great, stand 
before God: and the books were opened; and another 
book of life was opened [the first book of life is called 
the Lamb's Book of Life, containing the names of the 
elect Church, his Bride:— this other Book of Life will 
be the book or record of those who shall pass the restitution 
trial or judgment satisfactorily], and the dead 
were judged out of those things which were written 
in the books [the Scriptures— John 12:48] according 
to their works." 

It would be a mistake to suppose that God will 
call mankind to sonship during the Millennial age, 
and not require them to make full consecration of 
themselves to him, and to that righteousness of which 
he is the personal representative. None can ever have 
eternal life upon any other condition than this— absolute 
obedience, and more— absolute harmony with the 
very spirit of the divine law, the law of righteousness, 
the law of love. And all who will be in harmony with 
the Lord to such an extent as this, would of necessity 
sacrifice, if there were opposition to the Lord or to 
righteousness which would make necessary a sacrifice 
of any kind, rather than deny the Lord and the 



principles of his holiness. 

The reason why there will be no sacrifices required 
of the world during the Millennial age is, that sin and 
Satan will no longer be in control— "this present evil 
world" (dispensation) will have passed away, and in 
its stead will have been ushered in "the world to come, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness"— wherein righteousness 
will be the rule, wherein the King and all in favor 
with him and every feature of government will be one 
of righteousness, truth and love. 

To suppose the restitution call already commenced, 
would be to suppose that God had in some manner 
authorized some one to announce that henceforth no 
one would suffer for right doing, but only for wrong 
doing; and that henceforth whoever sought to do right 
to the best of his ability, would find himself unopposed 
therein, and that his every effort would promptly 
bring mental, moral and physical strength and recuperation, 
which, going on and on, would by and by 
reach absolute perfection. Furthermore, it would be 
to promise that any who accepted this restitution call 
would never die the Adamic death; but on the contrary, 
accepting this call heartily, would find that day 
by day, year by year, the power of death in him was 
being vanquished and the process of restitution 
progressing. 

When that call shall go forth, and those restitution 
privileges shall be offered to mankind, it will be 
as the Prophet has declared, that no man shall thenceforth 
die for Adam's sin, nor for the sin of his fathers, 
but only for his own sin. (Jer. 31:29,30.) We understand 
that this time will not be reached until after 
the time of trouble— not until A.D. 1915. To our understanding 
from that date onward, the Kingdom being 
fully established, the call of the world to restitution 
privileges will be opened, and whoever shall then die 
will die for his own sin [Second Death] and not for 
father Adam's; and whoever will then be obedient to 

R2678 : page 239 

the Lord will experience the blessings of his grace in 
restitution,— actual, perceptible recovery beginning 
at once, as the reward to the faithful under the restitution 
call. 

The sense in which Millennial blessings and favors 
are already lapping upon the Gospel age, to our understanding, 
is this: First, knowledge, inventions, 
etc., are bringing to the world of mankind blessings 
never hitherto enjoyed, and which are really intended 
for the Millennial age, and are merely being gotten 
ready or prepared in this "day of God's preparation." 
(2) Restitution blessings are lapping also, in the sense 
that these inventions, etc., are gradually leading on 
to the great time of trouble, in which present institutions, 
social, financial, political, religious, will all be 



overthrown— that in their stead God may bring in the 
better provisions and arrangements of the Millennial 
Kingdom. (3) Restitution blessings are coming to 
the Church now, in the sense that she is permitted to 
foresee these coming blessings upon the world, and to 
rejoice exceedingly, and to lift up her heart in thankfulness 
and praise to him who loveth us and who 
bought us with his own precious blood, and to realize 
how it is "the propitiation for our sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 

(4) Question.— Suppose some one should say, "I 
wish to give up this present world and all its honors 
and pleasures, to obey and follow Christ, no difference 

R2678 : page 240 

what trials and persecutions it may bring; but I have 

no expectation of salvation on the divine plane, and I 

am not running for that prize. Salvation on the human 

plane is better than I deserve, no matter how 

much it may cost me to follow Christ now, in the opening 

years of his reign, before Satan is bound. I am 

glad of an opportunity to show my loyalty under adverse 

circumstances, which will prove that I am sincere." 

Who may say that such an one might not 

come in under the restitution call? 

Answer.— The Apostle, on one occasion, said, 
"The times of this ignorance God winked at"— took 
no account of. So all the way down through this Gospel 
age, while this "high calling" has been presented, 
there doubtless have been some of the Lord's followers 
who have not clearly grasped his promises in all 
their length and strength and beauty,— many who did 
not clearly understand that the overcomers of this age 
are to be heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 
and partakers of glory, honor and immortality. Their 
ignorance, however, did not alter the call nor the 
Lord's engagement. The heavenly Father is, so to 
speak, dealing with Christ rather than with us, and 
thus it is written that we are "accepted in the Beloved." 
Whoever, therefore, during this Gospel age, 
has fully consecrated himself to the Lord as his Master, 
fully trusting in him also as his Redeemer, and 
seeking to walk in his footsteps, the same is an heir 
of God and a joint-heir with Jesus Christ, his Lord, 
whether he knew it or not; just as it would be in respect 
to an earthly inheritance. 

It might seem strange that a son should not 
have some knowledge of his father's wealth and of his 
father's intention to give him a portion, but the son's 
ignorance would not alter in any degree the father's 
will, nor hinder him from participating in its provisions. 
So we should say respecting those of the 
Lord's faithful ones during this age, who have not 
been aware of how great things "God hath in reservation 
for them that love him." And this applies 



also to such an one as you mention in this question: 
his ignorance will not alter the divine arrangement; 
and if he faithfully follow the Lord now, we have 
every reason to believe that in the regeneration he 
shall sit in his throne, whether he expects so great a 
favor or not. Nevertheless, we should expect that 
now the Lord would graciously reveal to such a faithful 
sacrificer his goodly heritage. There surely is no 
Restitution Call at the present time— no offer, yet, of 
an opportunity to grow out of imperfection and death, 
into perfection in God's likeness, and into life 
everlasting. 



page 240 

THE CHICAGO CONVENTION. 
CHANGE OF DATE, TO AUGUST 25,26,27. 



IT HAS BEEN found necessary to change our Convention 
dates to one week earlier than announced 
in our last issue. All arrangements are now complete 
as follows:— 

RAIL ROAD RATES, ETC. We are taking advantage 
of the extremely low rail road rates granted to 
the "G.A.R. Encampment," but open to everybody: 
so Excursion Tickets for the "G.A.R. Encampment," 
(and not for our Convention), should be called for. 
Make full inquiry of your R.R. ticket agent in advance, 
respecting date when he will have these cheap 
tickets on sale. 

HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS. The Chicago brethren 
assure us that they have made very complete arrangements 
for our entertainment, at reasonable rates. 

"Hotel Grace," Cor. Clark St. and Jackson Boulevard 
has been secured for headquarters. It is centrally 
located— within walking distance of all depots. A 
number of comfortable apartments have been secured 
at 50 cents per night each person— two in a bed: a few 
choicest rooms 75 cents each person. State which you 
desire reserved for you. 

Restaurants are numerous in the vicinity of the 
hotel and hall. Plain meals can be had at from fifteen 
cents upward. 

THE CONVENTION HALL. The committee has secured 
the use of "The People's Institute," corner of 
Van Buren and Leavitt Streets. It is commodious— 
probably quite beyond our needs— having a seating 
capacity of eighteen hundred. It is about 30 minutes 
ride from our hotel headquarters, and may be reached 
by the Garfield Park train on the Metropolitan Elevated 
Road: Get off at Hoyne Station. Or take the 



Van Buren Street car to Leavitt Street, or the Leavitt 
Street Car to Van Buren St. 

BAPTISM SERVICE. Arrangements for baptism 
—robes, towels, etc., are complete; so that any desiring 
thus to symbolize their consecration can be accommodated 
on Monday afternoon, August 27. 

WRITE US FOR PARTICULARS, as soon as you decide 
that you can attend, and have learned when your 
train will reach Chicago. Make your letter brief and 
to the point; thus for instance: "Our party will consist 
of six— two males and two females single, and one married 
couple. We expect to reach Chicago at 1 1 o'clock 
A.M. August 25, via Chicago and Northwestern R.R. 
We desire the fifty cent lodgings." Mention names. 

COMMITTEE OF RECEPTION of Chicago Church 
will, so far as possible, meet the friends at depots on 
arrival of trains indicated— at the door of the Ladies' 
Waiting Room. Each may recognize the other by 
seeing a WATCH TOWER in his hand. However, should 
you for any reason fail to meet one of the committee, 
you can easily find a lunch room, and then "Hotel 
Grace" or the Convention Hall, at the addresses above 
given. 

A LARGE ATTENDANCE EXPECTED. 

All who trust in the "precious blood" as man's 
atonement price are cordially invited. We anticipate 
a large attendance, and urge that all who come shall 
seek to bring with him the Lord's blessing, that all 
in attendance may be blessed and that the influence 
of the Convention may be far-reaching for good to the 
Lord's flock and to the Chief Shepherd's praise. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY 



VOL. XXI. AUGUST 15, 1900. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 243 

Rev. R. Heber Newton's Opinion 243 

Protestantism in France and in 

America 243 

Prepared to Fall Into Spiritism 246 

A Change Already in Progress 246 

Praying and Fighting— An Emperor's 

Sermon 247 



"Not So Paul Won Macedonia" 249 

God's Providential Care 249 

Doing, to Inherit Eternal Life 250 

The Good Samaritan 252 

Beware of Covetousness 253 

The Rich Churl 255 

Interesting Letters 256 

Three More Conventions 242 

page 242 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



THE CHICAGO CONVENTION- AUG. 25-27. 



We learn with regret that some of the rail roads entering 
Chicago have instructed their near-by agents not to commence 
selling the cheap "G.A.R. Excursion" tickets until Aug. 26. 
This will undoubtedly prevent some from attending the Convention 
on its opening day, the 25th; but should it be the desire 
of a goodly number, the Convention can be prolonged to 
include the 28. The dates already announced will be the best 
we can do (Aug. 25-27), for we want to include a Sunday, and 
prefer that, so far as possible, the commotion incidental to arrivals 
on the opening day shall be over before Sunday. 

Full particulars were given in last WATCH TOWER, and will 
be sent by mail on application. The Editor of this journal will 
attend, and hopes that all friends will introduce themselves to 
him, by name and place. 

SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y. CONVENTION-SEPT. 4 AND 5. 



Friends of the truth residing in the vicinity of Saratoga 
Springs, N.Y., advise us that a Floral Fete will be held 
there Sept. 3-6, which will have very low rates of rail road fare 
from all points in New York and New England. They request 
a gathering of the friends of that vicinity,— and as many others 
as can conveniently meet with them on Sept. 4 and 5. The 
Editor has promised to attend on the 4th, and if possible to remain 
also the 5th. Purchase Excursion tickets to Floral Fete. 

Comfortable accommodations can be secured at one dollar a 
day including board. Notify the WATCH TOWER office at once 
by postal card, when you will arrive, by what road, and how 
many will be of your party. On arrival go at once to the New 
Prohibition Hall, No. 464-1/2 Broadway.— But first look out for 
the Reception Committee at the door of the "Ladies' Waiting 
Room" displaying a copy of the WATCH TOWER. 

DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION-SEPT. 29,30, OCT. 1. 



We merely remind the friends of Texas and vicinity of the 
date as above, reserving particulars for a later issue. 

"HE THAT HATH NO MONEY-COME YE!" 



At all Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society Conventions provision 
is made for the free entertainment of the Lord's "brethren" 
able to attend, but unable to pay for hotel accommodations. 
In notifying us of your coming, mention if the Lord's providence 
has made it expedient for you to accept the free hospitality of 
the entertaining Church. 

CONVENTION OPPORTUNITIES FOR SYMBOLIC BAPTISM. 



This is a feature in all conventions. Robes, towels, etc. 
are supplied, and the use of baptistry secured. 



R2679 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



REV. R. HEBER NEWTON'S OPINION. 



DOCTOR NEWTON writes to the Christian 
Citizenship League as follows:— 
"The teachings of the church, for the most part, 



are far from following the teachings of Jesus. Nay, 
they are far from recognizing what those teachings 
are. The organization of the church is planned and 
patterned upon a policy which is the very antithesis 
of a true society of Jesus. 

"Commercialism dominates the organization, and 
conventionality tyrannizes the pulpit. The law of the 
market, rather than the law of the mount, is accepted 
by the church at large. 

"Our Protestant churches are composed, for the 
most part, of a constituency drawn from the well-to-do 
classes, and they see nothing essentially unsound or 
unethical in the economic system of the day. The 
pulpit, therefore, is rarely free to deliver its soul, if it 
has one, upon the burning questions of our generation. 

"Blind leaders of the blind, both seem hastening 
to fall into the ditch which lies before our civilization. 
And yet within the Christian church is the very ideal 
that the world hungers for, the very power to solve 
these problems. Infinitely pathetic is the situation." 

This is a very severe arraignment of orthodoxy 
in any case; but coming from one of its leading lights 
it is terrible! 

PROTESTANTISM IN FRANCE AND IN AMERICA. 



Within the past few years Protestantism has been 
making considerable progress in Catholic France; but 
it is to be remembered that there the term Protestant 
includes all systems of religion and irreligion opposed 
to Roman Catholicism. 

As might be expected, this in turn arouses the 
ire of Romanists, especially the clergy, who, long accustomed 
to full control of the masses, and to having 
their mandates pass without dispute or criticism, are 
now furious in their attempts to hinder their people 
from slipping the bonds of gross religious ignorance 
and superstition, and escaping from their control. 
Deprived of the civil power of the past— lost a century 
ago— and unable to torture or destroy those who protest 
against their system, they nevertheless clearly show 
that the spirit of the past still dominates them, and 
that only opportunity is lacking, and this by reason 
of a higher civilization and a more generally enlightened 
public conscience— not because of a higher and 
holier religious standing. 

Words are the crudest weapons now permitted, 
and these are used with energy and venom and regardless 
of the truth. For instance, the Bonne Presse, the 
organ of the Assumptionists (a Roman Catholic order), 
and many Croix, or Catholic Church papers, are seeking 
to arouse prejudice and public sentiment against everything 
not Catholic, by confounding Jews, Freethinkers 
and Freemasons with Protestant Christians— charging 



all with treachery to France, etc.,— and the general 
name of "Huguenots" has been revived as applicable 
to all those to whom Romanism is opposed. The inference 
is deducible from some of the writings, that 
their authors would like to see these modern "Huguenots" 
massacred as were the others— for the glory 
of God and the peace of the Roman Catholic Church. 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., pages 332-353. 
The names of some of the tracts and books published 
in the interest of this crusade against Protestantism 
would, alone, give a clue to the character of 
the attack; but we will give a few extracts:— 
"The Protestant Peril," of 569 pages, declares:— 
"The Huguenots go hand-in-hand with the traitors 
of the fatherland and with the foreign foes of 
France, just as their religious fellows did in the year 
1870. ...The Protestants force their way into the 
houses of the French people, ostensibly to sell Bibles, 
but in truth to spy out where the honest peasant has 

R2679 : page 244 

hidden his savings. They are picking out quarters 
for the army of the invasion. Therefore, we must keep 
a watch over these imbeciles and force them to leave 
our towns. ...These pious gospel messengers do 
not propose so much to make converts to Protestantism, 
as to demoralize our good people and to lay plans 
for facilitating the proposed invasion of our country. 
We appeal to the peasants to become new crusaders 
in the interests of the good cause." 

"The Protestant Conspiracy" charges that the 
queen of England annually contributes five million 
dollars to propagate Protestantism in France, and thus 
to make the latter a vassal state to Great Britain. 
Another work is entitled, "The Treachery of Protestantism." 
"Treason's Formation" is another of these. 
It says:— 

"The Huguenot is a born traitor. A Catholic 
will die for his faith; a Jew to save his money; but a 
Protestant knows no martyrdom. ...The claim of 
the innocence of Dreyfus was simply a specimen of 
Protestant treachery in order to make it possible for 
England to occupy Fashoda, and William II. to make 
his journey to Jerusalem. All the defenders of Dreyfus 
are open or secret Protestants." 

"The Protestant Conquest" is the title of another 
of these blasts of ignorance and falsity, designed to 
prejudice the populace so that they will give Protestants 
and the Bible no hearing. It suggests the wisdom 
and propriety of murdering leading opponents, both 
political and religious, as follows:— 

"The Catholics are too scrupulous. Nobody can 
bake an omelet without breaking some eggs. No 
revolution can be achieved without advancing over 
dead bodies. Do you think it would be a crime to 



condemn and put to death such men as Zadok Kahn, 
Reinach, Scheurer-Kestner, Picquart, Zola, Brisson, 
Yves Guyot, Jaures, Clemenceau, Monod, and Ranc, 
because they have organized the Dreyfus conspiracy? 
I confess openly that I would have no hesitancy to 
vote for the death of this Reinach, etc., and such pastors 
as Monod, etc." 

French Protestants are justly indignant at such 
unscrupulous methods of opposition, and are crying 
out for freedom and fair and honest treatment; and to 
offset it are publishing pamphlets entitled "Away from 
Rome," and scattering them widely. 



But now note the difference between the sentiments 
of Protestants in France, and Protestants here. 
Where they are in the minority they want liberty and 
God's Word to prevail, and appeal to reason and the Bible 
as in offset to ignorance, superstition and priestcraft. But 
how is it here in "the land of the free" where Protestantism 
controls the great majority? Ah! here we see the 
weakness of fallen human nature displayed; for here 
Protestants, like the Catholics of France, are most bitterly 
opposed to any advanced light— especially any 
further light from the Bible;— not only denying what 
they cannot gainsay Scripturally, but becoming the 
more angry in proportion as they find present truth 
unanswerable. 

True, they have not published volumes in opposition 
to our presentations, but this is no doubt due to 
two facts: (1) There is no opportunity to confound 
the gospel we preach with any class of politicians or 
political aspirations; and (2) they know nothing to 
say against our position, and fear to call attention to it 
lest their closely guarded and tightly penned "sheep" 
should get a taste of "the good word of God," and 
break away from sectarianism to the "green pastures 
and still waters" of divine truth. But most of their 
fears are groundless, for the majority of their flocks 
are not "sheep" anyway; and the "goats," true to a 
perverse nature, would prefer tin cans, paper, filthy 
rags, or any thing of a sensational character— Evolution, 
Higher Criticism, human philosophy, and "science 
falsely so called"— rather than the truth. 

United States Protestant methods differ from 
French Roman Catholic methods, but both have the 
same object; namely, to prejudice the minds of the 
people under their control who are trusting to them as 
their guides and spiritual advisers; thus to hinder 
them from investigating truth on its merits and in the 
light of the divine Word. 

Having mentioned the Roman Catholic method, 
it is but just that we cite instances illustrating the 
Protestant method. For instance, some years ago 
the pastor of the North Ave. M.E. Church of this 



city made a most furious attack upon the Editor of 
this journal, whom he had never met, and whose writings 
he probably had never read— as would seem to be 
implied by the false statements of our position made 
by him in a discourse over an hour long. What was 
the ground for the attack? Simply that five members 
of his congregation had been baptized by us the week 
previous, and that he knew, in some way or other, that 
we believed in the imminence of the Kingdom of God. 
He railed at the fact that this teacher did not belong 
to any of the sects, and was not recognized by any of 
them, informed his people that he had been specially 
educated so as to be able to guide them in all spiritual 
matters; and that they should seek no other counsel 
respecting God's Word. 

He then demonstrated his wisdom and ability as 
"a scribe instructed respecting the Kingdom" by declaring 
that the second coming of Christ must be many 
thousands of years future, because in his judgment, this 
was clearly taught, not by the Bible writers, but by 
the coal fields and ore deposits of earth, which he 
thought would last that long. 

If the learned gentleman had only thought of it 
he might have prophesied a still longer interim— millions 

R2680 : page 245 

on millions of years— basing his calculations on 

the supply of limestone for macadam and whitewash, 

and on the supply of granite for tomb-stones. This 

encouraging (?) sermon on "The Second Coming of 

Christ" ended with an attempt to arouse the murder 

spirit amongst the "goats" of his flock and to intimidate 

the "sheep" with words, understood by all 

to refer to the Editor of this journal, who was (by request 

of the recently baptized ones) present in the audience 

thirty feet from the reverend and learned 

speaker, who in loud and angry tones shouted, "Do 

you know what they would have done to such a man 

eighteen centuries ago? They would have led him outside 

their city and would have stoned him to death!" 

Here is the same murderous spirit manifested by 
the French Catholics— and in both incited by a bitter 
hatred of the truth— or rather by a fear of the truth, 
and a desire to preserve, by any and every means, the 
human organization they have been taught to regard 
as divine. "By any means" is none too strong; for 
we know of numerous instances in which professed 
ministers of God's truth have most outrageously falsified 
for the good of the cause, as the Jesuits would say. 

For instance, it makes the false shepherds (who 
seem to predominate) very angry when members of 
their flocks receive present truth and request that 
their names be stricken off the sectarian roll because 
they consider it quite enough and much more in accord 
with the Lord's will and Word to have it written only 



in "the Lamb's book of life,"— and quite sufficient 
to be members of "the Church of the first-born, 
which are written in heaven," and thus in fellowship 
with all true "sheep," wherever found. In some instances 
reported to us the pastor kept the letter to 
himself, and long afterward charged the one who had 
withdrawn with backsliding, neglect of covenant in 
not attending service and hence unworthy of respect 
or fellowship. 

In one instance a dear sister who had been a 
Bible class teacher of prominence and influence was so 
feared by her erstwhile pastor that he deliberately, and 
with much hypocritical show of sorrow, circulated the 
report that she had "gone insane"— "a very pitiable 
case." His crafty satanic method succeeded; and 
her church friends and neighbors "let her alone," for 
fear they would "excite her" and "make it necessary 
to send her to an insane asylum." Needless to say, 
the sister is of much sounder mind than ever before; 
—of much sounder mind than any who can believe 
the unscriptural and God-dishonoring doctrine of eternal 
torment, taught by the jarring creeds labeled 
"Orthodox." 

It was in view of such cowardly and disreputable 
methods coming to our notice that we prepared what 
are known as "Withdrawal Letters"— setting forth the 
truth in kindly language— which we supply freely to 
all who desire them, so that each member of the congregation 
receiving one may be truthfully informed 
as to our reasons for renouncing membership in sectarian 
systems; and thus, too, the temptation to misrepresent 
is taken from the false shepherds whose love 
for the sheep is chiefly for the sake of their "golden 
fleece." But those kindly-worded letters are feared 
and hated as much as the DAWNS. 

Space forbids us to mention numerous instances 
of perfidy and misrepresentation by "ministers" against 
our publications-especially MILLENNIAL DAWN. Publicly 
and privately they warn their people against it, 
and advise those who have it not to read it, but to 
"saturate with oil and burn it," evidently thinking 
us so opposed to eternal torment that we would use 
some kind of fire-proof paper that would need oil to 
make it burn. Others, learning that colporteurs had 
reached their city and had sold DAWN to their parishioners, 
have gone about from house to house, warning, 
threatening and entreating (according to the intelligence 
and financial dignity of the person) that 
they violate their engagements and refuse to take the 
books, and if they already have them to be sure to 
burn them. 

Why all this warning, etc.? Love for the "sheep"? 
Oh no, indeed! but love for themselves. They well 
know that wherever the true light of the Word of God 
goes their "craft is in danger." (See Acts 16:16-24.) 
Often they hear of their "sheep" getting into by-paths 



of sin, but who ever heard of their working themselves 
into a frenzy of energy on that account? Why then 
are they so excited the moment MILLENNIAL DAWN 
is mentioned, or seen in the houses of their sheep? 

Their fear is ( 1 ) that if their people read the 
DAWNS they will know far more about the Bible, and 
will begin to think and to ask questions which they 
cannot answer. (2) It will show them that they have 
been hiring shepherds to lead them to the green pastures 
of truth, who, instead, have been penning them 
up in sectarian folds and forcing them to subsist on 
the God-dishonoring doctrines of the dark ages. (3) It 
will lead the true "sheep" to get out from among the 
"goats" and "wolves in sheep's clothing," by showing 
them that the "harvest" time of separation has come, 
and that the great Chief Shepherd is calling forth his 
own sheep to himself and to fellowship with all other 
sheep— free from human creed-pens. (4) No wonder 
these worldly-wise shepherds resent a teaching which 
would gather the few grains of "wheat" from a parishful 
of "tares." It would look bad to call his a 
wheat-field if there were no wheat in it. Then, too, it 
would count in numbers (tho far less than they suppose 

R2680 : page 246 

—for the "tares" take little or no interest in present 
truth), and their prestige and salary depend so 
much on numbers; how could they regard DAWN 
otherwise than as their enemy likely to bring all kinds 
of trouble to their slumbering flocks by awaking them 
to thought and Bible study? 

This seems to make no allowance for honest preachers, 
lovers of the truth who should be glad to find it 
in DAWN or anywhere, and glad to proclaim it at any 
cost,— some one complains. No, we do not deny that 
there are honest, God-fearing and truth-loving men in 
the Christian ministry, scattered probably among all 
denominations; but, evidently, as at the first advent, 
the Doctors of Divinity as a class are, by their training 
and selfish interests, enemies of the true light, the 
wisdom from above, and friends and patrons of earthly 
wisdom. The majority are blind and cannot see the 
true light, and of the remainder a large proportion 
seem to love the present world, and to be willing to 
sell the truth for its "mess of pottage." Nevertheless, 
here and there some "forsake all" for the sake of the 
truth,— to suffer with Christ, if so be that they may 
also reign with him by and by. 

Nor does it always stop with threatening words: 
these in small towns are often followed by social ostracism 
and business boycott too often successful. 
For instance, a brother wrote us a short time ago, 
changing his address, explaining that he had been 
obliged to move onto a farm because his cotton-gin, 
saw-mill and grist-mill in town had been boycotted 



until he could no longer earn a living— because of his 
attempt to explain the truths of the Bible to his neighbors. 
The charge against him was that he "had too 
many different translations of the Bible" and "had 
many texts marked in his Bible which neither the 
preacher nor his neighbors could find in theirs;"— 
not being so well acquainted with their Bibles as with 
their almanacs, daily papers, dominoes, cards and 
chess. 

Alas, poor world! It is still true that "men love 
darkness rather than light," and that this is their condemnation, 
leading surely to the great time of trouble 
with which this age is predicted to end, as the same 
love of darkness led natural Israel to its great trouble 
and overthrow, in the end of the Jewish age. 

Yet none of these things move the Lord's people, 
for the same light upon the Word shows not only that 
the Lord's true people will be hated and maligned 
even to the end of this age, and that whosoever will 
live godly must suffer persecution; but it shows also 
the object of such tests and trials and sacrifices— to fit 
and prepare a little flock to be faithful and merciful 
kings and priests of God during the coming age, when 
with their Lord, Jesus, whom they follow through 
evil as well as good report, they shall, as God's representatives, 
"judge the world"— giving to all the fullest 
opportunity to come back to full harmony with 
God and righteousness. 

PREPARED TO FALL INTO SPIRITISM. 



It is our expectation that Spiritism, as one of the 
latter day delusions, is to play an important part in 
the next few years in connection with the great falling 
away already begun, in which "a thousand shall fall 
at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand." 
Romanism taught, and still teaches, a Purgatory to 
which their dead go at death for purification for heaven; 
and that while there the prayers and paid masses of 
their friends on earth avail for them to a sooner release 
—to heavenly bliss. Protestantism at its start, 
through Luther and its principal exponents, denounced 
this as a Papal deception to fill its coffers 
with the money of its deluded people; and failing to 
grasp the truth that a dead person is not alive anywhere, 
but awaits the resurrection of the dead as his 
only hope of a future life, Protestantism took its 
illogical position still held— that death ends all hope, 
and that all not fit for heaven go to a hell of everlasting 
torment. And, in harmony with this, prayers to 
and for the dead were reprobated— the righteous needing 
none, and the wicked being hopeless. 

It has often surprised us that with the thought 
that their dead are not dead, but more than ever alive 



and "hovering" among the friends at the funeral, as 
some ministers explain (?), there has not been a greater 
disposition to follow the lead of Spiritism and seek 
communion with those supposed to be alive and near, 
and able to assist. The explanation seems to be that 
Romanists are under the control of the priests instructed 
who are the saints who may be prayed to, and 

R2681 : page 246 

instructed that those who need to be prayed for can 
only be reached or assisted through the priests,— who 
alone must do the mass-saying and praying. And 
Protestants have been restrained by the original declaration 
of the leaders that prayers to and for the dead 
were both Romish superstitions, unsanctioned by the 
Word of God— to which we heartily agree. 

A CHANGE ALREADY IN PROGRESS. 



But the Boer-British war has started a fresh discussion 
of the question of prayers for the dead. As 
Roman Catholics, after news of a battle, repaired to 
their cathedrals to pray for the Catholic dead, and to 
offer mass on their behalf in Purgatory, Protestants 
have been perplexed and felt their need of something 
to offset the hard error of their creed that if the soldier 
were a saint he went at once to glory, but if not 
a saint at once to an endless and hopeless torment in 

R2681 : page 247 

hell. Loving fathers and doting mothers were unable 
to hide from themselves that their sons, and the army 
in general, were far from being saints or "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light;" and yet they felt 
sure that they were far too good and noble and patriotic 
to be turned over to the care of devils to be 
roasted eternally: and this coming now, at a time 
when people are thinking more than ever before, and 
when human sympathy is greatly expanded, is awakening 
serious thought in Britain. 

As usual, however, the Adversary manages to 
turn thought into a wrong direction; and so they fail 
to see that all the dead must wait for the second coming 
of the Lord and for the resurrection awakening 
then due, and that then (during the Millennial age) 
the whole world will be a grand and good Purgatory;— 
when Satan will be bound, and when so many as will, can 
have the assistance of the Royal Priesthood in getting 
rid of their errors and weaknesses, and coming back 
to perfection by a process of restitution. No, on the 
contrary, the suggestion is that the early Reformers 
must have erred in rejecting that feature of Rome's 



teachings which permits and encourages prayers for 
the dead. Note the sentiments promulgated by the 
influential Christian World of London. It says:— 

"Here is theology in the roughest; its chiefest 
problem thrust on you in a fashion which brooks no 
shirking. What has really happened? Where or what 
is he who, a moment ago so near, is now at a remove 
to which our space computations offer no clew? We 
are all on-lookers to-day at tragedies of this sort, and 
the questions behind them press us with relentless 
force. Do our dead still think or love? Have we any 
sort of relation with them? Can we do aught for them 
or they for us?... 

"What on this subject [communion with the dead] 
is the position of Protestant Christians to-day? Signs 
are abundant that the standpoint from which it is 
approached by non-conformists, not less than by conformists, 
is a somewhat different one from that held 
by the Reformers and the Puritans. 

"Thoughtful minds are now asking whether the 
sixteenth-century onslaught on Purgatory and priestcraft 
did not, in the rush, carry away with it some 
precious things that it is time now to restore.... 

"And why should we not pray for the dead? 
What is prayer, in the best conception of it, but the 
following of those we love, with aspiration and affection, 
with desire for their highest good, with the whole 
best emotion of our soul? What barbarous infidelity 
has taught us that death interposes a limit to this outgoing? 
The notion that those who now rest in God 
are, because of that, beyond the reach or need of 
prayer is heathen, and not Christian. It is disloyal 
at once to God, to the departed themselves, and to our 
own best instincts. There is no position, not that of 
heaven's central point; there is no condition, not that 
of supremest blessedness, that is outside the range of 
love.... 

"We have neglected our dead, and in so doing 
have weakened one of the most intimate of our links 
with the unseen. We have put up in our minds barriers 
that do not correspond with the reality, and so 
have obstructed the flow of some of the grandest of 
the human inspirations. The mind revolts against 
these limitations. Its prophetic instinct recognizes 
them as a mistake. The vagaries of Spiritualism are 
a rough protest against the policy of cutting the cable 
between here and the Beyond. And that other side 
protests also. Near to us, on the other side of a very 
thin veil, lies a great realm of life which has the closest 
connection with our own. What that connection 
is we at present only dimly discern. Our organs of perception 
seem only in the most rudimentary condition. 
It may be that our later indifference on this side has 
hindered their development. But develop they must, 
for they are among humanity's most priceless possessions. 
A stage will yet be reached when they will be part of 



the soul's general apparatus, and when, not to a stray 
prophet here and there [mediums?], but to the common 
man will it be given to stand with Bunyan's pilgrim 
on the Delectable Mountains and behold what 
was visible there." 

Light (Spiritualistic, London, April 10) thinks 
this is a real, tho belated, recognition of the essential 
truth of the Spiritualistic position. It says:— 

"Spiritualists have been severely criticized and 
ridiculed for affirming that the departed are frequently 
benefited by the advice, sympathy, and prayers of 
earth-dwellers. We have been denounced for teaching 
that progress after death, following upon repentance 
and effort, is possible for the ignorant and sinful 
dwellers on the threshold.... 

"Think of it! Spiritualism is a 'protest against 
the policy of cutting the cable between here and the Beyond!' 
Aye, and evidently the protest has not failed, 
it has not been in vain. While the writer laments 
that 'our organs of perception [psychical, mediumistic 
perception, or "spiritual gifts"] seem only in the 
most rudimentary condition,' he suggests that indifference 
has 'hindered their development,' and he fully justifies 
us and our long struggle for recognition against, 
not only indifference, but prejudice, intolerance and 
active hostility, by affirming 'develop they must, for 
they are among humanity's most priceless possessions!' 

"After this we shall assuredly have The Christian 
World founding a 'School of the Prophet's for the development 
and exercise of mediumship and psychical 
powers generally." 

PRAYING AND FIGHTING -AN EMPEROR'S SERMON. 



The German Emperor preached a sermon on board 
his yacht Sunday, July 29, from the text, Exodus 17:9-11. 
His argument was that as Moses prayed and 
got a blessing for Israel, so all Germans at home 
should pray that their brethren gone to war in China 
might successfully slaughter the heathen Chinese, who 
should be like the Amalekites. The press report of 
the discourse follows:— 

"The soldiers shall be the strong arm which punishes 
assassins. They shall be the mailed fist which 

R2681 : page 248 

smites that chaotic mass. They shall defend, sword 
in hand, our holiest possessions. True prayers can 
still cast the banner of the Dragon into the dust and 
plant the banner of the cross upon the walls. 

"Again is heard God's command, 'Choose us out 
men and go out to fight with Amalek.' A hot and 
sanguinary struggle has begun. Already a number 



of our brethren are over there under fire. Many more 
are traveling along hostile coasts. You have seen 
them, the thousands who, to the call of volunteers to 
the front who will guard the empire, have assembled 
themselves to battle with victorious banners. We who 
remain at home are bound by other sacred duties. 
Woe unto us if we remain slothful and sluggish while 
they are engaged in their difficult and bloody work, 
and if from our place of security we only curiously 
look on while they wrestle in battle. 

"Not only should we mobilize battalions of troops, 
but we should also, and shall, set in motion an army 
of trained people to beg and entreat [God] for our 
brethren that they may strike into the wild chaos with 
sword in hand. May they strike for our most sacred 
possessions. We would pray that God the Lord may 
make heroes of our men and lead those heroes to victory, 
and that then, with laurels on their helmets and 
orders on their breasts, he may lead them home to 
the land of their fathers. 

"Our fight will not be finished in one day; but 
let not our hands grow weary or sink until victory is 
secured. Let our prayers be as a wall of fire around 
the camp of our brethren. Eternity will reveal the 
fulfilment of an old promise— 'Call upon me in trouble, 
and I will deliver thee.' Therefore pray continuously." 

The Emperor and many other militant "Christians" 
fail to see that Israel was used of God as a 
typical people and that the duly authorized slaughter 
of the Amalekites was because their iniquity was "come 
to the full" (Gen. 15:16), and God would use them as 
types of evil and evil-doers to be overthrown by the 
antitypical Moses, the antitypical Mediator, Christ— 
as Pharaoh and his hosts previously typified the same 
thing. Similarly the "Land of Promise," Canaan, was 
typical of the heavenly Canaan. 

The Spiritual Israelite is to watch and fight and 
pray, but against a different kind of enemies and with 
different weapons— mighty through God to the pulling 
down of error, and the gaining of victories over 
sin and self and Satan. "The weapons of our warfare 
are not carnal," says the inspired Apostle— not swords, 
machine-guns and battle-ships.— 2 Cor. 10:4 

As for the "Christian soldiers" going to "heathen 
China" from "Christian Europe" we fear they have 
not a true "soldier of the cross" among them, and 

R2682 : page 248 

but few who have any knowledge whatever of the 
sword of the spirit— the Word of God. They are probably 
no better than the thousands of their comrades 
already there and of whose unchristian conduct, after 
the capture of Tien Tsin, the telegraphic dispatches 
published say:— 
"This day has been devoted entirely to looting 



the native city [Tien Tsin]. The Chinese killed many 
of their women to keep them from falling into the 
hands of the allied troops. It is impossible to cable 
a description of the scenes that were enacted.... 
American and Japanese troops were the only ones who 
made any attempt to restrain the civilian or soldier 
looters." 

THE GERMAN KAISER'S HUMANE (?) EXPRESSIONS 



The Emperor is practically the pope of the German 
National Church system; we presume he has 
received the collegiate degree of "D.D.," as did Bismarck. 
He is evidently another "man of blood and 
iron." He has surely placed himself, by recent utterances, 
at the head of the revived ancient order of 
Christian soldiers of the period of the crusades. The 
"Boys' Brigades" should all be pointed to this fact; 
—and be advised to resign and turn in the opposite 
direction from the general Christian (?) drift of our 
day. The following from the Presbyterian Banner is 
to the point. It says:— 

'"Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I 
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray 
for them that despitefully use you and persecute you.' 
Is this passage in the German New Testament? Has 
the Emperor William ever read it? If he has he must 
have forgotten it, or lost its spirit, for last week, in 
dispatching German troops to China, he is reported 
to have said to them, 'Every civilization not founded 
on Christianity is sure to be brought to naught. I 
send you out. If you close with the enemy, remember 
this: spare nobody, make no prisoners; use your 
weapons so that for a thousand years hence no Chinaman 
will dare look askance at any German.' The 
whole address breathes the spirit of ruthless destruction 
to the Chinese. The great 'war lord' doubled up 
his 'mailed fist' and threatened to pound China to 
pieces. The vain emperor, swollen with a sense of 
his own importance, seemed to be sublimely unconscious 
of the violent inconsistency of his fierce paganism 
with his professed Christianity. He would outdo 
Mohammed in spreading religion with the sword. 
There are difficulties, however, in the way of this plan. 
Christ himself told Peter, who was eager to use it for 
defending the Kingdom, to put up his sword, and 
there is no evidence that he has handed this weapon 
to William II. for this purpose. And further, there 
are the Chinese themselves; there are 400,000,000 of 
them, and they may prove a considerable obstruction 
in the way of William's policy. In fact, the German 
emperor's plan is about the worst possible one that 



could be announced in the present emergency. It 
would consolidate the Chinese and turn them into a 
horde of fanatics that might easily turn out to be a 
genuine 'yellow terror.' It is believed that the emperor's 
rash words will render the cooperation of the 
powers difficult, if not impossible. England and America 
will not set out on any such bloodthirsty mission. 

R2682 : page 249 

When Christianity seizes the sword, it may perish by 

the sword. Poor old China, in its paralysis, needs 

pity. Something must be done in the way of chastisement 

and reorganization, but let not passion seize 

the sword and sweep it with a besom of destruction. 

Justice must be done, but let it be tempered with mercy, 

and let the Christian nations act in a Christian and 

not a pagan spirit." 

"NOT SO PAUL WON MACEDONIA." 



Rev. Dr. Halderman lifts his pen against the 
modern and erroneous methods of propagating the 
gospel of "peace on earth, good will toward men." 
He says:— 

"I am absolutely sure that in the future Russia 
will gain the supremacy. It is also true that, taught 
by Western genius, the Eastern hordes will yet break 
in awful avalanches on the West. The greed, the rapacity, 
the Christless, godless selfishness of European 
nations will get its reward. All the Christianity that 
has been wrought in China will be small, counting 
in the terrible final balance that shall be made against 
so-called Christian nations, who have poisoned China 
with opium and made them look upon Christians as 
only another division of rapacious foreign devils. 

"Considered morally, there are two sides to the 
question. These Chinese are fighting for their homes, 
their land, their institutions. They know the Christian 
nations are ready to rob and cheat them; and 
when they find the missionaries backed up by guns 
and swords and bloodthirsty Cossacks, by rude and 
godless soldiery, ready to kill and slay, they are only 
the more infuriated and determined in the opinion 
that any white man is a devil and needs to be slain. 

"It was not so that Paul won Macedonia and 
Rome. When he went to Rome he did not say, 'Down 
with Nero! Down with the powers that be!' On the 
contrary, he counseled Christians to recognize that 
here Nero's government, bad as it was, was permitted 
by God and that Christians should submit. 

"It was by the blood of martyrs our church won 
at first: not by the blood of their foes, but their own 
blood; not shed with arms in their hands, but shed 



at the stake or rack or block with prayer on their lips 
and love in their hearts." 



R2682 : page 249 

GOD'S PROVIDENTIAL CARE. 



BECAUSE two of the Lord's dear sheep of 
the Allegheny congregation recently lost their 
lives in an accident, while returning home from meeting 
and discussing the sermon, many of the brethren 
have been surprised. The inquiry arose, Do we not 
believe that God's consecrated people are specially 
the objects of his care? And if so, how was such an 
accident possible? 

These same questions are liable to arise in many 
minds, and hence we discuss the matter here for the 
benefit of all. 

We advise that each WATCH TOWER reader shall 
peruse afresh the tract entitled, "Calamities: Why 
God Permits Them." In it we discuss this topic at 
considerable length— from the standpoint of accidents 
to the world, and accidents to the Church. Now we 
will confine our remarks to the latter phase of the 
subject, suggesting:— 

(1) It is the Scripture teaching that every member 
of the Church must die somehow. This was the 
purport of our consecration— "even unto death." 
Each member of the "royal priesthood" became a 
member by consecrating,— presenting his body a living 
sacrifice as did our High Priest, Christ Jesus. And 
just as it was necessary for him to finish his course 

of dying in actual death, so will it be with each of us. 

(2) As the Master's death was not on a "flowery 
bed of ease," neither, probably, will be the death of 
any of his footstep-followers. And, if it be a choice 
between a bed of tedious sickness and a sudden death 
by "accident," many would choose the latter as the 
less painful— the quicker "change." 

(3) But it is not for us to choose on this more 
than upon other subjects. It is ours to accept with 
patience and full resignation whatever divine providence 
may permit; and this may vary. Under some 
circumstances it may be better that death come through 

a lingering illness in which God will be glorified, and 
the power of his truth to sustain shall be demonstrated 
in the patient, loving spirit of the dying sufferer. Or, 
at another time, the Lord may see best to permit death 
to come upon his dear ones suddenly— as a shock, as a 
calamity; to test the faith of some, and to awaken others 
from lethargy to vigilance,— from drowsiness to a fresh 
energy in running the race toward the mark for the 



great prize. The suddenness of the death of the two dear 

sheep of this Allegheny fold certainly has had a good 

effect upon many of the dear ones most intimate with 

them, and who knew them both as most saintly characters 

—ripe in the Christian graces, and fully ready 

and waiting for their "change." Undoubtedly many 

not so prepared have been awakened to fresh vigilance, 

and a renewal of consecration vows, and zeal in self-sacrifice, 

by this incident and the thought— Would I 

have been ready had the call thus suddenly come to me? 

(4) If to some the question arises,— But what 
about the little children needing parental care? The 
answer is, that these parents had already placed their 
children, as well as themselves, under divine care; and 
that care is still over the children: as able to care for 

R2682 : page 250 

them now, as for both parents and children before. 
This is a place for trust— for faith. Whoever cannot 
trust his children to divine care does not as yet properly 
know his Heavenly Father, and needs to give renewed 
diligence to this important study. Such an one has 
not yet attained the faith that would be acceptable to 
God, and without which it would be impossible to 
please God,— the faith of an "overcomer." 

(5) The shock connected with our dear Redeemer's 
death was no doubt a severe test of faith to 

some of the early disciples— it seemed as tho it proved 
that our Lord was in disfavor with the Father— "We 
did esteem him smitten of God, and afflicted." Yet 
to those who stumbled not in unbelief the shock of 
our Lord's cruel death became afterward a great lever 
of sympathy for good as they fully grasped the thought, 
"He was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement 
for sin which brings peace to us was upon him, and 

R2683 : page 250 

by his stripes we are healed." The apostles also suffered 
violent deaths and learned to regard such calamities 
not as marks of divine disfavor, but the reverse. 

(6) There can no "accident" happen to the 

Lord's consecrated ones, viewed from the divine standpoint. 
Not a hair of their heads can be injured aside 
from the Father's permission, and what God purposely 
permits cannot be properly considered an accident from 
his standpoint, nor from the standpoint of those who 
fully trust his providence and grace. We might even 
suppose a calamity in which ninety-nine children of 
this world and one of the Lord's consecrated met 
death together. It might be purely accidental so far as 
all but the Lord's one was concerned: but, to that one 
nothing could occur unforeseen of God— nothing that 
God could not have fully controlled, and which permitted 
must mean a blessing to his child who rightly 



and in faith accepts it,— "For we know that all things 
work together for good to them that love God." So 
it was in our Lord's case. As he testified, the Jews 
could not touch his life before because his "hour was 
not yet come." And when his hour did come, our 
Lord testified to Pilate,— "Thou couldest have no 
power at all against me, except it were given thee 
from above." The same is true of every member of 
the body of Christ, the royal priesthood. But this 
divine supervision does not watch for the unconsecrated 
of the world— except as they may be children 
of the saints, or others whose affairs and interests are 
interlinked with theirs. 

(7) Expecting as we do that the living members 
of this royal priest or "jewel" class will all be gathered 
to glory sometime before A.D. 1915 (and so far as we 
are now able to surmise by 1910), we are bound to suppose 
that a considerable number of these will, in some 
manner, die sudden or violent deaths. And happy 
for us will it be if this thought that our "change" 
may come at any moment, shall be so impressed as to 
assist us to be always ready to answer the summons 
with joy. 

Let us each permit this thought to arrange our 
business affairs, our family affairs, our relationship 
to the "brethren"— our relationship to the world in 
general— all our words, and thoughts, and doings; and 
thus it will bring us great blessing and assist in making 
us "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light." 

The Editor will not be surprised if his death 
should come suddenly; nor if by divine permission it 
should come in some unpleasant form that might, for 
the moment, seem to "jolt" and interrupt the "harvest 
work." Let all of the consecrated be on guard against 
such a wavering of doubt respecting the divine power 
to care for and carry on the work. If such a trial 
does come, it will no doubt in part, at least, be intended 
of the Lord to show that the work is his and not ours; 
and that he is perfectly able to carry on his work, 
using one or another of his children as his servants 
to set the food of his providing before the household 
of faith. 

All of our affairs in daily life are shaped to these 
ends: to the development and bringing forward of 
others ready to the Lord's hand, should he at any moment 
call for the transfer of our stewardship and bid 
us "Come up higher." And the same applies to the 
financial means and interests which the Lord has entrusted 
to our care. Let none be surprised, then, at 
anything which may happen to us, but, on the contrary, 
glorify God on our behalf, and press along the "narrow 
way" with redoubled energy. 



R2683 : page 250 



DOING, TO INHERIT ETERNAL LIFE. 

--LUKE 10:25-37. -SEPT. 9.- 

GOLDEN TEXT: "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself."— Lev. 19:18. 

PROBABLY while our Lord was preaching, and 

his audience seated about him, either upon 

the hillside or in a synagogue, a lawyer stood up, and 

thus politely intimated his desire to say a word in connection 

with the subject under discussion. The term 

"lawyer," amongst the Jews at that time, signified one 

versed in the Law of Moses, one claiming to be able to 

expound that Law, and to teach others its true meaning. 

Such persons today we term theologians. These 

were also termed scribes or learned men— irrespective 

of their religious convictions, some of them adhering 

to one view and some to another; some being Pharisees, 

R2683 : page 25 1 

others Sadducees, etc.,— each endeavoring to interpret 
the Law in harmony with the teachings of the sect to 
which he adhered. 

Luke does not give us the connections, but quite 
possibly this lawyer raised his question in connection 
with some discourse in which our Lord held forth that 
he himself was the Bread of Life, of which, if a man 
eat, he may live forever— or in which he had been representing 
himself as the Good Shepherd, who would 
give his life for the sheep; or as the Redeemer who had 
come, that God's people might have life, and that more 
abundantly— eternal life. This lawyer (or, as some 
today would say, this D.D.) was probably of the Sadducees, 
who denied a resurrection and any future or 
eternal life, interpreting the Law, which promises life 
upon certain conditions, as merely a decoy, intended to 
promote holiness amongst the Lord's people, but nevertheless 
a deception, since the holiest and most faithful 
of the race had not inherited eternal life, but had gone 
down into death, even as others. 

In this view of the matter this Jewish D.D. propounded 
to our Lord a question, hoping that the answer 
would give room for a discussion, in which he would 
be able to show himself the greater of the two teachers, 
and to prove to his pupils, at least (who were probably 
present with him), that his theories were correct— that 
no matter how faithfully the Law might be kept no 
reward of eternal life would be given, and that faith in 
Christ would be equally futile in this respect. The 
Evangelist says he asked the question, "tempting" the 
Lord, that is, to prove him, to draw him out, to expose 
the weakness of his argument: saying, "Master, what 
shall I do to inherit eternal life?" You recognize me 



as a scribe, a doctor of the Law, a teacher; as one, 
therefore, who is living a godly and upright life, so far, 
at least, as his neighbors and pupils may be able to 
discern. Looking back I see that the holiest and best 
of our nation (the holiest nation in the world, and the 
only one recognized of God) have not inherited eternal 
life. I see that, on the contrary, they have died as 
other men; I see that for some cause (whether it be the 
Lord's failure to fulfil his promise, or man's failure to 
comply with the conditions) all have died, none having 
attained eternal life. Tell me now, what shall I 
do that I may not share the same fate of death— that I 
may live everlastingly? 

Our Lord answered the question with great directness, 
at the same time signifying his unquestioning 
faith in the promises of God, that whatever God had 
promised he would surely fulfil— implying, therefore, 
that if he failed to obtain eternal life it would be his 
own fault, and not the fault of God. Our Lord practically 
said, I stand by the Scriptural record: you are 
versed in the Law; quote, as you understand it, the 
teachings of the Law on this subject. 

The answer shows that this Doctor of the Law was 
well versed, for he quoted correctly the most direct 
statement on the subject to be found in the Law. Our 
Lord's reply was equally to the point: "Thou hast 
answered right; this do and thou shalt live"— I confirm 
the Law; I uphold it; I vouch for its truthfulness; 
none who keep that Law can possibly die. The difficulty 
with all Jews who have died has been, that they did 
not fulfil that Law requirement toward God and man. 

The Doctor of the Law was trapped. He had 
hoped to entangle Jesus in a discussion, and had himself 
become entangled; for the great Teacher had pointed 
out that the fault was not in God— that God was not 
unfaithful to his agreement under the Law; that the 
fault lay with the people. And this included the lawyer 
as well as the remainder of the race; and that he 
so understood it is implied in the statement, "He, desiring 
to justify himself, said, And who is my neighbor?" 
It was very shrewd of the lawyer to avoid discussing 
the first commandment, respecting the love for 
God with all the heart, mind, soul and strength; because 
no one can thoroughly judge another in respect 
to this feature of the Law; only God and each individual 
heart knows absolutely whether God is loved with 
every talent, every power of heart, of mind and of body. 
But others can judge to some extent respecting obedience 
to the second commandment: "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself." The lawyer felt that he could 
safely leave the first proposition and claim that none 
could judge his heart, provided he could "justify himself" 
in respect to the second proposition, his dealing 
with his neighbor. Hence it is that he brought up 
this point, saying, "But who is my neighbor?" 

There was a difference of opinion amongst the most 



learned Jews on this subject of who is the neighbor 
meant in the Law,— some claiming that it meant all 
Jews, and Jews only. Others claimed that the word 
"neighbor" would mean only those Jews who lived holy 
lives. Thus the lawyer practically said, I shall be 
obliged to yield my contention and acknowledge you 
superior to myself as a teacher, unless we can get into 
a contention on this subject of who is the neighbor. In 
that event I shall at least be able to bring a strong argument 
that will appeal to all the hearers. But when 
the great Teacher had, in parable form, explained 
the true meaning of the word neighbor, the lawyer 
found himself without an argument. 

Some have supposed that our Lord meant that this 
Doctor of the Law and others who heard him should understand 
that the Samaritan of the parable, by doing a 
kind and neighborly act, won for himself the inheritance 
of eternal life, and that our Lord meant further to teach 
that the lawyer and all of his hearers might inherit 
eternal life if they would go and do likewise— do as the 

R2684 : page 252 

Samaritan did— do good, help their neighbors. This 
view is a serious error. In the first place, we do 
not know that any Samaritan ever did just such an act 
of kindness. It was merely a parable, a suggestion: 
Suppose that such conditions existed, and suppose that 
a Samaritan had done such an act, would he not be a 
good "neighbor"? The reward of eternal life was not 
offered on condition of being a good neighbor merely. 
This was one of the conditions (the one the lawyer 
questioned), but it was quite secondary to the main 
proposition— Thou shalt love the Lord with every power 
and talent of mind and body. The lesson which the 
lawyer and every other Jew needed to learn was that 
no imperfect man could possibly fulfil that requirement. 
All so learning that "There is none righteous, 
no, not one" (Rom. 3: 10), would be prepared to look 
for the promised Messiah as, first of all, their sin-bearer, 
to justify them and to discipline them and make them 
perfect and able to obey the Law. 

Our Lord in the parable represents a priest, a Levite, 
and a Samaritan, in order to give force to the matter. 
The priest was specially consecrated to God, the Levite 
also was consecrated (and most of the Doctors of the 
Law were Levites), while the Samaritans were outcasts, 
without God and having no hope in the world, aliens 
and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel. The 
Samaritans, altho they lived in a part of the land of 
Israel, shared none of Israel's promises; but, as our 
Lord testified, "Ye worship ye know not what: we 
[Jews] know what we worship; for salvation is of the 
Jews." The Samaritan, therefore, was introduced into 
the parable to make a strong contrast before the minds 
of the hearers, and to say, A neighbor is one who does 



a neighborly act, however high or however low he may 
be in the scale of intelligence or dignity or divine favor. 

What our Lord wished to prove to the lawyer and 
to all hearers was, that the Law was just and holy and 
good, and that any Jew complying with its conditions 
would inherit its promise— eternal life. He wished 
all of his hearers to realize, therefore, that the fact that 
neither they nor their fathers inherited eternal life 
proved, not that the Law was imperfect, but that they 
were imperfect, sold under sin, and unable, therefore, 
to comply with the just demands of the Law. It was 
difficult for the Jew to learn this great lesson; viz., that 
he could not keep the perfect Law of God, and hence 
that he needed a Savior, a Redeemer, who would keep 
the Law for him, and thus justify him before God, and 
who would then grant him eternal life as a gift, as a 
favor— not of the Law, but of grace. 

In harmony with this, the Apostle assures us who 
trust in the sacrifice for sins which Jesus gave, and who 
have entered into New Covenant relationship with God 
through him, that "the righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled in us— the true sense, meaning, purport of the 
Law being in our hearts, God accepts this as instead 
of absolute fulfilment of the letter of the Law. The 
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus compensating for all our imperfections, 
for all differences between the actual demands 
of the Law and our efforts to conform our lives 
thereunto, we, walking not after the flesh but after the 
spirit, are reckoned as no longer fleshly beings but new 
creatures. 

THE GOOD SAMARITAN. 



Altho this parable of the good Samaritan was not 
given to illustrate by what good works the lawyer, or 
any other man, Jew or Gentile, might attain eternal 
life, but, on the contrary, was given merely to head off 
the argument of the lawyer, and to leave him without 
excuse, it nevertheless contains a rich lesson, which 
has brought a blessing to many. Not only has it made 
clear to many of the Lord's dear children the course of 
conduct pleasing in the Father's sight, viz., that of 
generosity, love, benevolence, etc., but it has also brought 
blessing to many who are not the Lord's children, in 
that they became recipients of mercies, favors and kindnesses 
in adversity which, otherwise, they might never 
have known. 

The road leading from Jerusalem to Jericho has a 
steep downward grade through a rocky country, which 
abounds in caverns, the hiding places of highway robbers. 
It has always been a dangerous road, and on it 
the traveler is not entirely safe to this day, unless under 
some kind of a protective guard. This feature of 
the parable was, therefore, in strict accordance with 



the conditions of the time; so was the fact of the priest 

and the Levite passing, for Jericho was one of the appointed 

cities of the priests and Levites, and it is estimated 

that twelve thousand of them resided there 

then. These, with other priests and Levites from other 

parts, took their turns in the service at the Temple in Jerusalem, 

and, consequently, were frequently on this road. 

Our Lord's parable seems to imply that the religion 
of the Jews, instead of bringing them nearer and nearer 
to the spirit of the Law, was really, by reason of the 
formalities and ceremonies and pride connected with it, 
tending to separate them further and further from the 
condition of heart which would be acceptable to God. 
The priest, most fully consecrated to the service of God 
in the Temple, is represented as having least interest 
in the brother in distress. He passed by on the other 
side (of the ravine), not counting the circumstance 
worthy of attention; reflecting, no doubt, with a self-righteous 
feeling respecting the honor of his own position 
as a servant of God, and unwilling to run the 
risk of ritual contamination. The Levite, also consecrated 
to God and his service, but not so high in office 

R2684 : page 253 

and privilege, was more disposed to consider the poor 
brother, and to render a helping hand. He went so 
far as to stand and look at the sufferer, and to think 
over how much trouble would be involved in assisting 
him, and how much risk he himself might run in so 
doing (altho we are inclined to believe that the priests 
and Levites were, on account of their office, generally 
exempted from molestation by the robbers). 

Then our Lord chose, as the hero of his parable, 
a despised Samaritan, unrecognized by God and disowned 
by his favored people. This heightens the force 
of the picture, by suggesting the thought that one who 
had never learned at all respecting the true God and 
his will, one who had never been offered eternal life on 
the terms of obedience to that Law, might nevertheless 
exercise so much of brotherly kindness and sympathy 
as to lend a helping hand to a neighbor in distress. 

And it is still true that many who, by reason of 
their better knowledge of God, through his Word and 
plan, should be possessed of a larger measure of his 
love and grace, are instead more deficient in these qualities 
than some who have been less highly favored. It 
might indeed be that some who are strangers to the 
covenants and promises of God as yet, possess, by reason 
of being well born, a large measure of natural generosity, 
benevolence, kindness, sympathy, and might be 
good Samaritans by nature, rather than by grace; and 
it may also be true that some who have been begotten 
again to the new life and to the new hopes may naturally 
have less of this good Samaritan element of kindness 
and generosity, because low born according to the flesh— 



born with a predominance of selfish proclivities. However, 

such an one, coming under "the law of the spirit 

of life in Christ Jesus," will soon be taught in Christ's 

school, that love is the fulfilling of the Law; and if he 

be an obedient pupil he will gradually attain to a better 

appreciation of the heavenly Father, and in heart, in 

spirit, will learn to love him with all his mind, with 

all his being, with all his strength. And so surely as 

this condition obtains, and in proportion as the love of 

God is shed abroad in our hearts, it will enlarge them 

also toward our fellow-creatures, so that every "new 

creature" must at heart come into such a degree of fulness 

of love toward God and toward his fellows as would 

make him not only an obedient and self-sacrificing son 

of God, but also a good Samaritan, a kind friend, a 

loving father and husband, a generous neighbor to all 

with whom he stands related. He will be a living exemplification 

of the Apostle's injunction,— doing good 

unto all men as he has opportunity, especially to the 

household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 



R2685 : page 253 

"BEWARE OF COVETOUSNESS." 

-LUKE 12:13-23.-SEPT. 16.- 

"What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the 
whole world and lose his own soul?"— Mark 8:36. 

WHILE JESUS was preaching on spiritual themes 

he was interrupted by one of the audience, 

whose heart was filled with anxiety respecting temporal 

matters, esteeming that he was being wrongly dealt 

with by his brother in the division of the parental estate; 

and perhaps finding that through some technicality 

he could not obtain what he considered to be his 

just rights under Jewish laws, he appealed to the great 

Teacher to use his influence on his behalf— to speak to 

his brother— to tell his brother that he ought to deal generously, 

and perhaps to threaten him if he failed so to do. 

How many there are who see just this much and 
no more in the teachings of Christ— a channel through 
which to serve their own interests; a means of securing 
justice to themselves. How many are ready to quote 
our Lord's precepts when it suits their convenience so 
to do, but who otherwise and at other times manifest 
little interest in them, and in the principles of righteousness 
which they inculcate! Persons in this attitude of 
heart are rarely able to grasp or enjoy the spiritual 
truths which our Lord enunciated, just as the young 
man in the lesson was failing utterly to profit by our 
Lord's spiritual teaching, because his entire thought 
was preoccupied with his own personal, selfish plans and 



schemes and views— however just they might have been. 

Our Lord flatly refused to interfere in the manner 
suggested, saying, "Who made me a judge or an arbiter 
over you?" Thus he illustrated the general teaching 
of the Scriptures, "Render to Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's," and 
again, "If any man sue thee at the law, and take away 
thy coat, refuse not even if he take similarly thy cloak 
also"— do not ask or expect anything beyond what is 
granted by the civil laws of the land in which you live. 
"Be subject to the powers that be; for the powers that 
be are ordained [permitted] of God." Our Lord's Kingdom, 
long promised, and which eventually shall be 
"the desire of all nations," had not then come, and still 
has not been set up. We still pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
The Lord's people are to recognize this fact, and not to 
expect absolute righteousness and justice until present 
conditions cease, with the close of this dispensation,— 
of which the Scriptures tell us Satan is the prince or 
ruler. Instead of expecting justice in full measure 
now, the Lord's people should rather be surprised that 
there is so large a measure of justice obtainable in many 
parts of the world. 

R2653 : page 254 

As our Lord was not willing to impose himself as 
a judge or an arbitrator in his day, so his followers now 
should not seek to interfere in secular affairs. The case 
would have been different had the two brothers come 
together to our Lord, and, indicating that they wished 
to do right, had requested his judgment of what would 
be the right course. In that event undoubtedly our 
Lord would have favored them with his view of the 
question and the reasons for it. 

It would be an excellent thing for all of the Lord's 
footstep-followers to learn well this lesson of non-interference 
in secular matters— the lesson, that those who 
speak as the oracles of God should speak respecting 
spiritual matters, to the spiritual class and not to the 
worldly— to them that have ears to hear, and not to the 
blind and deaf. This, of course, would not mean that 
the Lord's people should not give any advice, but merely 
that they should not give advice nor otherwise interfere 
outside the laws, customs and usages of the country in 
which they reside. The young man in the narrative 
undoubtedly had appealed to his brother and to the 
Jewish authorities for the relief which he thought he 
ought to have; and similarly it is proper for a Christian 
to appeal to the person immediately interested for what 
he considers to be just rights in the matter in dispute. 
He may appeal also to the laws of the land in which 
he resides; but if he fails in this he should content 
himself with his condition and wait patiently for the 
Lord's Kingdom and its righteous retribution. 



This principle, put into practice by Christian missionaries 
in China, would, we believe, have led to very 
different conditions than those which now obtain there. 
But our Lord's example and various injunctions along 
this line have been very generally ignored, and, to the 
contrary, it has been the custom of missionaries, who 
have gone to China and other lands, to ignore the laws 
of those lands and "the powers that be" there, which 
God's ordinance has permitted. They have attempted 
to settle all kinds of disputes; interfering in a manner 
which the Master, in this lesson, disapproved of. Not 
only so, but they have sought and invoked, publicly 
and privately, the interference of various so-called Christian 
governments of the world on their behalf, and in 
violation of the laws of "the powers that be" in those 
countries. It is as a result of this wrong line of conduct 
that the good of Christianity, its moral and civilizing 
influences, are specially hated and feared,— as political 
interferences, aimed at the destruction of the laws and 
institutions which to those people appear to be wise 
and good; and which undoubtedly are adapted to the 
present intellectual and moral conditions of the masses 
of their people. 

We cannot too strongly condemn, as contrary to 
the Master's teachings, modern methods of missionary 
effort— backed by cannon, warships and soldiers. It 
seems to us wholly contrary to the method employed 
by our Lord and the apostles, and advocated by them. 
It is much more in harmony with the methods adopted 
during the dark ages, by Papacy, and by Mohammedanism. 
Early Protestant missions seem to us to have 
been along much more reasonable and proper lines. The 
missionary, in giving himself to that work, understood 
and agreed that, figuratively speaking, he took his life in 
his hands; he had already sacrificed his life before starting. 
Neither he nor those who sent him forth thought 
of appealing to the government to avenge his death, 
either with many lives for the one life, or with large 
sums of money, nor with large concessions of land, or 
with large privileges of commerce. He went as a representative 
of the meek and lowly Jesus, as a "living 
sacrifice," as the apostles in early times went forth, 
without backing, ecclesiastical or civil. Like the apostles, 
they were privileged to appeal to all the laws and 
moral instincts of the people in whose midst they were 
living, and for whose good they were laying down their 
lives; but more than this they did not do, and were 
not authorized to do by anything in the Scriptures. 

It is the present wrong system of compassing sea 
and land to make proselytes, with battleships, cannon 
and soldiers, that is responsible for the loss of thousands 
of lives and awful misery. Were the missionary question 
today left upon the same footing that it occupied 



in the days of the apostles, and again at the beginning 
of this century, it would probably be less pretentious 
in appearance, but in reality probably would have found 
just as many of the "elect" as the present method; and 
would have left undisturbed questions that already have 
caused much trouble, and which in the near future will 
cause more. It would have left millions of the poor 
heathen in a much more contented frame of mind than 
at present— would have left them much more susceptible 
to the influences of the true Gospel, when, by and by, 
the great missionary work which God has planned will 
begin in earnest, under the administration of the Kingdom 
of Heaven, with Christ and his elect Church, the 
kings and priests, to rule and bless with infinite power 
and wisdom and love. 



But while refusing to interfere with the matter, the 
Lord made use of the intrusion to point a lesson on the 
subject of covetousness— a lesson which would be of 
benefit to both of the brothers, if they were present, and 
a lesson, indeed, which could not fail to be of profit to 
all of his hearers. The exhortation to take heed of 
covetousness would apply to the one who had sought 
our Lord's interference. Possibly he had been asking 
something outside of his rights and outside of his father's 
will and intent— coveting what his father had really 
intended should go to his brother. Or, if he were asking 
only what was reasonably his due, our Lord's words 
would be a consolation to him, as showing that whether 
or not he got all of his rights in the present life would 
be a comparatively unimportant matter— unimportant 
as compared to his having such experiences as would 
be favorable to his eternal life, and rightly using those 
experiences. Our Lord's words would also be a lesson 
to the other brother, if he were seeking to defraud and 
to take unjustly what belonged to his brother— or even 
if he were covetously ungenerous in construing his 
brother's rights. Indeed, everyone who will carefully 

R2685 : page 255 

consider the meaning of our Lord's parable in illustration 
of this subject of covetousness will draw from it a 
valuable, a profitable lesson. 

THE RICH CHURL. 

In this parable it is not stated that the rich man 
had obtained his wealth by any unlawful means. He 
is not charged with having defrauded his brother or his 
neighbor. The record merely is that he had temporal 
blessings in abundance, and that by natural increase 
he was very wealthy; and the point of the lesson turns 
upon his question to himself, What shall I do with 



these possessions? 

The right attitude of mind, "the spirit of a sound 
mind," would have answered this question somewhat 
after this manner: These bounties of divine providence 
are a trust, and I am a steward, a trustee; my position 
will permit me to be a source of great blessing to others 

R2686 : page 255 

of my fellow-creatures not so bountifully supplied; in 

fact, I have in my hand the power to make many fellow-creatures 

comfortable and happy; and in discharging 

this stewardship in this proper manner I shall have 

much greater pleasure than if I endeavored selfishly to 

use all these bounties upon myself, or to store them up 

for my own use in the future. 

Such an unselfish, generous course would not only 
have had divine approval, and thus have constituted 
"true riches" "laid up in heaven," but, additionally, 
it would have been the most direct road to happiness 
for the already favored individual himself. It is a true 
proverb, "There is that scattereth and yet increaseth; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, and 
it tendeth to poverty." So, many have found that 
hoarding of earthly wealth leads to poverty of heart, to 
a meanness of disposition, which is not enjoyed by the 
individual himself, and which is strongly reprobated 
by him with whom rests our eternal interests, our everlasting 
blessing and riches. On the contrary, he who 
uses, in harmony with his best judgment, the earthly 
wealth committed to his care, thereby purchases to 
himself a rich reward of approbation on the part of all 
with whom he has to do; and, through the Lord's gracious 
arrangement in Christ, this cultivation of the 
spirit of love becomes a most important factor in respect 
to his attainment of everlasting joy and blessing. 

As illustrating the uncertainty of such selfish calculations, 
our Lord might have made the parable to 
close by showing the rich man as losing all of his possessions 
and being reduced to beggary through some 
misfortune, such as war or fire; or he might have shown 
him the victim of a loathsome disease, in which even 
his riches could not purchase attendance, so that thus 
he might suffer want in the midst of plenty. But he 
chose to close the parable by merely representing the 
rich man as dying suddenly— ceasing to have and to 
hold and greedily enjoy his selfish hoardings. "Soul, 
take thine ease," etc., is merely another way of saying 
—Self, take thine ease, eat, drink, etc. 

Our Lord, to enforce the lesson, then raises the question, 
Whose, then, shall these things be? They could no 
longer be enjoyed by the accumulator, whoever might 
get them; he would be poor indeed, whoever might 
enjoy them; for these were all that he had; he had 
given up thought and effort and every talent to money-making 
and to attempted selfish enjoyments, and had 



not been rich toward God,— had not been rich in good 
works,— had not laid up treasure in heaven. His life 
had been a failure; he would enter the next life a pauper, 
as respects mental and moral development in good 
qualities. He would enter it with a load of selfishness, 
with which to some extent he had been born, but to 
which he had added greatly by a life of selfishness. 
And his load of selfishness will, in that future life, for 
a time handicap his efforts toward true nobility, should 
he then make efforts toward perfection under the gracious 
terms of the Millennial Kingdom. 

Tho our Lord in the parable represents the covetous 
person as succeeding in accumulating riches, yet, 
as a matter of fact, the majority of covetous people never 
so succeed; and their selfishness is not less reprehensible 
from the fact that it fails of success. The thought 
rather is that if a covetous person who succeeds makes 
a miserable failure of life, how much worse would be 
the failure of the covetous person who gains nothing, 
either in the present life or in that which is to come! 

Our Lord, turning to his disciples at this juncture, 
gave a special lesson applicable to them only, and not 
to the multitude. Literally translated this message is: 
Be not anxious as respects your earthly life, its food and 
its clothing. Think rather of the life which is to come; 
remember that this present condition is, from the divine 
standpoint, a death condition. Consider that in you 
who believe, the new, the eternal life, has already begun, 
and that if you will faithfully continue under present 
conditions in living for this new life, and not after 
the flesh, it will be perfected in the First Resurrection. 
Think more of your bodies than of the raiment which 
covers them; think more of your life than of the natural 
food by which it is at present sustained. God is able 
and willing to give perfect life and perfect bodies and 
perfect conditions to those who believe in me, who walk 
in my footsteps and meet my approval. The reason 
why you need not take anxious thought for these temporal 
things, for which the world takes anxious thought 
(and necessarily so), is this: you have come into harmony 
with God, and have been adopted into his family; 
believing in me, you have been granted "liberty 
to become sons of God." (John 1:12.) As sons of 
God, with the new life begun in you, you are to 
realize that everything of the present life is quite unworthy 
to be compared with the future and eternal 
interests. You are to remember that, having consecrated 
yourselves to the Father's will in becoming my 
disciples, you have given up every interest and matter 
to his superior wisdom. Be content, therefore; be without 
anxiety, knowing that so long as you abide in me, 
and so long as you are walking in my footsteps, your 
Heavenly Father knoweth what things you have need 
of, even before you ask him, and is both able and willing 
to give what is best. 

Therefore, if in divine providence you receive poverty 



as your unavoidable portion, accept it as best for 
you, according to divine wisdom; remembering that it 
is our Redeemer who is guarding our future and eternal 
interests, and permitting such experiences in this 
present life as will be most beneficial to us, and as will 
lead most directly to eternal riches and favors, and that 
in greatest measure. 



page 256 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel prompted to assure 
you that my interest in the glad tidings of great 
joy is increasing. I assure you this— not that I believe 
you think otherwise concerning me, but it is a 
pleasure for me to tell you in words what I am not able 
always to prove in deeds. I rejoice that in the present 
great harvest our Lord uses all willing witnesses of the 
truth in some capacity: no one need be discouraged, 
for, "Those members of the body which seem to be 
more feeble are necessary." 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER is a very welcome visitor to 
our home. While meditating on two discourses in July 
15 TOWER, viz., "The Ministry of Comfort" and "Forgive 
Us our Debts," I rejoiced in spirit that you so 
clearly defined the divine disposition for those striving 
to attain it, since it is the heavenly Father's desire that 
we should become copies of his dear Son. 

The subject of Justice, alluded to in "Forgive us 
our Debts," used to perplex me, but about two years 
ago I was much enlightened by an explanation on the 
exercise of the above attribute, that I read in a WATCH 
TOWER. Among other things you wrote, "God did not 
enact the penalty of sin from sinners, but of a perfect 
man, created in the image of God, whose sin was wilful. 
If we were perfect ourselves and dealing with others 
who were likewise perfect, a law of Justice and demands 
of Justice would be in order. Since we are transgressors 
ourselves, and objects of divine grace, and since our 
fellow-creatures are in the same pitiable plight, through 
the Adamic fall, there is no room for us to take our 
stand upon Justice." In another place I noted, "While 
always endeavoring to be just we should not demand 
justice from others but act along the line of love and 
compassion." This view of righteous judgment (John 7:24) 
appealed to my heart and cleared away my 
difficulty. 

I am so thankful for this Scriptural instruction and 
that I have learned not to consider the brethren by 
daily conduct, or rather by the imperfections of the 
earthen vessel. Doubtless all are striving to do the 
best they can, but by the ruling thought or controlling 
motive of their lives. I believe all those who are guided 



by righteous principles to the best of their ability and 
earnestly endeavoring to spread the glad tidings of the 
Kingdom have God's loving approval. How tender, 
patient and long-suffering our Father is! If there is any 
sign of fruit on the branches the great husbandman 
prunes and prunes and does not cut off entirely: only 
dead branches are severed from the vine. Oh the love 
and mercy of our God! Praise be to his holy name 
forever! 

My love for God, for the Church and for humanity 
increases constantly, but I am slow about cultivating 
the fruits of the spirit. Please pray for me, dear 
Brother Russell, that I may bloom in this direction. I 
long for perfection of character. 

Accept this letter as a little token of appreciation 
and much Christian love for yourself and all dear harvest 
workers in the Bible House. 

AMELIA E. POWER,--Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I beg you not to think 
me less appreciative if I do not correspond as frequently 
as others. Indeed, I have at times reluctantly refrained 
from writing you, having in mind your many thousand 
correspondents, and your work to "prepare the table" 
and give "meat in due season," and "declare what he 
seeth." Assuring you that wife and I try to do our part 
--watch in the WATCH TOWER, "eat and drink" at the 
Lord's table (Isa. 21:5); and thanking you for your 
share in setting forth this meat and drink, we also 
thank our heavenly Father, the giver of all good— especially 
for that feature of his plan which you have 
been chosen to carry out. We make mention of you 
daily before the throne of grace. 

I am happy to report that my efforts, together with 
yours, have not been in vain in this place. Here are 
some of the "more noble" who are receiving the truth 
with all readiness of mind, searching the Scriptures 
daily to see if these things be so. One sister who was 
quite prominent in the Salvation Army notified the 
officers of this sect that she could no longer cooperate 
with them, and to this end gave a banquet, inviting 
the officers to it (one Ensign, one Captain and one 
Lieutenant), at which she took occasion to explain 
why she withdrew, assuring them that she was not 
joining another sect, neither leaving God nor Christ nor 
the "brethren." Then she offered me the opportunity 
of speaking and reading out of the Word of God. 

I have found two who purchased DAWNS a few years 
ago but did not know what they contained. They have 
now been aroused to read them. I go over the field 
once in a while, to see how they all get along with their 
reading and find out where the wheat is, seeking to 
ripen it, and will, when they can appreciate it, call 
their attention to the TOWER. I will try ere long to 



gather the interested ones to a series of chart talks 
and to get acquainted, and then will suggest a DAWN 
Circle. 

I often think in solitude of the favor shown me, 
that I have been called to a share in the sufferings of 
Christ, and to the hope of sharing with him in glory. 
He only knows how dearly I love the cause, and how 
humble it makes me when I think of the kindness you 
have shown me, first in bringing me onward toward 
maturity in the knowledge of Him who hath called me 
out of darkness into his marvelous light, and then in 
permitting me to share with yourself in the harvest 
work as a co-reaper and fellow-servant, going from 
house to house, calling attention to that wonderful 
book, MILLENNIAL DAWN. I highly esteem this service 
with you in the gospel as a son with his father (Phil. 2:22), 
and assure you that I am from henceforth fully 
and unreservedly in the service of the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. I invite your suggestions at 
any time, for while I am a colporteur, by the grace of 
God, I am, by the same grace, a "volunteer," so that 
if you think best to "shell the forts" first, here I am, 
or if to skirmish on the borders from house to house, 
I will so continue. At any rate send me some "volunteer 
ammunition." "Remember me with thee... 
and make mention of me unto Jehovah." 

With due respect and love to the TOWER helpers, 
I am yours with much Christian love and gratitude, 
CHARLES J. PETERSON,-Kansas. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. SEPTEMBER 1, 1900. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 259 

The Chicago Love Feast " 

Southern Presbyterians Disappointed " 

Poem: Gather All Thy Children Home 260 

"Do Ye Even So to Them" 261 

Is the Golden Rule Incumbent? 262 

Divine Strength Perfected in 

Human Weakness 263 

Watching and Its Reward 268 

"Be Ye Doers of the Word" 271 

A View of "Bible House" 272 

Two Conventions 258 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



TRACT No. 50 is the German translation of No. 49, "Which 
Is The True Gospel?" Copies have been sent to our entire list, 
as usual. You have German friends or neighbors to whom 
these may be acceptable. Order additional copies as desired. 



SARATOGA SPRINGS, NY. CONVENTION--SEPT. 4 AND 5. 

Friends of the truth residing in the vicinity of Saratoga 
Springs, N.Y., advise us that a Floral Fete will be held 
there Sept. 3-6, which will have very low rates of railroad fare 
from all points in New York and New England. They request 
a gathering of the friends of that vicinity,— and as many others 
as can conveniently meet with them on Sept. 4 and 5. The 
Editor has promised to attend on the 4th, and if possible to remain 
also the 5th. Purchase Excursion tickets to Floral Fete. 

Comfortable accommodations can be secured at one dollar a 
day including board. Notify the WATCH TOWER office at once 
by postal card, when you will arrive, by what road, and how 
many will be of your party. On arrival go at once to the New 
Prohibition Hall, No. 464-1/2 Broadway.— But first look out for 
the Reception Committee at the door of the "Ladies' Waiting 
Room," displaying a copy of the WATCH TOWER. 



DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION-SEPT. 29,30, OCT. 1. 

We merely remind the friends of Texas and vicinity of the 
date as above, reserving particulars for next issue. 



CONVENTION OPPORTUNITIES FOR SYMBOLIC BAPTISM. 

This is a feature in all conventions. Robes, towels, etc., 
are supplied, and the use of baptistry secured. 



"HE THAT HATH NO MONEY-COME YE!" 

At all Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society Conventions provision 
is made for the free entertainment of the Lord's "brethren" 
able to attend, but unable to pay for hotel accommodations. 
In notifying us of your coming, mention if the Lord's providence 
has made it expedient for you to accept the free hospitality. 



R2686 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE CHICAGO LOVE FEAST. 



A LOVE FEAST from beginning to end! This 
was the public expression of many, and 
apparently the sentiment of all in attendance. Our 
Lord surely poured us out a grand spiritual blessing 
and refreshment. Surely if any went away empty it 
was in part or in whole his own fault. None of our 
conventions ever exhibited more love for the Lord and 
his truth and his brethren. Indeed each succeeding 
one seems just a little better than its predecessors, 
however grand they were. And may we not expect 
this, as we approach nearer and nearer in our journey 
toward "The General Assembly and Church of the 
First-borns?" It would be but reasonable that the 
ripening of the hearts of a larger number should be 
more and more manifest in the exhibited fruits of 
the spirit. 
The Chicago Convention was announced as a— 

CONVENTION OF BELIEVERS IN THE ATONEMENT 
THROUGH 

"THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF CHRIST,"-"A RANSOM FOR ALL, 
AND IN HIS 
MILLENNIAL KINGDOM. 

It lasted for three days, continuously— except 
for intermissions for food and rest— and was followed 
by a colporteurs' session in the interest of those already 
in that service, or about to enter it. 

The attendance was the best we have ever had;— 
three important items contributing: (1) Chicago's 
large population and the goodly number already interested 
in the truth there. (2) The city's central 
location. (3) The unusually low rates of railroad 
fare granted from every direction and over all roads. 
The number in attendance was estimated at between 
500 and 600, and of these about 300 were from outside 
Chicago. 

We had a grand time! The Lord be praised! 
May the blessing so abundantly poured out not only 
be lasting in its effect upon those who received it, but 
may it overflow from them upon the brethren at their 
various homes, and thus become wide-spread. We 
know well that we had the loving thoughts and earnest 
prayers of many thousands not privileged to meet 
with us. Eighty-two symbolized their consecration 
to death by water baptism (46 brothers, 36 sisters). 
It was a grand sight, such as is seldom witnessed on 
earth. We may be sure that our Lord, the great Chief 
Reaper, and the saints who have already joined him 
"beyond the vail," and also our guardian angels who 
continually minister unto those who shall be heirs of 
salvation, looked upon that scene with deep interest, as 
did some three hundred brethren in the flesh who 
were witnesses. 

SOUTHERN PRESBYTERIANS TROUBLED. 



The split between Northern and Southern Presbyterians 
during the Civil war made of them practically 
two distinct bodies or denominations. The 
troubles and suggestions respecting the Confession 
of Faith have all been amongst the Northern brethren, 
until lately. However, at the last "General Assembly 
of the Presbyterian Church (South)" a petition 
was received from the Presbytery of Brazos, Texas, requesting 
that the Assembly "modify the statements 
of the Confession regarding the eternal damnation of 
non-elect infants." 

The resolution was strangled in committee which 
reported adversely to any discussion of the Confession, 
fearing no doubt that the question once opened never 
would close. The representatives of the Brazos Presbytery 
asked an amendment to the Confession reading 
thus:— "All dying in infancy are elect infants, and 

R2687 : page 260 

are regenerated," etc., Chapter 10, paragraph 3. 

Note now the shrewd but dishonest treatment of 
that petition (formulated by the committee and adopted 
by the Assembly) in these words,— "We recommend 
that the prayer of the overture be declined, inasmuch 
as the present language of the Confession cannot, by 
any fair interpretation, be construed as teaching that 
any of those who die in infancy are lost." 

Let us read over this paragraph 3, Chapter 10, of 
the Confession and see whether or not the Brazos 
brethren and humanity in general have mis-read it. 
Here it is: "Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated, 
and saved by Christ through the Spirit, 
who worketh when, and where, and how he pleaseth. 
So also are all other elect persons who are incapable of 
being outwardly called by the ministry of the Word." 

If the General Assembly were sincere in averring 
that in their judgment these words do not teach that 
there are non-elect infants who dying in infancy are 
lost, then it follows that these brethren have totally 
repudiated the doctrine of election taught in other 
paragraphs of their Confession of Faith. For if all 
infants are elect, or if the election does not take place 
until after the period of infancy, then they must deny 
all that Calvinism stands for in the way of Predestination 
and Foreordination. Otherwise they would be 
forced to the position that only elect persons die in 
infancy and hence must assume that God specially 
intervenes to prevent the non-elect from dying in 
infancy, specially supervising the deaths of the 
millions of infants dying annually from infanticide, 
lack of care, etc. 

But to think of the General Assembly taking any 



of the above positions would be altogether unreasonable, 

and hence we are unwillingly forced to think of 

their resolution as lacking in honesty, lacking in truthfulness, 

which they no doubt excused on the Jesuitical 

plea that— It is right to do wrong if thereby you can 

serve God and the Church. However, the Church is 

not served by this false statement, even if a sect is 

thereby held together a little longer. The true Church 

"whose names are written in heaven," and which 

will eventually include all the truly "elect" "little 

flock," is never benefited or served by error or falsehood; 

but, as our Lord declared, only by the truth— 

"Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth." 

Nor is God served or honored by such false representations 

of his Word and plan. 

Furthermore, the specification of "elect infants" 
implies that the framers of this Confession had in 
mind non-elect infants who die in infancy, whose fate 
they left to be implied by the intelligent reader, who, 
if he accepted this Westminster Confession as a whole, 
would believe in elect and non-elect adults, and coupling 
this with the specifications of the same Confession 
on predestination would conclude that every non-elect 
adult must at one time have been a non-elect infant, 
who dying in infancy would have died non-elect and 
unregenerated and unsaved by Christ through the 
spirit who worked not upon them at any time nor anywhere 
nor anyhow, because he pleased not so to do, 
they being non-elect. 

One would suppose that our dear Presbyterian 
friends, finding themselves in such inextricable confusion 
on this doctrine of election, and yet finding much 
on the subject in the Bible, would be ready, yes anxiously 
and hungrily waiting for the reasonable Bible-solution 
of the subject presented in Millennial Dawn. 
Yet comparatively few of them seem to be so. The 
only reasonable explanation is that the majority are 
not sufficiently honest with themselves and with each 
other, and with God and his Word. They do not 
sufficiently love the truth— error is preferred. They 
do not hunger and thirst after right. Hence also the 
comparatively few who are "sanctified through the 
truth"— the large number failing to make their calling 
and election sure, because unsanctified by reason 
of their false doctrines. 

THE "BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY. 



Friends of the cause naturally feel a deep interest 
in everything connected in any manner with the harvest 
work. We have frequently been urged to publish 
the Editor's picture either in the DAWNS or in these 
columns; but have as persistently refused. It is the 
truth rather than its servant that should be honored 



and proclaimed. There is too much disposition to 

credit truth to the preacher, forgetful that all truth is 

of God, who uses one or another servant in its proclamation 

as it may please him. 

However, when requested to publish a photo of 
our work-shop, the "Bible House," we could think of 
no reasonable objection, and hence it appears on the 
last page of this issue. The third floor is the chapel 
in which Sunday and other services are held. On the 
top floor, centre, is the Editor's study: his usual seat 
being near the window at the head of the spiral fire 
escape. 



R2688 : page 260 

GATHER ALL THY CHILDREN HOME. 



Heavenly Father, Holy One! 
May thy will in me be done; 
Make my heart submissive, meek, 
Let me ne'er mine own way seek! 
Loving Savior, I would be 
Ever more and more like thee, 
Free from pride and self-desire, 
Fervent with a holy fire. 

Blessed Lord, thy saints defend, 
Watching o'er them to the end; 
Day by day their faith increase, 
Keep them in thy perfect peace. 
Comfort, strengthen, guide and bless, 
Lead them through the wilderness; 
And when thy due time shall come, 
Gather all thy children home! — G.W.S. 



R2688 : page 261 

"DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM." 



"All things whatsoever ye would that men should 
do to you, do ye even so to them."— Matt. 7:12. 

WHATEVER THE TESTS we apply, Jesus and 
his teachings are seen to tower above all 
others. For instance, we are frequently told that the 
Golden Rule is found in the writings of Confucius as 
well as in the New Testament, and that this is a proof 
that Confucius was a teacher equal in rank with Jesus, 



and equally sent of God. And no doubt many of 
those who give this report do so in all honesty; for 
the fact is that many Christians have never seen the 
depth and scope of the Golden Rule given by Jesus, 
and misunderstand it to be the same as the maxim by 
Confucius, which much resembles it. There is a wide 
distinction, however, and in comparison the words of 
Confucius might be termed a brazen rule. His maxim 
is, "Do not do to others what you would not wish 
them to do to you." We repeat that this is as much 
as the majority of Christians have ever seen in the 
Golden Rule given by our Lord. 

We would be glad to see the maxim of Confucius 
received and acted upon throughout the whole world 
by every creature, and undoubtedly the result would 
be a great blessing to mankind— a great improvement 
over present conditions, in which almost everybody 
except the saints who seek to walk in the footsteps 
of the Lord are continually doing every day the very 
things which they would not wish their neighbors to 
do to them. But even tho so great a reformation could 
be brought about, it would still leave much to be desired; 
it would still leave the world far from the condition 
suggested by our Lord's prayer, "Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in heaven." For men 
might, through policy or for other reasons, deal justly 
with each other, refraining from the doing of such 
things as they would not wish done to them, and with 
all that their hearts might be very full of selfishness, 
meanness, covetousness, etc., and very far from the 
condition of love. 

But when we note the comprehensiveness of our 
Lord's Golden Rule, we find it is absolutely a love-rule; 
and that it leaves nothing to be desired: nothing could 
possibly be added to it; it is complete. It is not merely 
a negative law: "Thou shalt not" do an injury; it is 
a positive law: "Thou shalt" do good. Thou shalt 
do thy neighbor all the good, all the kindness, all the 
service, that thou wouldst have him do to thee. This 
law, which the Apostle calls "the law of liberty," the 
perfect law, this Golden Rule for life, has no parallel 
anywhere, in any writings, and could not possibly 
have a superior,— a grander sentiment could not possibly 
be expressed. But how few there are who rightly 
appreciate and love this rule, and use it daily in the 
measurement of their own conduct! As already noted, 
the majority, even of the best people in the world, 
the vast majority of Christians, fail to discern its 
lengths and its breadths, and consider it merely an 
injunction not to do injury to others. How few, then, 
joyfully and appreciatively grasp its sentiment, and 
seek from the heart to conform their lives thereto— 
none but the saints, none but the "elect," we may be 
sure, are thus in heart-harmony with the essence and 
spirit of their Heavenly Father's law of Love. 

There might be danger of some of the Lord's people 



using this rule amiss and to their injury, by being 

overgenerous toward others and not sufficiently careful 

of themselves; but such instances are very rare, 

because in our entire race the general result of the 

fall has been to crowd out love and benevolence, and 

to fill us with selfishness. So much is this the case 

that it has become a worldly proverb that "Self-preservation 

is the first rule of life;" that self is always 

to be number one, and to be cared for well and thoroughly 

before others are to be even considered. 

Even after we have been begotten of the holy 
spirit, as new creatures, after the transforming of our 
minds has begun, we all know from experience that 
the selfishness of the old nature is so deep-grained that 
it is likely to hold its own with us to the very end of 
life. We have, however, known of some who, in their 
desire to conform themselves fully to the Lord's will, 
have taken an extreme view of this Golden Rule, and 
have understood it as tho it said, "Thou shalt do to 
thy neighbor as he shall wish thee to do to him"— not 
noticing that this would be a very different rule, and 
one which might operate very unfavorably in every 
way. While few are in danger of making a mistake 
in this direction, many are inclined to reason on the 
matter from this standpoint, and to say: We could 
not possibly carry out this Golden Rule in the ordinary 
affairs of life, because, for instance, if I were to 
do to my neighbor as I should wish him to do to me, 
I should sell him a five-dollar pair of shoes for one 
dollar; or a twenty-dollar suit of clothes for five dollars; 
or what he might want of wheat or oats at half 
the usual price. And if I adopted such a rule with 
one, I should properly adopt it with all, and this would 
soon mean bankruptcy in my business; so, evidently, 
the Golden Rule cannot be used in human affairs at 
the present time. 

But we answer that this is a mistaken view of the 
Golden Rule, and whoever examines it should see 
that the difficulty probably lies in the selfishness of 
his own heart. He thinks his neighbor might expect 
goods at less than cost, because he thinks that he himself 
would be willing to receive goods at less than cost 
from his neighbor. The application of the Golden 
Rule should show him his difficulty; should teach him 

R2688 : page 262 

the lesson that when he goes to his neighbor to buy 
shoes he must do to his neighbor as he would that his 
neighbor should do to him: he must pay his neighbor 
a reasonable price for his shoes; a reasonable, living 
profit. And likewise in every other transaction: the 
Golden Rule teaches us that we should be willing to 
pay the farmer for his produce, and the manufacturer 
for his, as we would think just if we were the manufacturer 
and making the sale. Likewise, if we were 



making the sale, we should not think of charging our 

customers a larger profit than we would think reasonable 

if they were the sellers and we the customers. 

Whoever of the Lord's people, therefore, gets thoroughly 

into the way of using this Golden Rule in all of life's 

affairs will certainly find that it will elevate their conceptions 

of justice, righteousness, equity; and these 

godlike qualities will become more and more developed 

in them, as parts of their characters, until 

they will obey them not merely because of their 

harmony with the Master's Golden Rule, but because 

they will recognize their true beauty and grandeur, 

and because their hearts will be in harmony with 

them. 

But this rule, while thus inculcating justice, goes 
beyond this and inculcates benevolence;— such benevolence 
and so much of it as we, with properly balanced 
minds would be disposed to ask of others if we were 
the ones in need, in straits. O how grandly rounded 
out in spiritual character would all of the Lord's true 
saints become, under the influence of this Golden Rule! 
It would not only affect the actions of life, making 
them first just toward all with whom they had dealings, 
then, benevolently disposed toward all needing their 
assistance to whatever degree they were able to render 
assistance without doing injury to others,— and, 
additionally, the same law in force would extend also 
to their every word. Under the regulations of this 
golden measurement how few bitter or angry or slanderous 
words would be used— for how few would like to 
have others use such to or of them— to speak to them 
in anger and with bitterness and rancor, or to slander 
them. No wonder the Apostle tells us that those who 
have put on Christ must put off all these— anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, envy, slanders, etc. Additionally, 
this Golden Rule would lead to kind words, gentle 
actions, considerate demeanor; for who would not 
wish such from his neighbor? As the Apostle again 
declares, we are to put on as Christian graces,— gentleness, 
meekness, patience, longsuffering, brotherly 
kindness, love. -Col. 3:8-10,12-15. 

This Golden Rule, beginning with the outward 
actions, and progressing to our words, would very 
quickly extend to our thoughts; and as we would not 
wish to have others think ungenerously or meanly of 
us, nor put a bad construction on our every act of life, 
but would rather that they would view our words and 
deeds generously and lovingly, so we in turn would 

R2689 : page 262 

find, that under the influence of this Golden Rule, 
our thoughts of others would become more generous, 
more noble, less suspicious, etc. 

This Golden Rule is assuredly the divine law 
which our dear Redeemer expressed in other words 



at another time, saying, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." We may safely consider, therefore, 
that the one rule interprets the other, and that to love 
our neighbor as ourselves signifies that we should love 
him and do for him as we ourselves would wish him 
to love us and to do for us. And we could not understand 
it to mean more than this. God expects of 
us that we will make reasonable provision for ourselves 
and for those for whom, by legal or natural ties, we 
are responsible— our families, our relatives, as the 
Apostle says: "He that provideth not for his own, 
and especially they of his own house, hath denied the 
faith and is worse than an unbeliever."— 1 Tim. 5:8. 
Evidently, therefore, our own households are our 
first charge and responsibility, and must have reasonable 
attention before we could hope to do for our neighbors. 
This would indeed be putting a difference between 
our neighbor and ourselves, and between our 
neighbor's family and our own family, but the matter 
is well adjusted by the Golden Rule, rightly interpreted, 
which requires of us that we shall do for our 
neighbor, in his want and extremity, as we would have 
him do for us, were we in his circumstances and he 
in ours. And our minds being leveled up to a plane 
of justice, we should expect that if we were in distress 
our neighbor would first make reasonable provision 
for his own family, and not give to us to the injury 
or deprivation of those more immediately and more 
closely dependent upon him. 

IS THE GOLDEN RULE INCUMBENT? 



But some one may inquire: Is it necessary for us 
as Christians to attempt to carry out this Golden Rule 
in our daily lives? When we see that very few even 
of Christian people appreciate the rule, or to any extent 
seek to carry it out, may we not consider that it 
is a very good rule, but that its observance is not made 
incumbent upon us, and that our attainment of eternal 
life and heavenly glory are not linked with the observance 
of this Golden Rule? May we not consider 
it rather as a good standard to have in mind as the 
perfect law, but consider that we are not to live up to 
that standard in any sense of the word? 

We answer that this Golden Rule was the one by 
which our dear Redeemer's every action was measured, 
the one according to which he lived, and under 

R2689 : page 263 

which he laid down his life on our behalf, and it is 
essential to and incumbent upon all those who would 
be his disciples, his followers. All who hope to become 
his joint-heirs in the Kingdom are required to 



walk in his footsteps as he set us an example (1 Pet. 2:21), 
or, as another Apostle declares, God has foreordained 
to have an elect Church to be joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom with Christ, but he has equally foreordained 
that none shall ultimately be acceptable as 
members of that glorified Church except such as shall, 
in the present life, become copies of God's dear Son, 
our Lord Jesus: and to copy him means to copy the 
Golden Rule, which was exemplified in him and in 
his course. It follows, therefore, that whoever expects 
to share the Kingdom must give diligence to the 
formation of character, and that this Golden Rule is 
necessary in such formation of character— to develop 
in us not the principles of equity, or justice only, but 
also the spirit of love, of unselfishly doing good to 
others.— Rom. 8:29. 

DIVINE STRENGTH PERFECTED IN HUMAN WEAKNESS. 



But here again comes in the question, How can 
those who by nature are fallen and imperfect, and full of 
inherited selfishness and meanness, ever hope to keep 
this Golden Rule, which is the full measure of a perfect 
man's obedience, and which, with all his well-doing 
and sacrificing, was not more than fulfilled by 
our Lord Jesus himself? How could we hope to be 
approved as keepers of this Golden Rule, in the sight 
of him who can read, not only the outward conduct, 
but also the thoughts and intents of our hearts? 

We answer that here comes to our relief the 
gracious arrangement which God has provided for this 
Gospel age, viz., justification by faith. Our justification 
not only covers "the sins that are past" (Rom. 3:25), 
and makes us acceptable to God in Christ, so 
that we can offer ourselves as living sacrifices upon 
his altar, but, more than this, it stands with 
us all the way down the journey of life, and according 
to God's grace in Christ it compensates for, 
or makes up for us all of our unintentional deficiencies, 
so that, as the Apostle says, "The righteousness of 
the Law [expressed in the Golden Rule] is fulfilled 
in us who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." 
-Rom. 8:4. 

Since we are not all alike fallen, not all alike selfish, 
it follows that some walk much nearer to the 
spirit of the divine Law, attain much closer to the 
measurement required by the Golden Rule, than can 
others; yet no fallen creature can walk fully up to the 
requirements of the Golden Rule, so long as handicapped 
by the various weaknesses of the flesh: and 
here the grace of God in Christ makes up our deficiencies; 
those who are able to follow the pattern most 
closely are still far from following it absolutely, and 
consequently need to have the merit of the precious 



blood of Christ imputed to them to make up for their 
shortcomings; and those who are still more fallen, 
and who, with their very best efforts, are still further 
from measuring up to the grand standard of the 
Golden Rule, need that much more of God's grace to 
compensate for their deficiencies. Hence the Apostle 
declares that where sin and imperfection abound 
the most, there God's grace correspondingly abounds 
the more; so that to those who are in Christ and seek 
to walk in his footsteps, who are in their hearts measuring 
themselves with the Golden Rule, and seeking 
to the best of their ability to live up to its requirements, 
may be succeeding variously in their endeavors, 
from the worldly standpoint; but from the divine 
standpoint all such are reckoned as having their blemishes 
fully covered with the merit of our dear Redeemer's 
sacrifice, and that therefore the righteousness 
of the Law, its true meaning, its spirit, and the true 
measure of the Golden Rule, is reckoned as fulfilled 
in them to divine acceptance,— perfectly. 

But it is not merely to have this Golden Rule thus 
reckonedly fulfilled in us for a day or for a week or 
for a month that counts us "overcomers," but that 
we shall faithfully continue to walk as closely in the 
Lord's footsteps as we may be able, faithfully continuing 
to use his Golden Rule to the best of our ability; 
and that we shall do this day by day and year by 
year with continued and increasing zeal, until our 
Master, watching the process of development of character, 
shall say, It is enough; the character is fixed; 
the love for righteousness is permanent and thoroughly 
developed; the spirit of love is indelibly marked, and 
altho there still remain in the flesh traces of selfishness, 
yet they are dim and faint in comparison with 
the original mark, and give good evidence of victory 
gained, not in the flesh, but in the heart, in the will. 

"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in 
that day when I make up my jewels."— Mai. 3:17. 

ANOTHER SERIOUS ERROR MADE BY SOME IN APPLYING 
THE GOLDEN RULE TO LIFE. 



Undoubtedly the Golden Rule has, to a considerable 
extent, exercised an influence over even worldly 
people (nominal Christians), where such have come 
more in contact with the true saints who endeavor with 
more or less zeal to recognize and to use the Golden 
Rule in the measurement of their daily conduct, without 
their being keepers of it as a rule, or even professing 
so to do. And even amongst Christians who have 
given themselves to the Lord, and who fully desire 
that his will in every particular shall be done in them, 

R2689 : page 264 



and who recognize this Golden Rule as a grand expression 
of the divine will, we believe there are serious 
misapprehensions respecting the proper manner 
of its use. For instance, among the noblest of the 
Lord's people are some who say, We will turn our 
backs on society and worldly enjoyments, and devote 
what time we have at our disposal to the improvement 
of the fallen— to moral reforms, social reforms, financial 
reforms, the reforming of drunkards, etc. And 
still others, imbued with the same spirit, and with the 
same desire to fulfil this Golden Rule, say, We will 
leave home and friends, and go into far-off lands as 
missionaries, to preach Christ to the heathen. 

We are bound to appreciate such noble sentiments, 
whether we can agree with the conclusions as to 
methods of work, etc., or not. We love the noble 
principle which, if not in every instance, at least in 
many cases, lies at the foundation of such sacrifices of 
time, influence, convenience, etc.: it is an outworking 
of the Golden Rule in these dear friends, saying to 
themselves and to others, If we were in the slums or 
in heathen degradation, we should wish that some of 
God's children would come to us, to lift us up and enlighten 
us, and hence we should do so to others, even 
as we would, if our conditions were altered, that they 
should do to us. 

This is sound reasoning and a proper application 
of the Golden Rule, and yet also, we believe, a mistaken 
or wrong one. One of the first lessons that the 
Christian is called upon to learn in the School of 
Christ is, that his judgment is defective; that not only 
our physical powers have degenerated through the 
fall, but that likewise our mental powers have suffered; 
so that the whole world today is not only unsound of 
body, but also unsound of mind, unsound of judgment. 

R2690 : page 264 

The primary lessons of God's children in the school 
of Christ are to the effect that we all lack wisdom, and 
that for this very reason he has provided his Book, 
the Bible,— "that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished."— 2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

We are taught in the Book that the work of salvation 
is one too great for humanity itself, and that 
therefore God has undertaken the work; we are taught 
that he has not left the matter to operate itself at random, 
neither has he left it to our imperfect judgments 
and puny efforts: we are taught that the great Savior 
of the world planned his work "from the foundation 
of the world," and yet that it was four thousand 
years and more before he took the first great step for 
its accomplishment, namely, the giving of his Son to 
be the redemption price of Adam and his race (1 Pet. 1:20); 
we are taught that having begun this work of 



salvation God has not abandoned it, and does not intend 

to abandon it, but that eventually "he shall bring 

forth judgment [trial] unto victory;"— and that eventually 

our Lord Jesus shall see the fruit of the travail 

of his soul on man's behalf, and shall be satisfied;— 

that eventually the knowledge of the Lord shall fill 

the whole earth, and all shall know him from the least 

to the greatest; that eventually he shall bring in everlasting 

righteousness, so that the time shall ultimately 

come when all the families of the earth shall be blessed 

with the knowledge of God's goodness and grace, and 

with an opportunity to benefit thereby; that eventually 

whosoever will not obey the great Prophet-King 

shall be cut off from amongst the people in the Second 

Death; that eventually there shall be no more dying, 

no more sighing, no more crying, no more pain there, 

because the former things of Adamic sin and its penalty 

and blight shall have been done away.— Isa. 14:24,27; 

55:11; Matt. 12:20; Isa. 53:11; 11:9; Jer. 31:34; 

Acts 3:19-23; Rev. 21:3,4. 

But many of God's dear people overlook these 
gracious provisions and promises of his Word, and 
partaking to a considerable extent of the spirit of love 
they forget that God's love is still greater than their 
own, even as God's wisdom is greater than theirs; 
hence they lose sight of the fact that the entire plan 
of salvation is of God, and that he has not abandoned 
it to others, but will carry it out himself in his own 
due time. It is because they forget this that they 
become burdened with the weight of responsibility, 
and feel as tho the salvation of the world rested upon 
themselves,— and, impressed with this feeling of self-importance 
and forgetfulness of God's Word, they 
go into the mission work, slum work, and to the 
heathen. They forget, and are greatly disadvantaged 
by so doing, that God has already declared, "As the 
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my plans 
higher than your plans, and my ways higher than 
your ways."— Isa. 55:8,9. 

As a consequence of this oversight and misdirection 
of effort, these dear friends are doing works now 
which God intends shall be done in a future age, and 
which can and will be done then to very much better 
advantage every way. God has appointed the Millennial 
age for this work of lifting up the weak, opening 
the blind eyes of the barbarians, and unstopping 
their dull ears to hear the message of divine grace. 
God has appointed that when his time for this great 
work, in which he is more interested than any of his 
creatures possibly could be, will come, the conditions 
will be favorable to the success of his plan, which he 
guarantees us will succeed, and will bring blessing to 
all the families of the earth, and will enlighten every 
man born into the world.— Gal. 3:16,29; John 1:9; 
Acts 3:19-21. 

God's Word informs those who seek his counsel, 



R2690 : page 265 

that at that time Satan shall be bound so that he may 

deceive the nations no more, as he is now doing (Rev. 20:1-3): 

that during that period of Satan's restraint 

those whom he now blinds (2 Cor. 4:4) with various 

false doctrines, sophistries, superstitions, etc., will be 

freed from these, and have the eyes and ears of their 

understanding opened. It informs us also, that at 

that time he will establish as the King over all the 

earth his honored agent, who gave his life as a ransom 

for mankind; and that our Lord Jesus will establish 

the Kingdom of God amongst men, a Kingdom 

not merely in name, but also in power and in fact; one 

which shall rule the world, forcibly putting down sin, 

oppression, ignorance, superstition, darkness; and 

raising up righteousness, truth, and every good principle 

and influence for the blessing and uplifting of 

those whom he purchased with his precious blood. 

It informs us that under his beneficent reign all evil 

shall be subdued, that even death shall be conquered: 

and that all mankind, freed from the Adamic sentence 

of death, may, if they will, then attain unto eternal 

life and full human perfection, and that only the wilful 

sinners against light and opportunity will be utterly 

destroyed in the Second Death.— 1 Cor. 15:24-28; 

2Thess. 1:8,9; Acts 3:23. 

The same Word instructs us that the Lord's plan for 
the present age does not purpose the conversion of the 
world; nor its salvation in any sense of the word; nor 
its uplifting; but that his plan, on the contrary, is 
simply the development of the Church, the foreordained 
and predestinated number, a "little flock," who must 
all be selected from amongst men, and every one of 
them be copies of God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) It 
also informs us that this work of God in this age is 
the work in which we are invited to be co-workers 
together with God. It points out to us that this is 
the work of the Bride— to make herself ready for the 
marriage (Rev. 19:7); that the special work in this 
present time consists not only in the "calling" of the 
Church, but also in the building up of one another, 
among the called ones, in the most holy faith;— helping 
one another to perfect holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord,— showing us that a large part of our work 
is in our own hearts, cleansing ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit, helping one 
another to make our calling and our election sure, by 
perfecting in our hearts the Golden Rule.— 2 Cor. 7:1; 
Jude 20. 

But overlooking the particular service marked out 
for those who would be co-workers with God in this 
age, our dear friends, now criticised, misuse their Golden 
Rule, by applying it outside of the class for which 
the Lord intended it in this age. It will be applicable 



to all the heathen world and the sub-stratum of society 
in the Millennial age, but now it is applicable chiefly 
to the household of faith. True, if we could accomplish 
all that the Lord would have us accomplish for 
the household of faith, it would then be very proper 
for us to extend our efforts to the heathen and lower 
strata of society, rather than to sit down in idleness; 
but so far from finding that we have not enough to 
engage our time in the household of faith, we find 
that we are in the harvest-time of the age, and that 
the harvest is great and the laborers are few, and that 
there is much more than enough to engage all our 
time and energies among the "brethren" whom the 
Lord our God has called. Hence the Golden Rule 
calls us to be exercised chiefly amongst these, and not 
amongst those whom the Lord our God has not yet 
called, but who are left, in the divine plan, for a calling 
and blessing of another kind in the next age— the 
Millennial age. 

Looking back we see that our dear Master, who 
gave the Golden Rule, observed it in the manner we 
are now advocating. Living in the end of the Jewish 
age, and knowing that the divine favors and blessings 
at that time were confined to fleshly Israel, our Lord, 
with a full appreciation of the Golden Rule, nevertheless 
used it in strict harmony with the Father's plan; 
and accordingly instructed his twelve apostles also, 
saying, "Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; for I am 
not sent save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
(Matt. 10:5,6; 15:24,26.) Likewise the apostles understood 
that while, at the death of Christ, the middle 
wall of partition, which had heretofore separated divine 
favor from other nations, was now broken down, so 
that, so far as God was concerned, the Gospel message 
was open to every creature,— nevertheless, that every 
creature had not open ears for the Gospel, and that 
according to the Lord's plan he would not open their 
ears until his due time, the Millennial age, and hence 
it was that the apostles sought for the class to whom 
the present message, the high calling for the Church, 
was intended,— "He that hath an ear, let him hear." 

Pursuing this policy of searching for those who 
had ears to hear, the Apostle Paul, sent by the Lord 
to be the great messenger of grace to the Gentiles, 
did not say within himself (as some of our dear missionary 
friends seem to say within themselves), I will 
seek out the most illiterate and degraded people in 
the world, that I may lift them up. Had this been 
the Apostle's sentiment he doubtless would have hastened, 
with his coadjutors, southward from Jerusalem 
into darkest Africa, or eastward from Jerusalem into 
India, with its hundreds of millions, and still further 
eastward into China, with its hundreds of millions, 
in utter ignorance of God and steeped in superstition. 



R2691 : page 266 

But the Apostle had made a better study of the divine 

plan, and knew that the times of restitution, the Millennial 

age, was set apart by God for this general uplift 

of mankind; and that it would be a waste of effort 

to undertake to do that work in advance of God's cooperation; 

in advance of his time and in advance of 

his arrangements, which his wisdom foresaw would be 

necessary to the accomplishment of that work. 

The Apostle reasoned, on the contrary, "God hath 
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world 
in righteousness" (Acts 17:31), and that appointed 
day is a future day, the Millennial day; and if God 
has appointed that day to be the time for the 
world's judgment, it would be folly on my part to attempt 
to bring in a judgment of the world sooner than 
God intends it, even if I were able to do so. He reasoned, 
further, that if God has appointed a future day 
forjudging the world in general, then the world in 
general is not on trial or under judgment in the present 
Gospel day, and hence might just as well be left 
in their heathen darkness a little longer, as God already 
had left them in heathen darkness for more than four 
thousand years;— and he reasoned wisely, logically. 
He was instructed of the Lord, and hence he had the 
spirit of a sound mind, and did not attempt to do an 
utterly impossible and hence a foolish thing. He did 
not attempt to be either wiser or more loving than 
the Heavenly Father, but trusting to the Heavenly 
Father's wisdom and love he sought to know the will 
of God now, in this present age, that he might thus 
be an ambassador for God and a co-worker together 
with him. 

Nor was he left in darkness. He was instructed 
of the Lord, and he in turn instructs us, that the work 
of the present age is the work of preparing the judges 
of the world, who, when the great day of the world's 
judgment or trial shall have dawned, will be prepared 
to execute judgment and justice in the world, and to 
bless with a righteous rule all the families of the earth. 
He informs us that the saints now being tried (judged), 
tested and developed in character are undergoing this 
severe process, and are required to walk in the "narrow 
way," to the intent that they may be fit to be instruments 
of God forjudging the world in righteousness 
when the due time for that judgment shall have come. 
(1 Cor. 6:2,3.) Consequently, we find that the Apostle's 
energies, so far from being directed to the substratum 
of society, the heathen and the barbarians, 
were directed to the very opposite class. He sought 
the best people in the world; the most moral people 
and the most intelligent; the people most advanced in 
every sense of the word— believing, and rightly, that 
the reasonable and gracious plan of God would commend 
itself better to such than to the sodden and benighted 



and stupefied and degraded minds of the barbarian 

heathen. Conservatively, the Apostle first 

sought the intelligent classes of Asia Minor, and after 

having gone through various cities (not attempting 

nor expecting to convert the people en masse, but 

merely hoping, in harmony with the divine program, 

to find a few, a little flock, and to establish these in 

principles of righteousness and in the School of Christ, 

to learn of him and to develop character, and to be 

prepared for the future work of judgeship and joint-heirship 

with Christ in the Kingdom)— the Apostle 

pressed on to find still others who had "ears to hear." 

The declaration of the Scriptures is that he and 
his company purposed to go into Asia, but that under 
divine providence he seemed to be hindered from going 
there, and that then God specially directed him 
in a dream, and sent him into Europe with the message 
—sending him, not to barbarians, but to the most 
enlightened and most cultured people of the then civilized 
world, the people of Greece. (Acts 16:7-10.) 
And we remember that later on the Lord sent the 
Apostle to Rome, telling him in advance that this was 
his purpose, and seemingly in order to keep the Apostle 
in Rome he was sent there a prisoner, yet for three 
years was permitted to have full liberty to preach 
Christ to as many as had ears to hear. And let us 
not forget a circumstance which occurred in connection 
with the journey to Rome, when the Apostle was shipwrecked 
on the Island of Mileta. (Acts 28:1-10.) He 
found there a people who, so far as we are able to 
judge, were on the average better prepared for the 
truth than the Chinese, Malays, etc., and of these the 
record says, "The barbarians showed us no little kindness." 
We might suppose that barbarians who were 
disposed to be kind and generous to people who were 
shipwrecked on their coast, would be a rather more 
favorable class to approach with the gospel of Christ 
than cannibals, to whom missionaries of to-day frequently 

go- 

And yet what do we find as the result of the 
Apostle's stay in the midst of that people all that winter? 
Do we read that he left several flourishing little 
missions? Do we read that he preached day and night 
unto the barbarians? Not a word of it; no mention 
is made of the slightest effort to reach them. The 
Apostle seemingly knew that they were too degraded 
to have any ear to hear the Christian message, or to 
be called with the high calling which God during this 
age is sending forth, to gather the Bride for his Son. 
We have every reason to believe that the Apostle made 
no effort whatever to make known the Gospel of Christ 
to those heathen people. Quite possibly while he 
was there forcibly detained in their midst, and unable 
to reach those who would have an ear to hear the good 

R2691 : page 267 



tidings, he may have attempted to suggest to them 

certain moral reforms, or how to live more comfortably, 

or something else that would come within the 

range of their measure of intelligence. But apparently 

he had no thought whatever that the gospel 

"High Calling" was for such, and hence the Golden 

Rule, operating in his life and governing his conduct, 

was limited accordingly— limited to act in harmony 

with the divine revelation and the divine plan. 

Why is it that the example of Jesus and his inspired 
apostles is overlooked by so many of our dear 
Christian friends to-day? Why is it that they use 
their Golden Rule without respect to the divine plan 
and divine promise? We answer, It is because some 
of them are leaning to their own understanding, instead 
of seeking the divine Word, and to be taught 
of God; they think they know what ought to be done 
without inquiring of God's Word, and they are going 
about to do what they think should be done, rather 
than seeking to follow heaven's directions and Apostolic 
example. Many of them, indeed, are not self-conceited 
to the extent of being careless respecting 
advice; indeed, many of them are quite lacking in 
thought on their own part, and only too willing and 
too anxious to take advice of others; but they are 
not sufficiently careful where they get the advice. 

They say to themselves, We belong to the Presbyterian 
body: look at its millions; look at its education; 
look at its influence. Or, We belong to the 
Methodist body: look at its numbers, influence, etc., 
etc. The same is true of the others. And then they 
ask, Is it possible that all these wise and learned men 
should be mistaken? Do they not all advocate that 
we should thus go out to preach the gospel amongst 
the heathen? Yes, we answer; this is a part of the 
delusion: many of the great and worldly-wise have 
adopted a theory, and are attempting to operate the 
Golden Rule wholly outside of and in utter neglect of 
the divine plan. Their theory is that God's Kingdom 
has come, and they point to the civilized nations of 
Europe and America as evidences and proofs that 
God's Kingdom has come, and they say, What all 
zealous Christians should now do is to convert the 
Chinese nation, the Japanese nation, India, and all the 
tribes of the earth, that these also may become Christian 
nations like those of Europe and America, and 
thus the whole world will become God's Kingdom. 

But we answer, This is false, utterly false; the 
nations of Europe and America are not God's Kingdom, 
notwithstanding the fact that they claim to be 
Christian nations, and that they put upon their coins 
that their monarchs reign by the grace of God. They 
are all, at best and at most, "kingdoms of this world," 
under the control of Satan, "the prince of this world." 
(John 14:30.) These are the kingdoms which at the 



advent of Christ's Kingdom he declares shall be broken 
in pieces as a potter's vessel, as being utterly unfit 
for his service, and utterly out of harmony with the 
principles of righteousness which will be established 
in his Kingdom.— Rev. 2:26,27; Dan. 2:45. 

Alas! if these kingdoms of so-called Christendom 
be the fulfilment of our dear Redeemer's prayer which 
he taught us as his disciples, "Thy Kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven"— 
if we must accept these as God's Kingdom, if we must 
think of their rule as being God's will done on earth 
as it is done in heaven— then some of us are greatly 
disappointed, for we find that God's will is very little 
done on earth, and consequently heaven, if no better 
than this, must be a pandemonium in comparison to 
what we had hoped for. 

But we are not mistaken; the Lord's Word everywhere 
teaches that the present Gospel age is for the 
selection of the Kingdom class, the saints, who by and 
by, in God's due time, shall be joint-heirs with Christ 
in his Kingdom, and inheritors with him of the great 
promises made to Father Abraham, that this seed, 
Christ (head and body-Gal. 3: 16,29), shall bless all 
the families of the earth, as God's Kingdom bringing 
in everlasting righteousness. Would to God that we 
could assist to some extent in opening the blinded eyes 
of Christendom on this subject: and yet we could not 
hope to render any assistance to the general mass of 
churchianity,— for it is the divine plan that not the 
"tares," but only the "wheat," shall now understand. 
-Dan. 12:10; 1 Thes. 5:3-5. 

All we can hope for is that those who are the 
Lord's true saints are not, and never have been, fully 

R2692 : page 267 

satisfied with the position in which they are, and the 
work which they are doing; but realize a heart-hunger 
for something better, more satisfactory, and more in 
harmony with the divine character and power— that 
these who have ears, and who have already heard to 
some extent the true gospel, might now hear the true 
ring of the Shepherd's voice, and thus be called away 
from Babylon and its confusion of error, its jargon of 
contradiction and insincerity, to the green pastures 
and still waters of divine truth— present truth— that 
thus separated (delivered from Babylon's bondage) 
they might be more fully united with the Shepherd 
himself, and become co-workers together with God in 
his work, learning to exercise the Golden Rule in their 
own hearts, in their own lives, and to help others of 
the household of faith and the Bride of Christ to do 
the same. 

Nor are we to overlook the fact that while the 
present Gospel message is for the highest types of 
men, it appeals specially to the middle class of these 



—the humble but intelligent rather than the rich or 
great. "Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in 
thy sight. "-Matt. 11:25,26. 



R2692 : page 268 

WATCHING AND ITS REWARD. 

-LUKE 12:35-46.-SEPT. 23.- 

GOLDEN TEXT: -"Watch and pray, that ye 
enter not into temptation."— Matt. 26:41. 

PRAYER IS GOOD; it is absolutely indispensable 

to Christian life. It means, not only a 

living faith, but a growing faith. Experience will prove 

that neglect of either private prayer (Matt. 6:6) or 

prayer in the congregation of the Lord's people (Acts 12:12; 

1:14; 16:13; 1 Cor. 11:4,5; 14:13,14) is sure to 

lead to leanness of soul and lukewarmness in respect 

to spiritual things— unfaithfulness, coldness, death. 

On the contrary, communion with the Lord in prayer 

brings increased confidence in the Lord's supervision 

of our affairs; increased faith in all the exceeding great 

and precious promises of his Word; increased realization 

of his leadings, past and present; increased love for all 

the brethren of Christ, and increased solicitude for their 

welfare and spiritual progress. Prayer is thus closely 

and actively identified with progress in spiritual things, 

progress in the fruits of the spirit, toward God, the 

brethren, and all men. 

Our Golden Text suggests, however, that more than 
praying is necessary. Praying that does not fully represent 
the sentiments of the heart is apt very quickly 
to degenerate into a mere form of words— drawing nigh 
to the Lord with the lips while the heart is far from 
him,— perhaps enwrapped in business or pleasure or 
sin. Whoever, therefore, would make progress in the 
spiritual way must not only pray with the spirit and 
with the understanding, but he must also watch— against 
the sinful tendencies of his own flesh— self-gratification, 
selfishness; also against the allurements of the world 
toward so-called worldly pleasures, worldly ambitions, 
honor amongst men, the love of money, etc.; also 
against the wiles of the Adversary, whose deceitful attacks 
usually come upon the Lord's people as "an angel 
of light"— to deceive them into forms and ceremonies 
of Churchianity, substituting before the mind 
and affections and consecrated intentions, human sentiments 
and methods and works and objectives, as instead 
of "the hope set before us in the Gospel" (Col. 1:23) 
and its various exceeding great and precious 
promises, by whose incentive the Lord has called us to 
walk and to run, by faith and not by sight, following in 



the footsteps of our Redeemer. 

Our lesson itself deals particularly with the watching; 
but in harmony with the Golden Text we know 
that all true watchers must also be prayers, and that 
all fervent prayers will also be watchers. Prayer represents 
the faith; watching represents the works which 
must accompany it, so long as it is a living faith; for, 
as the Apostle declares, Faith without works is dead- 
it speedily loses its vitality, its value, its very existence. 

Our Lord gave a parable, as was his custom in 
teaching, to illustrate this lesson of the necessity for 
watchfulness. 

A wealthy householder is represented as absent for 
a considerable portion of the night at a wedding -feast, 
and expecting on his return that the servants of the 
household would be awake and alert to receive him and 
any company he might bring with him. It was expected 
of such servants that they would not only not 
retire to bed, but that they would not even get drowsy. 
To give their master a proper reception they should be 
thoroughly awake, quick to hear and to respond to his 
knock, and to "open unto him immediately." Hence, 
in the parable, such servants are represented as having 
their loins girt about and their lamps burning brightly. 
The custom of Orientals at that time was to wear long, 
loose, flowing robes. These, when they were resting, 
were loosened at the girdle, but when attending to business 
they were drawn tightly at the waist with a girdle 
or belt, preventing them from interfering with proper 
service. Lamps, which were the mode of illumination, 
were also necessary in the night, and should not be 
permitted to grow dim, but be trimmed as necessity 
required. 

Our Lord points out that such faithful servants 
would be appreciated by their master, and that he would 
give them a reward— he would honor them by treating 
them as his friends, and bring forth to them of the good 
things from his pantry. He would indeed gird himself 
as a servant and serve these faithful ones: and for 
the master of the house to do this would imply the 
bringing forth of the very best that he possessed. But 
in order to fulfil the conditions and be thus acceptable 
to their master they must be ready in whatever hour 
of the night he might come. 

The parable, without question, refers to the second 
coming of our Lord Jesus, and points out to all of his 
faithful servants the proper attitude of watchfulness 
and preparation to receive him at whatever time his 
second advent should occur. It also indicates that it 
was the Lord's good pleasure not to reveal definitely 
and positively to his people when to expect his arrival, 
but rather that all the way down through this night-time 
which we designate the Gospel age, and which 
must necessarily precede the morning of the Millennial 
day, they should be continually awake, alert, waiting 
for him, ready to receive him at any moment. They 



should have the loins of their minds girt up and be 
active in thought, in word and in deed, in every matter 
pertaining to the Master's service, that they might be 
approved of him;— the lamp of the divine Word, so 
necessary to their enlightenment, should be with them, 
and well supplied with the oil of the holy spirit— and 
well trimmed, in the sense of rightly dividing the word 
of truth, and seeking to understand through it their 
proper attitude of heart and conduct, to be pleasing to 
their Master. 

R2692 : page 269 

The parable is a very simple one, and could scarcely 
be misapprehended by the class for whom all parables 
are intended— the consecrated Church. These realize 
at once that the central thought with them, as the Lord's 
servants, must be such readiness of heart and mind 
and character as will be pleasing to the Master when 
he shall come to gather his "jewels,"— his watching, 
faithful servants. This thought of the return of the 
Lord, and of the blessings which he has promised to his 
faithful ones at that time, is the great incentive set before 
the called ones of this Gospel age. It is for the 
Master's favor and the consequent exaltation with him 
to a share in his Kingdom, then to be established, and 
a share in the great work of blessing the world of mankind, 
then to be accomplished, that all of the saints are 
seeking, watching, praying, striving. 

Well has the Apostle said, "He that hath this hope 
in him purifieth himself even as he [the looked-for 
Master] is pure." It is this hope that leads the faithful 
servants continually to the lamp of the divine Word, 
to trim it and to thereby keep themselves thoroughly 
awake, quick of ear and quick of eye in respect to any 
and every thing relating to the will of the expected 
Master, and such conditions of heart-purity and robes 
of righteousness as would be pleasing and acceptable 
in his sight at his arrival. 

Let all watchers fully appreciate this parable, and 
be on guard against every ensnarement of the Adversary, 
and against the stupefying influence of the world 
and its spirit, and against the selfishness and weaknesses 
of his own flesh; and let each put on the graces 
of the spirit, and assist his fellow-servants in these preparations, 
that thus an entrance may be ministered to 
him into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, 
Jesus Christ.-2 Pet. 1:4-12. 

What great blindness and spiritual stupor respecting 
so simple a parable is manifested by many who are 
regarded as teachers in nominal Zion, in respect to this 
lesson! Note the interpretation of it offered by one of 
the leading "Helps to Sunday School teachers." The 
writer evidently is not so blind as to fail to see that the 
parable relates in some manner to the second coming 
of our Lord; but he is so blinded by misconceptions, 



R2693 : page 269 

false doctrines, etc., as to give the following as an 
explanation:— 

"The comings of the Lord are ever unexpected to 
us,— his coming at death, his coming to judge the world, 
his coming in his Kingdom, his coming in the harvest-times 
of men, his coming in the crises of our lives, his 
coming with opportunities and open doors, his coming 
with the power of the holy spirit." 

This blind teacher thus believes in seven comings 
of Christ, additional to his first coming eighteen centuries 
ago. More than this, the words we quote signify 
that the writer believes that a coming of Christ 
occurs every time a death occurs (or possibly he limited 
this to the death of his saints; but other teachers of 
the same school of darkness, when preaching funeral 
sermons, are accustomed to announce the Lord's coming 
in the death, not only of saints, but of pretty nearly 
everybody). This writer further claims a coming of 
Christ in all the crises as well as in all the opportunities 
of human life. He evidently believes (may we 
not say, dreams?— he surely is not awake, and surely 
his lamp is not trimmed and burning, nor the loins of 
his mind girt about) that there are millions of comings 
of Christ. Moreover, speaking (in his dreams) as a 
mouthpiece of the great Adversary, he speaks of the 
harvest-time of men— evidently to direct attention away 
from the Master's explanation that the harvest-time 
will be "the end of this age," in the which he himself 
will be the great Chief Reaper, and will associate with 
him his faithful servants in the work of gathering the 
wheat (his faithful) into his barn (the spiritual condition). 
-Matt. 13:30. 

Note another method of wresting the Scriptures, 
and of attracting the minds of the Lord's people away 
from the great truth everywhere set forth in the Scriptures, 
and particularly enunciated in this parable, viz., 
the second coming of our Lord as King, and the duty 
of all his faithful ones to be ready, expecting and joyously 
waiting for that event. This perversion and 
wresting of the Scriptures is in the interest of temperance, 
and represents the watching as implying temperance 
work, thus: "Not only those who are laboring and 
praying for temperance reform, but the young people 
especially, should be wide awake and watchful in regard 
to temperance. They should watch the effect of strong 
drink upon others. They should watch its effect upon 
the community. They should be on their guard against 
the smallest beginnings of the habit of using intoxicating 
liquors. They should watch for opportunities of 
helping on the cause of temperance by word and by example, 
in public and in private." 

Is it any wonder we hear the Master prophesy respecting 
the unfaithfulness amongst his professed people 



at this time, saying, "When the Son of Man cometh, 

shall he find the faith on the earth?" The form of the 

question implies the answer, No; he will not find the 

faith flourishing in the earth,— not predominating. 

Other Scriptures, however, assure us that at the time 

of his coming he will find a little flock of faithful watchers 

—not many great, wise or learned, but chiefly "the 

poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom." 

As for Babylon in general, she is saying, with louder 

voice than ever, Have we not done! done! done! Are 

we not rich and increased in goods! Are we not compassing 

sea and land to make proselytes! 

R2693 : page 270 

But the Master will say, Thou art poor and blind 
and miserable and naked, and knowest it not! (Rev. 3:17.) 
Thy colleges, of which thou dost boast, are 
they not the very hot-beds of infidelity, denying my 
Word— denying that my work was perfect in the beginning, 
and that present conditions of sin and degradation 
and death are the penalties of violation of my 
righteous law; denying also the value of my sacrifice 
for sins, given that the heavenly Father might be just 
and yet the justifier of him that believeth in me; denying 
that holy men of old spake and wrote as they were 
moved by the holy spirit, and claiming a superior wisdom 
as "higher critics," by which they determine that 
myself and my chosen and inspired apostles were ignorant 
and incompetent and deceived, when we quoted 
the words of the prophets and applied them; denying 
also my second coming, to gather my little flock, the 
Church, to associate them with me in the Kingdom 
promised through the prophets, which shortly shall 
bless all the families of the earth; claiming, on the contrary, 
that all things continue as they were from the beginning, 
—that a process of evolution is in progress, 
and that no Redeemer, no redemption and no restitution 
are necessary— some of them going so far as to claim 
that no personal deity is necessary, but that what they 
call the laws of evolution are the creator, preserver and 
savior of the race. 

Is it any wonder that under such false teachings 
in high places, and the same teachings repeated 
with more or less of ability throughout the length and 
breadth of Babylon— is it any wonder that my people 
are "perishing for lack of knowledge"? (Hos. 4:6.) 
They have "hidden the key of knowledge," and not 
only fail to enter into the privileges and opportunities 
of this Gospel age and its call, but them that would enter 
in they hinder by their false teachings and misrepresentations, 
putting darkness for light, and light for 
darkness. -Luke 11:52; 2 Pet. 2:1; 3:3,4; Amos 8:11; 
Matt. 23:13; Isa. 5:20. 

Alas! that any whose eyes of understanding have 
been opened in any degree should be deluded into supposing 



that he can do God service by cooperating with 
Babylon in any measure, sense or degree. Surely they 
are under the blinding and stupefying influence of the 
Adversary when they do not hear sharply and distinctly 
the Lord's message to all of his true people at this 
time, to come out of Babylon and be not partakers of 
her sins, her errors, her false teachings, and the crime 
implied in these, and on account of which severe scourgings 
are coming upon Babylon, and will fall with special 
severity upon those who had known better, and who for 
any reason have refused to obey the voice of him that 
speaketh from heaven— our present Lord, King, Bridegroom. 
-Heb. 12:25-27; Rev. 18:4. 

Our Lord applied the parable in few words, saying, 
"Be ye, therefore, ready also, for the Son of Man 
cometh at an hour that ye think not." That is to say, 
watchfulness for the great event of the King's return 
would be absolutely indispensable, and would constitute 
a mark or indication of those worthy to be called 
true servants or "brethren." We are not to make the 
mistake of supposing our Lord to mean, Watch incessantly, 
for you will not know when I do come. This 
would be an absurdity. The central thought of the 
parable is that the faithful servants, awake and watching 
at the proper time, will hear the knock, will recognize 
the Lord's presence, will open to him, in the sense 
of believing and accepting his presence, and will be rewarded 
by him in the time of his presence by being 
supplied special knowledge respecting heavenly things 
which would be "meat in due season" to their comfort 
and joy. All who are faithfully watching shall know 
when the event occurs, so surely as those who do not 
watch shall not know. 

The Apostle Paul speaks of this same great event 
and of the same class of watchers, designating them 
brethren; and after explaining that the second coming 
of our Lord would be upon the world as a thief and a 
snare, and that the world will not escape certain trouble 
and overthrow of their systems and politics, he explains 
that, on the contrary, "Ye brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that day should overtake you as a thief"— 
you have your lamps trimmed and burning. As he 
further explains, the brethren worthy to know and to 
escape the troubles incidental to that time do not sleep, 
as do others; they are watchful; they are alert, and 
because thus alert they know of the Bridegroom's arrival, 
of which the world knows not; and in the time 
of his presence these brethren are fed with special 
spiritual food, which the world knows not of. The 
Master himself is sending forth, at the hands of his 
servants, the needed meat in due season, things new 
and old for the strengthening of his household for this 
present time of trial and for the perfecting of the saints 
for the work of ministry, to which he has called them. 
-1 Thess. 5:1-6. 



TO WHOM DOES THE PARABLE SPECIALLY APPLY? 



This was Peter's question. He wondered whether 
or not the Lord meant that the specially chosen twelve 
apostles were these servants who must watch and wait 
for him at his second coming, or whether the parable 
was of general application, and meant that everybody 
should watch. Our Lord did not answer this question 
directly, for to have done so would have been contrary 
to the divine plan; to have answered directly, to have 
shown that our Lord was not coming in the early watches 
of the Gospel night, would thus have been in contradiction 

R2693 : page 271 

of the very teaching of the parable, that he 

must be watched for all through the Gospel night. 

Evading this feature of Peter's question our Lord embraces 
the opportunity to give some further instruction, 
and explains to Peter and to us all that at that time, 
"then," i.e., at the time of his return, his second advent, 
he would look out and appoint a steward for the 
dispensing of spiritual food to the household of faith; 
and that a special blessing would be with that steward 
in the event of his faithfulness, and that he would be 
removed from the stewardship in the event of unfaithfulness. 
Faithfulness on the part of this steward 
would imply larger and continued service in dispensing 

R2694: page 271 

the meat to the household of faith at that time. But 

unfaithfulness on his part, and a disposition to tyrannize 

the household, would be sure to result in his being 

cut off from further opportunities for serving the household, 

and lead to his having a severe experience with 

the unbelievers in the time of trouble then to come 

upon the world. And altho it is not stated, it is fairly 

inferable that such an one being deposed from stewardship, 

another would take his place, subject to similar 

terms and conditions as to faithfulness. 

In certain senses of the word, and in certain respects, 
every child of God is a steward— a steward of 
his own talents, opportunities, privileges, abilities in 
the Lord's service; and each one is to recognize that 
his responsibilities as a steward in these respects is 
toward the Master who gave him the talents, and who 
will require at his hands an account thereof— an increase 
by reason of proper use. We are not, therefore, 
to understand our Lord's answer to Peter to imply that 
none of the household but the one are in any sense of 
the word regarded as stewards. Such an interpretation 
would be in conflict with numerous Scriptures. We 
are to notice that the stewardship mentioned is not a 



stewardship of talents and opportunities, but a stewardship 
of spiritual food merely. 

Neither does it imply that in the end of this age, 
and at the time of our Lord's presence and the sending 
forth of meat in due season that the special steward 
alone will have to do with the dispensing of the food 
for the household, for, as shown in Matthew's account 
of this parable (Matt. 24:45-51), there are "fellow-servants" 
whose duty and privilege it will be to cooperate 
with this steward in the dispensing of the viands, the 
feeding of the household of faith. The thought would 
seem to be that in the interest of the household, and 
for its comfort and joy and blessing, the Master at an 
appropriate time would furnish to some one of his servants 
a key to the precious things of his Word, thus 
providing bountifully "things new and old" for the 
sustenance and joy of the household, and minister these 
through numerous fellow-servants, as well as through 
the one to whom the key of this stewardship would be 
specially entrusted. 

In this connection we are to remember that every 
stewardship brings with it weighty responsibilities, and 
while such responsibilities are not to be shirked, neither 
are any of them to be undertaken lightly, without appreciating 
the fact that every one who becomes a servant 
of the household of faith has thereby a larger degree 
of responsibility, not only toward the household, 
but toward the Master of the house, from whom comes 
every commission. And every servant is to remember 
that unfaithfulness would surely lead to his removal, 
even as every manifestation of humble faithfulness on 
his part will endear him to the Master and to every 
faithful member of the household, and imply his continuance 
in the service until the Master shall say, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant; enter into the 
joys of thy Lord." 



R2694: page 271 

REVIEW OF THIRD QUARTER.-SEPT. 30. 



"Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your 
own selves."— Jas. 1:22. 



Reviews are frequently profitable, and especially 
so when conducted in the light of this Golden Text; 
with a view to noting to what extent we have heard 
the voice of the Son of Man, and to what extent we 
have been obedient to his messages. To fancy ourselves 
as making spiritual progress merely by gaining 



information respecting the Lord, his miracles, his teachings, 
etc., is to get the nut and crack it and drop the 
kernel, the thing of real value. 

It is in harmony with this thought that our Lord 
declared, "The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of 
Man, and they that hear shall live." The dead are 
the entire human family, all of whom must hear the 
voice, the teaching of this great Prophet, whom the 
Father has sent, not only to redeem, but also to restore 
so many of the human family as will accept his favors 
upon his terms. All must hear eventually, but comparatively 
few have the hearing ears at the present time. 
The prince of this world blinds the mind, closes and 
stupefies the ear, or makes what may be heard of no 
effect through traditions of men, or through hardness 
and selfishness of the hearer's own heart. Blessed are 
our eyes if, seeing and hearing of the Lord's grace 
and goodness toward us and toward all of his creatures, 
we at once fall into obedience to the spirit of the great 
Teacher's instructions. In so doing we will have passed 
from death unto life— gradually, until, under the ministry 
of the great Prophet, as sharers in the first resurrection, 
we shall be perfected and possess life in perfection, 
yea, life more abundantly,— immortality. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. SEPTEMBER 15, 1900. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 275 

What is the End of Life? 275 

The Spread of Mohammedanism 275 

Methodism and Higher Criticism 277 

Presbyterians Being Sifted 277 

High Church Performances 279 

Calamities— Why Permitted 279 

Times of Refreshing 280 

The Christian's Course Delineated 280 

The Dallas, Texas, Convention 283 

Sabbath Dinners and How to Utilize 

Them 283 

The Proper Kind of Table Talks 284 

A Royal Banquet Declined 286 

"Zion's Glad Songs" 274 



The Volunteer Work 274 

page 274 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2697 : page 274 

"ZION'S GLAD SONGS." 



OUR dear Brother McPhail, who has quite a talent for music, 

has collected a number of new and beautiful hymns,— the 

music to the majority being his own composition. These, fifty-four 

in number, are well printed, and appropriately bound in 

paper covers,— price 10 cents each, or $1 per dozen, postage free. 

This little book, entitled "Zion's Glad Songs," has another 
feature which we are sure will be appreciated by many, viz., 
the addition of the music for twenty-eight old tunes, long, short, 
common, and peculiar meters. These are inserted in the interest 
of our regular hymn book, "Poems and Hymns of Dawn," 
the tunes of the remainder being copyrighted. 

It is not at all the thought that the new book will supplant 
the old one; for many of the grand old hymns cannot be equaled 
by any new ones, either in words or tunes. The thought is to 
make it supplementary. As such we recommend it to you all. 
Our first edition of 6000 is now ready and orders will be filled 
as received. 



THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 



This branch of the service has lagged a little during the hot 
weather, because of small attendance at church services. Now 
that cooler weather has come we expect that it will revive. 
Some who have finished their own cities are branching out- 
endeavoring to serve nearby towns. This is commendable. 
Every faithful soldier of the cross is sure to receive blessings 
both now and hereafter from "the Captain of our salvation." 
Let us be faithful. 

page 274 

"Lift high the royal banner, It must not suffer loss." 



R2694 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



[The following, author unknown, came from India, from 
a Christian Missionary. It is excellent.] 

WHAT IS THE END OF LIFE? 



THE END OF LIFE is not to do good, altho so 
many of us think so. It is not to win souls— 
altho I once thought so. The end of life is— to do 
the will of God. That may be the line of doing good 
or winning souls, or it may not. For the individual, 
the answer to the question, "What is the end of my 
life?" is "To do the will of God, whatever that may be." 

Spurgeon replied to an invitation to preach to an 
exceptionally large audience, "I have no ambition to 
preach to 10,000 people, but to do the will of God"— 
and he declined. 

If we could have no ambition past the will of God, 
our lives would be successful. If we could say, "I have 
no ambition to go to the heathen; I have no ambition 
to win souls; my ambition is to do the will of God, 
whatever that may be," that would make all lives equally 
great or equally small, because the only great thing in 
a life is what of God's will there is in it. The maximum 
achievement of any man's life, after it is all over, 
is to have done the will of God. 

No man or woman can have done any more with 
a life— no Luther, no Spurgeon, no Wesley, no Melanchthon 
can have done any more with their lives; and 
a dairymaid or a scavenger can do as much. 

Therefore, the supreme principle upon which we 
have to run our lives is to adhere, through good report 
and ill, through temptation and prosperity and 
adversity, to the will of God, wherever that may lead us. 



It may take you to China, or you who are going to 

Africa may have to stay where you are; you who are 

going to be an evangelist may have to go into business; 

and you who are going into business may have 

to become an evangelist. But there is no happiness 

or success in any life till that principle is taken possession 

of. And the highest service is first, moment 

by moment, to be in the will of God. It may be to 

work or to wait; to stand fast or to lay still. Tis 

he, our blessed Lord, who will keep us in his will, 

if our eyes are fixed on him. 

How can you build up a life on that principle? 
Let me give you an outline of a little Bible reading:— 

The definition of an ideal life: 

Acts 13:22— "A man after mine own heart, which 
shall fulfil all my will." 

The object of life: 

Heb. 10:7— "I come to do thy will, O God." 

The first thing you need after life, is food: 

John 4:34— "My meat is to do the will of him that 
sent me." 

The next thing you need after food is society: 

Mark 3:35— "Whosoever shall do the will of my 
Father in Heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, 
and mother." 

You want education: 

Psa. 143:10— "Teach me to do thy will, O my God." 

You want pleasure: 

Psa. 40:8-"I delight to do thy will, O my God." 
A whole life can be built up on that vertebral column, 
and then, when all is over, 

1 John 2:17-"He that doeth the will of God abideth 
forever." 

THE SPREAD OF MOHAMMEDANISM. 



If reports are to be believed Mohammedanism is 
spreading in Asia and Africa much more rapidly than 
is Christianity. This is credited to three reasons. 
(1) Its simplicity of doctrine, which makes it commendable 
to persons of low intellectual capacity— 

R2695 : page 276 

Believe in Mohammed and obey his simple law and 
have an eternity of sensuous bliss. (2) Its permission 
of polygamy, common throughout those countries. 
(3) Its uniform requirement of total abstinence 
from intoxicants. 

Recognizing the fact that Christianity makes few 
proselytes from Mohammedanism, and that the latter 
is growing rapidly in numbers and influence, the 
British Government has of late years been attempting 
to gain the confidence and support of her Mohammedan 



subjects, whose number is estimated at one hundred 
and fifty millions— fifty millions more than all 
denominations of Protestant Christians in the whole world. 

Doubtless this change of attitude toward the very 
religion against which all the Crusades of medieval 
times were waged, tho due to political policy, is backed 
by the changed religious sentiment of our day;— 
which under the lead of the higher critics has 
declared,— 

"The hope of the race lies in a deeper study of 
the great, inspired writers of the past, such as Shakespeare, 
Homer, Dante and a few others, whose works 
have charmed the minds of people of culture. The 
Bible, also, though a little out-of-date, has been recognized, 
in the past, as a work of inspiration, and 
you may find it helpful to include it in your course of 
reading." 

General sentiment, therefore, resolves itself into 
this,— Since our wise men tell us that the Bible is 
unreliable, and that the death of Christ Jesus no more 
redeemed the world than did the death of other reformers; 
and since they tell us that future happiness 
depends upon the cultivation of our mental and 
moral qualities, and that Shakespeare's and other 
writings are quite as good or better than the Bible for 
such culture, how do we know but what the Mohammedan's 
Bible— the Koran— is as good or better than 
our own, and they as right as we or more so? Therefore 
let us not any longer say with the Bible that 
there is no other name than that of Jesus given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must be saved; but 
let us say, Get morality and education in the name 
of Mohammed or Jesus or Confucius or whomsoever you 
please. 

Such would be the logical outcome of such teachings; 
and thereby we are reminded of our Lord's 
words respecting these times— "When the Son of 
Man cometh shall he find the faith on the earth?"— 
Luke 18:8. 

WHAT GREAT BRITAIN IS DOING FOR MOHAMMEDANISM. 



Shortly after the capture of Khartoum by General 
Lord Kitchener, and at his instance, a Mohammedan 
college was founded, known as Gordon College, and 
more recently another Mohammedan school was 
founded at Sierra Leone, on the west coast of Africa. 
This latter institution was opened with considerable 
ceremony under the auspices of the acting-governor, 
Major Nathan, and of it the New York Sun says 
editorially:— 

"The ceremony began with a prayer in Arabic 
offered up by the Imaum of the mosque, Alfa Omaru, 
who afterward gave a short account of the efforts to 



promote education made by the Sierra Leone Moslems. 
He referred to the years 1839 and 1841, when the 
Mohammedan religion was considered as a danger to 
the colony, when Moslems were persecuted and their 
mosques pulled down by excited mobs. Thanks, however, 
to an enlightened policy, matters were set right, 
and for more than fifty years the Moslems have enjoyed 
full toleration and the protection of the British 
Government. In 1872 the festival of the Lesser Bairam 
had been attended by the governor, Sir John Pope 
Henessy, with a military escort, and in 1 879 another 
governor, Sir Samuel Rowe, had entertained seven 
hundred Moslems at Government House on the occasion 
of the Bairam Festival of that year. In 1 89 1 
Governor Hay handed over a fine property with commodious 
buildings to the Moslem community for educational 
purposes, accompanied by a grant for the 
payment of the teachers. These successive events 
were important epochs in the history of Islamism in 
West Africa, and the Imaum looked forward to the 
day when the present elementary school would become 
the stepping-stone to a college." 

In his reply Major Nathan cited examples of 
Mohammedans occupying official positions in India 
and in Egypt, and added that,— 

"He wished them to perfect themselves in Arabic 
in order that they might know what real Mohammedanism 
is. When they understood the Koran, he 
said, they would see that their religion was one telling 
them how to live, and not a religion of charms and 
gewgaws. Knowing English, they would have the 
literature and wisdom of the white man open to them: 
and with Arabic, they would be able to read not only 
the Koran, but the 'Makamat' of El Hariri, known 
already to some of them, and the 'Alif Lailat wa 
Lailah,' the translation of which English people read 
with pleasure. In concluding, Major Nathan urged 
them not to rest content until they had in Sierra 
Leone a Moslem college whence wisdom and knowledge 
might go forth over the whole of West Africa." 

The Sun believes that the importance of the 
incident can hardly be overestimated. It says:— 

"The news of the official encouragement given 
to the Mohammedan religion and the culture of its 
sacred language, Arabic, will in a very short time 
spread from the Atlantic to the Red Sea, and the 
wisdom of the policy that dictated it will be justified 
by the resulting spread of British influence among the 
Moslem populations of North Africa. In all probability 
it will lead to a corresponding rivalry on the 
part of the French, whose hold on the Arabs of 
Algeria is none too strong, owing to mistakes in 
policy and the want of character of many of those 
appointed to office. 

R2695 : page 277 



"The next century no doubt has many surprises 
in store; but whatever they may be, not the least 
strange will be the spectacle of the two Western 
nations that led in the crusades promoting, for political 
and territorial reasons, the creed they then tried 
to crush." 

However peculiar all this may appear from the 
standpoint of nominal "Christendom," it is perfectly 
clear to all of the "royal priesthood." We see the 
fallacy of the claim that European kingdoms are 
Christ's kingdoms— that the Word of God never did 
recognize them as anything but "kingdoms of this 
world" ruled by "the prince of this world." We 
see that the nominal churches are not the one true 
Church of "saints," whose names are written in 
heaven. We see that the Crusades, Inquisitions, and 
all similar attacks upon human beings and their moral 
and religious liberties were never authorized by the 
Lord; but were wholly contrary to his Word and 
spirit. We see that it is perfectly proper and consistent 
for worldly people and governments (English, 
French, German or what not) to favor any system 
or all systems of education and religion that will in 
any degree counteract vice and immorality, and preserve 
peace. 

True, we who have had the eyes of our understanding 
opened to see matters clearly from the Bible 
standpoint could do nothing against the truth and in 
favor of error— nothing to foster and encourage the 
error or even to apparently bid it Godspeed. But we 
are not in official positions where such questions could 
come to us: because we are "not of this world" even 
as our Redeemer was not (John 17:16), therefore the 
world disrespects us (John 17:14), and offers us no 
places of public influence. Fidelity to our Lord's 
principles thus saves his faithful from perplexities: 
they have died to worldly politics and its aims and 
duties and methods, and have been "translated into the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son," and are thus members 
of the "holy nation" which has not yet come 
into power and ruling authority— waiting for their 
King to exalt or set them up in power and great glory 
at the time when his Kingdom shall be revealed to the 
world as the supplanter of all kingdoms of this world. 

METHODISM AND HIGHER CRITICISM. 



"The 'heresy' case of Professor Mitchell (see 
The Literary Digest, January 27), has been effectively 
disposed of for, at least, some years to come. By the 
recent General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church at Chicago it was referred to the bishops, 
who, apparently finding it as embarrassing a subject 



to handle as did the Conference, referred the matter 

of Dr. Mitchell's retention to the trustees of Boston 

University, by making him eligible to re-election for 

five years— until, conveniently, after the next meeting 

of the General Conference. The fact that the trustees 

of one of the leading Methodist theological seminaries 

have now unanimously re-elected Dr. Mitchell, 

who is one of the most prominent American exponents of 

the higher criticism, and has been accused of deviating 

widely from the traditional view as to the authorship 

of certain Old Testament books, is regarded as an 

event of significance. The largest Protestant denomination 

in America thus tacitly votes to retain an upholder 

of the higher criticism as official instructor of her young 

clerics."— Literary Digest. 

PRESBYTERIANS BEING SIFTED. 



The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
recently in session in St. Louis, in reply to overtures 
for a revision of its Westminster Confession of Faith, 
referred the matter to a committee, whose business it 
shall be to learn the opinion of the local Presbyters 
and to report to the Assembly of 1901 . The Presbyterian 
weekly journals give the best clue to the results, 
for they are generally under the care of the 
leaders amongst the ministry, who generally "try to 
be on the winning side." 

From the trend of comments by these journals 
(The Interior and The Herald and Presbyter alone seem 
to urge revision) we opine that the Confession will 
probably not be revised but reaffirmed. The result 
of this course would be to sift out the honest but 
deluded souls in pulpit and pew who for years have 
burdened their consciences (and in many instances 
hardened them) with slander against the divine character 
and deceit toward all mankind in professing the 
Westminster Confession. These have for years consoled 

R2696 : page 277 

themselves with the thought that (1) the Confession 
is a dead letter anyway, which today nobody 
believes, and (2) that it would soon be changed, 
"perhaps next year,— and my conscience can stand 
the strain that much longer." If now that Confession 
is reaffirmed by the denomination these will be 
thereby forced out to maintain even a vestige of peace 
with God and a good conscience toward God and 
man. The pity is that their consciences are not more 
tender and their hearts more loyal to God and his 
truth that they should act more promptly. 

"The children of this world [the "tares"] are 
wiser in their generation than the children of light 



[the "wheat"], said our Lord. And so in this case 
undoubtedly the reaffirming of the Westminster Confession 
is the wisest course so far as the preservation 
of the "tare" organization is concerned. For tho, 
as above suggested, this will drive out some of the 
most conscientious, it will be found that they all told 
are but few. On the other hand were the Confession 
revised or repudiated it would mean to the rank and 
file of Presbyterianism, "We have lost our gods! We 

R2696 : page 278 

have admitted that we were all wrong in respect to 
our faith— blind men who for centuries have attempted 
to lead the confessedly blind world into truth, and 
now confess ourselves bewildered, yea totally blind as 
respects the divine plan!" Every Presbyterian would 
feel abashed at such a confession, and hence it is 
that such a revision of creed is improbable: and if it 
were seen to be inevitable many would transfer their 
"good names" and titles to other denominations before 
the funeral. 

"THE PRESBYTERIAN" ARGUES AGAINST REVISION 
THUS,- 

"Too much has been said recently to weaken the 
force of our doctrinal statements. Many who never 
thought of calling them in question are wondering 
what they really teach." 

The people would have little difficulty in deciding 
the meaning of that very explicit and carefully 
worded "Westminster Confession," were it not that 
the theologians having told them, "These be thy 
gods, O Presbyterians!" are fearful that the pews 
(more honest than the pulpits) shall discover how 
terribly homely, yea, devilish, are these gods which 
they have so long worshiped and served. 

Continuing, The Presbyterian says, "Others who 
regard the false constructions put on them as the 
work of adversaries, now find that even Presbyterian 
ministers are declaring them legitimate inferences. 
Damage is being done by the outgivings of radical 
revisionists. The church is suffering, and will continue 
to suffer in name and in accomplishment, with 
years of revision agitation. Her interests would be far 
more advanced, in our judgment, by standing by the old 
standards of faith and by their reaffirmation by our 
Presbyteries and General Assembly." 

What does this language mean in plain English? 
Is not the following construction a reasonable one? 

For a long time now our ministers and religious 
editors have presented a solid front to the world, and 
by claiming that black in the creed is white they 
have succeeded in convincing Presbyterians, at least, 
that the black parts are at very most not darker than 



grey or mist and fog color. But now this discussion 

is in danger of disillusionizing the people. Already 

it is giving us great trouble and is likely to cause 

more disturbance and dissatisfaction, not only with 

our Diana, but also toward us, the well-paid and 

honored shrine-makers and servers. We are not 

thinking about the truth and its service, nor about 

the interests of the true Church, whose names are 

written in heaven; we are merely considering the interests 

of our sect, the Presbyterian Church, and how 

these matters will affect her interests and worldly prosperity. 

We feel provoked that Presbyterian ministers 

who have stifled their consciences for years should be 

so weak, so pusillanimous, as now to show the white 

feather and confess that they and we all have for years 

been hoodwinking and deceiving the Lord's flock who 

gave us liberally of their golden fleece to lead them 

into pastures of truth. As for us, we are committed 

to the prosperity of Presbyterianism— all of our name 

and title and earthly hopes are attached to it, and 

hence, false tho the Confession be to every instinct of 

justice and love, we must stick to it— sink or swim, 

live or die, survive or perish! 

Does the foregoing seem to be an uncharitable 
paraphrase of the Presbyterian's position? Let those 
who so think read carefully the following extract from 
the Confession and decide then whether anything better 
or nobler than policy leads it to defend and call for 
a reaffirmation of those sentiments of a darker period. 
We have too much respect for the Presbyterian's brains 
to suppose that it does not comprehend the language, 
and too much respect for its heart to suppose that it 
at heart endorses the presentation as true and just: 
hence we can only conclude that its advocacy is insincere 
and for policy's sake. The policy, as already 
suggested, is worldly-wise and will serve to keep together 
a little longer one of the most respected of 
the human organizations falsely styled churches; but 
the end of all such is not far distant, as clearly shown 
in God's Word and pointed out in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. III., Chaps. 4 to 7, and VOL. IV., Chaps. 11 to 13. 

The following is the referred to— 

EXTRACT FROM THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION OF 
FAITH. 

"By the decree of God, for the manifestation of 
His glory, some men and angels are predestinated 
unto everlasting life and others foreordained to everlasting 
death. These angels and men, thus predestinated 
and foreordained, are particularly and unchangeably 
designed; and their number is so certain and 
definite that it can not be either increased or 
diminished. 

"Those of mankind that are predestinated unto 
life, God, before the foundation of the world was laid, 



according to his eternal and immutable purpose and 
the secret counsel and good pleasure of His will, hath 
chosen in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of His 
mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith 
or good works or perseverance in either of them, or any 
other thing in the creature, as conditions or causes moving 
Him thereto; and all to the praise of His glorious 
grace. 

"As God hath appointed the elect unto glory, so 
hath He, by the eternal and free purpose of His will, 
foreordained all the means thereunto. Wherefore they 
who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed 
by Christ, are effectually called unto faith in Christ by 
His Spirit working in due season; are justified, adopted, 
sanctified, and kept by His power through faith 
unto salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by 
Christ, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified and 
saved, but THE ELECT ONLY. 

R2696 : page 279 

"The rest of mankind God was pleased, according 
to the unsearchable counsel of His own will, whereby 
He extendeth or withholdeth mercy as He pleaseth, 
for the glory of His sovereign power over His creatures, 
to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor and 
wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious 
justice." 

DEFECTIVE EDUCATION OF MINISTERS. 



Rev. D. S. Gregory, D.D., says:— 
"In a ministerial body of say seven thousand 
there are perhaps several thousands of us that nobody 
will hear preach: many more that are heard by good 
people under stress of duty; and comparatively few 
that are heard gladly.... 

"The psychology of the average educator is fundamentally 
defective, and hence his pedagogics must 
be fatally false. He recognizes the existence of a 
cognitive faculty, the power of acquiring the simple 
elements or raw materials, so to speak, of knowledge, 
in perception external and internal; of a conservative 
faculty, or memory, the power of keeping knowledge 
so acquired for future use; of a comparative faculty, 
the power of thought for working up the knowledge 
acquired and conserved into conceptions, judgments, 
and reasonings. But just there his psychology of the 
intellect strikes a dead wall which it seems powerless 
to pass. He fails to recognize the existence of the 
supreme intellectual faculty, to which all the others 
are merely subordinates and for which alone they exist 
—the constructive or systemizing faculty. He does 
not find it in his text-books; it has been practically 



ignored in educational aims and methods...." 

This is too highflown language for the majority 
of readers; we give its sense in few words thus,— The 
average minister learns at college to collect certain 
facts and theories, and to memorize them; but he never 
learns how to systemize what he has learned. 

We reply that this is true; nevertheless, it is the 
bulwark of Churchianity; for had honest ministers or 
laymen attempted to systemize their theology (the 
errors so largely predominating) they would have 
found long ago that all their theories are as irrational 
as they are unscriptural. No theology but the old 
theology of the Bible— the divine plan of the ages- 
can be systemised; and it is system and plan and order 
and beauty throughout, and thus bears the impressions 
of its divine Author, Jehovah. 

EPISCOPAL HIGH CHURCH PERFORMANCES. 



The Christian Commonwealth (London) describes 
a mass recently performed in St. Michael's Church, 
London, as follows:— 

"The mass 'for the repose of the soul' of the deceased 
was celebrated, and at the funeral service in 
the church all the accessories of Vatican mummery 
were observed. Each of the congregation of ten received 
a little candle, which was lighted before the 
Gospel was read, and blown out after the reading. 
The people's candles were rekindled at the Sanctus, 
after incense-burning. After mass the celebrant left 
the chair, and at the sedilia changed his chasuble for 

R2697 : page 279 

a black cope with yellow orphreys and then headed a 
procession with a crucifix. The catafalque was sprinkled 
with holy water, and censed, while petitions were 
mumbled for the soul of the deceased. After the 
clergy were gone the people were invited to asperse 
the catafalque with the holy water." 

CALAMITIES-WHY PERMITTED. 



The inundation of the city of Galveston, Texas, 
accompanied by great loss of life and property, has 
shocked the world. And no wonder; it was surely a 
great calamity that five thousand human beings should 
so suddenly be swept into death— the grave. Yet the 
real horror, affecting many minds in connection with 
this matter, is never even hinted at in the great headlines 
of the daily press announcements. What a shock 
it would give if these papers were edited in so-called 



orthodox style, thus:— 

JESUS CAME TO 5000 GALVESTON PEOPLE. 

OF THE NUMBER HE FOUND ONLY ABOUT 100 SAINTS 

FIT FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. 

THE REMAINDER, 4900, 

HE BANISHED TO ETERNAL HOPELESS AGONY IN 

TORMENT, PREPARED FOR THEM, 

ACCORDING TO HIS FOREKNOWLEDGE AND 

LOVING DESIGN, 

BEFORE THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD. 

If our dear friends who profess to believe such 
blasphemous things respecting our Heavenly Father's 
plan would come out honestly and state their views 
thus plainly we should be glad of it. It would be a 
great service to the truth. It would act upon many 
as an emetic, and help them to get rid of the unhealthy 
mass of error which now sickens them and hinders 
their appetite for the true heavenly manna of the divine 
Word, which then would be to all the Lord's true 
people "sweeter than honey." 

Tract No. 2, of the "Old Theology" series, treats 
this subject of "Calamities and Why God Permits 
Them." We recommend its liberal circulation at 
times like this when great calamities awaken thoughts 
respecting divine providences, etc. And we might 
here remark that we will not be surprised if the next 
fifteen years shall witness an increasingly large number 
of calamities. To our understanding there are 
physical changes necessary to the full introduction of 
Millennial conditions: these will probably come about 
gradually, and incidentally cause great trouble and 
losses. These we understand are so timed as to form 
a part of the great time of trouble with which our age 
is to end, which, however, the Lord designs shall prepare 
man as well as the earth for further, future blessings. 
"When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 



R2699 : page 280 

TIMES OF REFRESHING. 



THE GATHERING at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., 
was not expected to be a large one; because the 
railroad excursion rates extended over only a very 
limited area. It was therefore a local rather than a 
general meeting; but as such it served its purpose 
grandly, and brought to many clearer views of the 
divine plan, and fresh energy in its service, because of 
renewed consecration to the great Giver of all good. 
About one hundred were in attendance, and these 



were nearly all visitors from abroad, as only about 
three WATCH TOWER subscribers reside there, and few 
outsiders attended. The Lord was with the Convention 
and blessed the two days of its session greatly; 
and we believe that the grace there experienced will 
not only be a lasting blessing to those in attendance, 
but that its overflow upon others not privileged to 
attend, will be a lasting joy and benefit. 

En route we spent Sunday at Toronto, Canada, 
where another local Convention of about one hundred 
had gathered. This also was a feast to our souls. 
We thanked God for the tie that binds our hearts in 
Christian love— and realized afresh that— 
"The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above." 

The home route permitted a meeting between 
trains with some of the dear friends at Washington, 
D.C., where about thirty were hastily convened, to 
whom we spoke on "Pressing toward the mark for 
the prize of our high calling." Departing, we thanked 
God for the fulfilment of Mark 10:30; and felt that if 
faithfulness to the truth had gained us many bitter 
enemies, it had also brought us such devoted friends 
as very few in this world could boast of. 

We arrived home, at Allegheny, in good season 
for Sunday services (Sept. 9), where our joy further 
abounded in addressing about two hundred of the 
home congregation, and in receiving their hearty welcome 
back after an absence of two Sundays. We can 
only wish and hope that each of the one thousand 
dear brethren and sisters "scattered abroad," with 
whom we communed and shook hands during the past 
two weeks (beginning with the Chicago Convention 
and ending at Allegheny), experienced one-half the 
blessing that has come to your pastor. He most heartily 
thanks you all for your many kindnesses and expressions 
of Christian love extended to him and the 
associated "Pilgrims;" and he thanks God for the 
privileges enjoyed in serving his flock, in Jesus' name. 
"A table God has furnished me 

In presence of my foes; 
My head he doth with oil anoint, 
And my cup overflows." 



R2697 : page 280 

THE CHRISTIAN'S COURSE DELINEATED. 



DAVID, the Prophet, in the first Psalm, has 
significantly marked out the proper Christian 
course and its blessings and outcome. In the 
first verse he designates three classes from whom the 



Lord's people should stand aloof— three classes with 
whom, if they have fellowship, it will be to their 
detriment. (1) The ungodly, or more properly, the 
wicked (margin, Leeser, Young). (2) Sinners. 
(3) The scornful. "Blessed is the man who walketh 
not in the counsel of the wicked, nor standeth in the 
way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." 
-Psa. 1:1. 

Applying this Psalm prophetically, it is proper 
that we should determine what classes of persons are 
meant by the wicked, the sinners and the scornful. 
We suggest that under the terms of the present Gospel 
age, not murderers and thieves, etc., can be 
meant by the wicked, for such, generally at least, are 
deluded and "blinded by the god of this world," so 
that they have never seen the true Gospel light; and 
not seeing it they have not had such responsibilities 
in connection with it as would properly brand them 
as wicked from the divine standpoint. The "wicked" 
are to be looked for in the Church, and in harmony 
with this thought is our Lord's parable which, referring 
to the Church and the talents bestowed upon its 
members, declares respecting the one who received the 
talent of the Lord, but failed to use it— "Thou wicked 
and slothful servant." The "wicked" of this age 
would seem to be those who have enjoyed the light 
of divine favor, who have come to a knowledge of the 
truth, been made partakers of the holy spirit, etc., 
and who then, despite all these favors and blessings, 

R2698 : page 280 

and despite their covenant with the Lord to be his 
servants and to lay down their lives in his service, 
neglect the same. 

The Apostle also points out a certain class in the 
Church as wicked, saying of them that if they fall 
away "it is impossible to renew them again unto repentance" 
(Heb. 6:6), "for it had been better for 
them that they had never known the way of righteousness, 
than that having known it they should turn 
from the holy commandment." (2 Pet. 2:21.) The 
same class is again described as those who sin wilfully 
after receiving a knowledge of the truth, and for 
whom, consequently, no further share in the sacrifice 
for sins remains; and consequently no hope for them 
in the coming age. (Heb. 10:26.) In a word, then, 

R2698 : page 281 

the wicked class of the present age would seem, from 
the Lord's standpoint, to be those in the Church 
nominal who have received clear light and knowledge 
respecting the divine plan, and who have either sinned 
wilfully by turning away from a life of righteousness 
to a life of intentional sin, or those who repudiate 



the precious blood of Christ and the atonement made 
for them by the same, counting the blood of the 
covenant wherewith they were sanctified a common or 
ordinary thing. 

If then we have found a class denominated "the 
wicked," let us consider what can be meant by the 
injunction that the blessed of the Lord should not 
walk in the counsel of these wicked ones— should not 
follow their guidance, their suggestions, their instructions, 
their leading. 

Every man and every woman has more or less of 
an influence which attracts others to walk in his way. 
And all who repudiate the ransom, all who deny 
original sin and its sentence of death, and the necessity 
for our redemption from sin and death,— all who 
thus deny the foundation of the Gospel, the "wicked" 
above described, seem to make it their special business 
to endeavor to seduce the minds of others— to 
lead others astray by their evil counsel. If they cannot 
secure prompt attention, they invariably suggest, 
—Walk with us awhile, keep our company, and see 
whether you will not gradually come to believe as 
we do, that we were not bought with a price, even the 
precious blood of Christ— that man needed not to be 
bought; that he did not fall from perfection; that he 
was not sold under sin by our first parents; and, hence, 
that he needed not a redemption in any sense of the 
word, and therefore the Scriptures are false and misleading 
in making this the centre and pith of the 
Gospel. 

Their false suggestion is that our only need was 
a good and holy example. They are blind to the fact 
that all through the past there were many noble 
examples, and that there are many today, far beyond 
the ability of the average natural man to follow, and 
that we needed something decidedly more helpful and 
efficacious than an example. They seem blind to the 
fact that an example would never justify to life one 
who was justly condemned to death. They do not 
seem to realize that God was just in pronouncing the 
penalty against our race, and that he could by no 
means clear the guilty through any process of injustice; 
and that, therefore, it was necessary that a ransom, 
a corresponding price, should be paid before the 
resurrection and reconciliation were possibilities. 
(Rom. 3:26.) But they say, Walk with us in our 
counsels and see; and, as the Apostle suggests, many 
follow their pernicious ways, denying the Lord having 
bought them. -2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

Those who would be of the class pronounced 
"blessed" of the Lord, in our text, must not follow 
the counsel of these "wicked," but, on the contrary, 
should stand firmly by the Gospel of the redemption, 
and seek no other. Let all who desire to be blessed 
of the Lord mark well this counsel and follow it, and 
have no fellowship whatever with the "wicked," nor 



in any degree walk after their counsels. 

"Sinners" are mentioned as another class, separate 
and distinct from the "wicked" above referred to, 
and they are evidently a class whose transgressions 
are much less heinous in the sight of the Lord: these 
sinners we must look for in the Church also, not in 
the world. Since the world is not yet on trial there 
is nothing to demonstrate the standing of any of 
its people. The "sinners" of our text we would understand 
to be those who, without repudiating the covenant, 
without denying the Lord that bought them, 
and thus falling utterly from divine favor, are nevertheless 
failing to live according to the terms of their 
covenant, their consecration. These would seem to 
be sinners against the covenant they have made— 
those who fail to carry out the covenant of self-sacrifice. 
This class possibly includes some who are described 
by the Lord as "overcharged with the cares 
of this life and the deceitfulness of riches," and 
who for these reasons are sinners against their covenant, 
violators of it. The Lord's people who would 
be of the "blessed" of the Lord, and receive his 
ultimate "Well done," are not to stand with these 
covenant-violators even. To stand with them might 
imply to treat them as companions, to enter into their 
plans and schemes; and surely all who would thus do 
would be likely to become partakers of their spirit, 
and to become careless of their consecration vows, 
and overcharged with earthly cares and ambitions. 

The "scorners" are designated as a still different 
class, and might possibly represent some not of the 
Church, but possessing more or less knowledge of 
holy things and rejecting them, speaking of them 
lightly and scornfully. The Lord's people are not to 
be intimately associated with such, nor make them 
their companions and friends. They cannot have 
fellowship with such without receiving injury; hence, 
so far as possible the Christian is to avoid this class, 
in business partnerships, in society, and especially in 
marriage. No one who could speak lightly or scornfully 
of our Heavenly Father or of our Lord Jesus 
or of the exceeding great and precious things set 
before the Lord's people in his promises, could be 
other than a hindrance to those who are seeking to 
gain the prize of our high calling. He therefore who 
would be blessed of the Lord, and who would attain 
that for which he was "called," should take heed to 
the instructions and avoid the scornful. 

R2698 : page 282 

This does not signify, however, as the Apostle 
points out, that we are to have no dealings in the 
world with any but saints, for, as he tells us, in that 
event we would needs go out of the world (1 Cor. 5:10); 
but it does imply a recognition of the principle 



that evil is contagious, and that the Lord's people 

cannot be too careful to avoid every contact with 

evil. They should separate themselves to the Lord, 

to holiness, and seek to place themselves under influences 

in harmony with their holy and true and 

pure aspirations, begotten by the holy spirit. 

The Prophet implies that those who have fellowship 
with the scornful and with covenant-breakers 
and with the wicked who deny the precious blood of 
the covenant, cannot be blessed of the Lord, because 
they are in a wrong attitude of heart; for, as his 
words imply, those who are in the right attitude of 
heart to be blessed of the Lord can readily find something 
much better, much more interesting, much more 
profitable, than fellowship with any of these classes; 
"Their delight is in the Law of the Lord, and they 
meditate in his Law by day and by night." 

This does not imply a reading over of the Ten 
Commandments, nor of the Mosaic ritual, but to the 
Christian it implies a delight in the Law of righteousness, 
which law is briefly comprehended in the word 
"Love." The right-minded Christian who is in the 
line of heavenly blessing now, and of heavenly glory 
by and by, has found and will continually find in the 
great Law of Love something well worthy of his time 
and his study. He finds this Law applicable to every 
relationship between the heavenly Father and himself; 
he sees that all of his conduct, his every service 
toward God as a son, adopted into his family, must 
be the result of love. He sees also that love is the 
Law which must govern all of his conduct toward the 
brethren in Christ and toward all men; and he finds 
in this abundant and satisfactory food for reflection 
in his leisure hours, so that he is interested neither in 
the speculations and quibblings of the "scoffers," nor 
in the worldly matters which overcharge the "sinners," 
nor in the false Gospel which engages the 
attention of the "wicked," who deny the ransom. 

He finds that this Law of God contains, or is related 
to, every feature of the divine plan; and hence 
his meditations and studies of its various ramifications 
lead his thoughts hither and thither, in contact 
with all the exceeding great and precious promises 
which God has bestowed upon them that love him, 
both as respects the life that now is and also that 
which is to come. And the more this is his attitude 
the more is he blessed of the Lord; and the more 
blessed he is of the Lord the more surely will this be 
his attitude and experience. 

Such an one, the Lord declares through the 
Prophet, will be like a tree planted near rivulets of 
water, which will always be abundantly refreshed and 
never fail in his yield of the fruits of the spirit, which 
under such circumstances must grow and flourish 
exceedingly. And as his fruit will be abundant, so 
his leaf (his hopes) will be ever green; he can and 



will have faith in him who promised the coming 

blessings, and whose riches of grace he comes to appreciate 

more and more daily. 

"All that he doeth shall prosper." This is literally 
true, tho not, perhaps, in the way in which the world 
might view the subject. But what is it that such a 
child of God doeth? What is his aim? What is his 
object in life? Wealth, fame, worldly honors? No, 
none of these. His aim, that which he doeth, that 
which he seeketh, is to glorify his Heavenly Father 
and eventually to attain to the glory, honor and immortality 

R2699 : page 282 

which God has promised to them that love 

him. (Rom. 2:7.) If then the Christian but attain 

these his objects, surely all his experiences will have 

been prosperous, and that abundantly. What matters 

it to him if under divine providence he was permitted 

to err in judgment respecting some business venture, 

so that instead of earthly prosperity it brought financial 

loss, if it worked out spiritual gain? To this 

blessed man the loss was prosperity, and he proved the 

truth of the divine promise, that all things shall work 

together for his good. Under such a promise, under 

such guidance of divine wisdom in his affairs, guaranteeing 

him just such experiences, trials, difficulties, 

earthly disappointments and disadvantages as will, 

under the Lord's providence, bring him richest blessing 

in the attainment of the great prize of the future 

which he seeks, and for which every other thing, 

interest, hope and aim has been sacrificed, how could 

any be considered otherwise than prospered? (Rom. 8:28.) 

Surely indeed, all that he doeth shall prosper 

—not because of his own wisdom, not because of infallibility 

in the management of his affairs, but because 

his infallible Lord is supervising his interests, and outworking 

them for good to him. 

It is this same class of blessed ones that our Lord 
addresses, saying, "Blessed are ye when men shall 
revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of 
evil against you falsely for my sake"— things may 
seem to be going contrary to your welfare, and hence 
to be working out incalculable harm; but have faith 
—"Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your 
reward in heaven:" and it is this heavenly reward for 
which you have been called, and for which you have 
entered the race, and the attainment of which will be 
exceedingly abundant above all that you could ask 
or think. -Matt. 5:11,12; Eph. 3:20. 



R2697 : page 283 

THE DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION. 



-SEPT. 29,30 & OCT. 1.- 

WE DO not expect many from outside the State 
of Texas at this Convention; for the special 
excursion rates are restricted to near-by territory. 
Oklahoma, Indian Territory, Arkansas and Louisiana 
we believe participate, in whole or in part. As Texas 
is a very large state we endeavored to arrange for two 
Conventions, but could not obtain the excursion rates 
except for Dallas. 

Our Convention will take advantage of the cheap 
rates of fare granted on account of the "Dallas Fair," 
and such tickets should be called for. If you desire 
to attend, inquire of your ticket agent at once for rates, 
train time, etc., and as soon as possible let us know 
on which road and train you expect to arrive; and how 
many will be of your party, males and females; if colored, 
mention it. State if you desire room and board 
at one dollar per day. Those who cannot afford even 
this moderate expense will please say so, and some 
comfortable arrangement will be made for them also. 

"WOODMEN'S HALL" has been secured for the 
use of the Convention. It is centrally located at No. 
349 Main Street. It is an easy walk from all depots, 
but those who desire can use electric car direct from 
the depots to the door of the hall. 

A RECEPTION COMMITTEE will so far as possible 
meet all who arrive on the morning of Sept. 29th; but 
any failing to be recognized near the Ladies' Waiting 
Room door can readily find Woodmen's Hall as above 
and should proceed there at once. 

We hope for a good attendance and warrant a 
warm welcome and a rich blessing to all true soldiers 
of the cross; and to those seeking to find and put on 
the whole armor of God. Come, intent upon doing 
good unto all— especially to the household of faith, 
as well as praying a blessing upon yourself, and you 
surely will not go away empty. 

Arrangements for water baptism will be complete, 
robes, towels, etc. Yes, "Bro. Russell" will attend. 



R2699 : page 283 

SABBATH DINNERS AND HOW TO UTILIZE THEM. 

-LUKE 14:1-14. -OCT. 1 .- 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"Whosoever exalteth himself shall be 
abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

SO FAR as we know, our Lord Jesus never refused 

an invitation to feasts, banquets, etc., 

to which he was asked, with his disciples. The present 



lesson tells us of such a banquet, probably specially 
arranged in Jesus' honor, by a Pharisee high in social 
position as a ruler in the synagogue. The feast was 
appointed for the Sabbath day, as was frequently the 
case, many of the Sabbath feasts being quite sumptuous; 
but the viands were always served cold, it being a 
part of the Jewish code that fires should not be kindled 
nor victuals cooked on the Sabbath day. And altho 
we, as Christians, are entirely free from the Jewish Law, 
including the fourth commandment as well as all the 
other commandments of the Decalogue, but are under 
a new commandment, the perfect Law of Love, to God 
and to man; nevertheless, we concede that considerable 
blessing might be experienced, and additional opportunities 
for spiritual development enjoyed, if Christian 
people were to cook a double portion on Saturday, and 
thus leave themselves freer from domestic responsibilities 
on the day which, according to the laws of the 
land (tho not according to any law of the Scriptures) 
we appropriately observe by abstinence from the ordinary 
business of life, utilizing the leisure for worship, 
study and spiritual communion. 

Evidently before entering the dining room, probably 
in the court-yard, our Lord, while surrounded by 
many notables of the scribes and Pharisees, noticed a 
man afflicted with dropsy; and it would appear that 
our dear Redeemer was so full of love and sympathy 
that he had a desire to bless and to heal every such 
person with whom he came directly in contact. The 
loving character thus manifested gives us assurance 
that when the Kingdom comes and our Lord shall take 
unto himself his great power and reign, he will assuredly 
bless and uplift so many as will accept his favors 
in a proper manner— so many as really desire to be 
blessed by him. Thus our Lord's general character 
fully substantiates and corroborates all the prophetic 
statements made respecting him and the character of 
his Millennial work of blessing all the families of the 
earth. 

Our Lord well knew the extreme of fanaticism to 
which the Jews had gone, especially the outwardly 
pious and formal ones, representatives of whom were 
now gathered about him. He knew that they would 
regard the healing of the dropsical person as a violation 
of the Sabbath. Indeed, as illustrating the sanctity 
of the Sabbath, the Jewish Talmud tells of an 
instance in which a house took fire, and three young 
girls were burned to death, simply because their friends 
and neighbors interpreted the law against making a fire 
as implying also that it would be wrong to quench a 
fire on the Sabbath day, and when expostulated with 
respecting the matter, the answer was that it was "a 
sacrifice acceptable to God, who would reward them 
for having allowed their dear ones to perish rather 
than break his commandment!" 

Jesus wished not only to correct such a false interpretation 



of the Law, but also, in harmony with his 

R2699 : page 284 

custom, to do a large proportion of his miracles on the 

Sabbath day; because that day typified the coming 

Millennial day, the great seventh thousand-year day in 

which, his Millennial Kingdom being established, he 

will scatter blessings of healing, mental, moral and 

physical, amongst all the people. By way of instructing 

his disciples and the Pharisees respecting the improper 

view of the Sabbath generally entertained them 

by religious teachers, our Lord enquired of the Pharisees 

what they had to say on the subject: Is it or is 

it not lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? They made 

no reply; no doubt feeling themselves somewhat incompetent 

to discuss any question with one whom they 

had all learned to recognize as a great Teacher, however 

much they rejected his Messiahship. 

Then Jesus, as showing his own understanding of 
the matter, that it would be right, that it would be in 
full harmony with the spirit of the Law to heal a man 
on the Sabbath day, touched the dropsical man and 
healed him. Then, by way of pointing out to his 
auditors the inconsistency of their line of thought on 
this subject, he reminded them that it was a recognized 
privilege and duty of every Jew to deliver his 
ox or his ass, fallen into some pit or difficulty, and to 
consider this a work of necessity and mercy, not forbidden 

R2700 : page 284 

by the fourth commandment of the Jewish 

Law. He allowed his auditors to draw the inference 

from this illustration, that as it could not be wrong to 

assist a dumb animal out of difficulty on the Sabbath, 

much less could it be wrong to relieve the distress 

of a human being made in the image of God. 

Thus he would show that God's laws are not arbitrary, 

but that it is always proper to do good. 

THE PROPER KIND OF TABLE TALKS. 



Every Christian family should utilize the excellent 
opportunities afforded for social converse at meal -times. 
Not only does pleasant and profitable conversation 
assist digestion, and thus prove physically helpful, 
but, additionally, these regular family gatherings should 
be recognized as opportunities for mental profit and 
for growth in knowledge respecting both temporal and 
spiritual things. Particularly for the last fourteen 
years this has been the custom of the Bible House 
family at Allegheny,— and a very profitable one. Our 
topics are usually propounded in the question form, 



the privilege of questioning being open to all at the 
table. Answers to the questions are sought from each 
one present, thus stimulating thought and a proper 
expression of it, very helpful to all, as subsequently 
they may be called upon to answer such a question 
before others in public or in private. We commend 
the plan to all of our readers, suggesting that 
in such a gathering the one supposed to be most conversant 
with such matters reserve his reply for the last. 

Where the family is composed wholly of "new 
creatures" the questions would properly differ somewhat 
in general character from what they would be if 
it were a mixed company: nevertheless, appropriate 
subjects should not be refused from anyone present; 
as, for instance, questions respecting table etiquette, 
good breeding, proper language, the events of the day 
that do not partake of the nature of gossip, etc. It is 
a shame that Christian people, even in the humblest 
walks of life, and when perhaps surrounded by poverty, 
have no thought of what valuable opportunities are 
afforded at such times of breaking of bread— to break 
to their families mental or spiritual food also, strengthening 
and elevating. 

In proportion as Christian people realize their 
privileges and duties in such matters they will find 
that coarseness and rudeness at the table will disappear, 
refinement and intellectuality gradually displacing 
them. And one of the features most conducive 
to true table etiquette, and the drawing together of 
hearts and minds in true fellowship and intellectual 
enjoyment at the times of physical repast, will be found 
to be the giving of thanks to God— the recognition that 
every good and every perfect gift cometh down from 
our Father. The family which at table neglects to return 
acknowledgement to the Giver of every good, will 
scarcely succeed in properly recognizing each other and 
having intellectual fellowship one with the other. 

That our Lord was prompt to avail himself of all 
such table-talk opportunities, is very manifest. On 
each occasion of his attendance at a banquet we find 
him utilizing the opportunity for the inculcation of 
some truth— natural or spiritual. In the present instance 
he evidently did not consider his hearers to be 
in a favorable condition for high spiritual teachings, 
and hence his table-talk was on a lower plane, adapted 
to the natural man, yet nevertheless inculcating lessons 
which, if learned, would prepare the learners for the 
heavenly things. And this should be the thought in 
every family circle,— that the tendency of all conversation 
should be ennobling as well as instructive— leading 
upward as well as outward. 

The guests had been invited to the table, and 
our Lord noticed how they were each seeking the 
seats of chief honor, thus showing the pride and 
ambition of their hearts. We may safely assume that 
our Lord and his disciples took the less distinguished 



seats, in harmony with the Scriptural injunction, "In 
honor preferring one another." 

A favorable opportunity offering, our Lord indirectly 
called attention to the wrong self-seeking 
course,— not by saying anything against the action in 
this particular case, but by suggesting a propriety of 
conduct in a general way; he based his illustration upon 

R2700 : page 285 

a marriage feast, at which, more than any other, distinctions 
as to title, honor and position, received much 
consideration. As was his custom, he taught by a 
parable, permitting his hearers to draw the inference 
and make the application in some measure to the banquet 
to which they were then gathered; and he wound 
it up by making this a great lesson on a general principle; 
viz., that "Whosoever exalteth himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted," 
—a lesson of vital importance to all who would 
be ready for and enter the Kingdom. 

This is a great lesson applicable, not only to the 
natural man, seeking progress back to fellowship and 
harmony with God, but there is in it also a lesson to 
the "new creature" all through life's journey,— that 
if divine favor is desired and to be expected it must be 
sought; not in pride, not in self-sufficiency, but in 
humility. The Lord resisteth the proud, the self-sufficient, 
the boastful, and showeth his favors unto 
the humble. The Apostle James likewise calls attention 
to the importance of this grace of humility, assuring 
us that no true progress can be made in the way to 
God, except by the humble. (James 4:10.) And 
the Apostle Peter, after exhorting to humility, saying, 
"Yea, all of you, be subject one to another, and be 
clothed with humility," adds, "Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt you in due time."— 1 Pet. 5:5,6. 

If the hearers had received the message and been 
corrected by it, it might indeed have worked considerable 
difference in their standing amongst their brethren, 
the Pharisees, but it would also have worked a considerable 
difference in their favor with God. By receiving 
such a spirit of humility they would be coming 
into that relationship with God and the truth which 
would have divine approval, and be thus the stepping-stone 
to further favor, by preparing their hearts to receive 
the good things which God has to give, but which 
cannot be received by any except the humble-hearted. 
Indeed, we know of nothing today that is so great a 
stumbling-block to the majority in nominal Christendom 
as the prevalent spirit of self-seeking. It is a 
great barrier before the minds of many, in and out of 
the pulpit, continually hindering them from seeing, 
hearing and obeying present truth— they love the approval 
of men rather than that of God. 



The table-talk later turned in another direction, 
probably considerable being said in the interim that is 
not recorded, not pertinent; but before the feast was 
ended an appropriate opportunity came for the Lord to 
present some words of counsel to his host, and this was 
done in so kind and so wise a manner that it surely 
could give no offence, but, on the contrary, must have 
led the thoughts of all the hearers to higher and 
heavenly things. He advised that the banquets of the 
well-to-do in this world's goods be extended to their 
poorer, less fortunate neighbors and friends; assuring 
his hearers that such a course would bring the greatest 
blessing, as every good deed brings its blessings, forthwith 
—in the consciousness of having done good; and 
in the reactionary effect upon one's own heart of every 
good deed, every benevolence. And, in addition to 
these blessings, our Lord pointed out that for such an 
one there would be a blessing in the future also— a reward 
that would fully compensate every such 
benefaction. 

Our Lord's words were in part a commendation of 
the course pursued by his host in inviting himself and 
his apostles to dinner, for they were poor. Indirectly 
his remarks meant that if that very feast were given 
with a proper sentiment of heart, as we have every 
reason to presume was the case, his host might expect 
a reward for his conduct in the future— besides the 
blessing that had already come to his house through 
our Lord's presence and words of instruction. 

Sunday School lesson comments will be found to 
misinterpret the blessing which our Lord declared 
would come to those who received the poor. One of 
these commentaries says, on this point, that "Our 
Lord refers to the first resurrection, mentioned in Rev. 20:4,5, 
assuring him that he would be raised in that 
resurrection as one of that glorious class. He would 
have the rewards that God gives, and can give only, 
to those who are righteous." 

This is a grievous mistake, a misapprehension of 
our Lord's meaning. The first resurrection is not to 
be attained merely by the doing of kind acts to either 
the worthy or the unworthy poor. As explained in 
the connection (Rev. 20:4) none will have part in the 
first resurrection except those who have been "beheaded 
for the witness of Jesus and for the word of 
God." And, altho this beheading is figurative and 
not literal, it nevertheless has a deep significance, implying 
much more than making a feast to the poor. It 
signifies, not only death to self-will, but also to be cut 
off from all other heads, governments and law-givers, 
and to recognize no "head" but Jesus, whom God 
hath appointed to be the Head of the Church which is 
his body— the head of every member of it. 

It means, not only to be cut off from institutional 
heads and authorities, but also to cease to have heads 
and wills of our own, and to accept, instead, the headship, 



the will, of our Lord Jesus. It is the same 

thought that is drawn to our attention by the Apostle 

in Romans 6:3, where he declares that we are baptized 

into the body of Christ, as members of that 

body, under the one Head, Christ, by being baptized 

into his death,— a full consecration of our wills, and 

R2701 : page 286 

ultimately a full laying down of our lives, faithfully 
unto death. The attainment of this first resurrection 
and its joint-heirship with Christ in the Millennial 
Kingdom was clearly understood by the Apostle Paul, 
and was his aim: and respecting it he said, "I count 
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered 
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ.... That I may know him, 
and the power of his resurrection." (Phil. 3:8,10.) 
Had St. Paul understood our Lord's words as the 
above quoted Sunday School lesson commentator did, 
he would have chosen the easy and pleasant plan of 
feasting the poor, rather than the years of privation 
and self-sacrifice in the narrow way which he pursued. 
And to this our Lord's words on another occasion 
agree, "Through much tribulation shall ye enter the 
Kingdom." 

What, then, did our Lord intend to promise as a reward 
for a good deed— done without hope of reward in 
the present life? We answer, that he meant to promise 
the same thing that he promised to anybody who would 
give even so much as a cup of cold water to one of his 
disciples. He wished to assure them that all such would 
by no means lose their reward. (Matt. 10:42.) Not a 
reward of glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom of God, but a good reward, more than 
compensating for the kindness they performed. This 
rewarding of everyone who has done good, either to 
the poor of this world or especially to the Lord and his 
faithful brethren walking in his footsteps, will come 
to them, not in the first resurrection, but at that time; 
—after the first resurrection shall have glorified the 
Church and inaugurated the Kingdom, then Millennial 
blessings and the reign of righteousness beginning will 
bring rewards to everyone who has done kindnesses, 
helping them forward and abundantly rewarding them; 
while all who have done evil shall have some measure 
of "stripes" in compensation and retribution. 



R2701 : page 286 

A ROYAL BANQUET DECLINED. 
LUKE 14:15-24.-OCT. 14. 



"Come, for all things are now ready." 

JESUS continued his table-talk of our last lesson 
at the Pharisee's dinner. Our Lord had led the 
attention of his associates, not only to the proprieties 
of life, but to future things, by the suggestion that 
feasts should be given in the interest of the poor, whose 
inability to return the favor would insure a divine 
blessing more than compensating in the future— in the 
Kingdom. This led one of the company to a remark 
which we loosely paraphrase, thus,— Ah, yes! that 
Kingdom, for which we hope, will be a blessed time. 
How blessed it will be to share the bounties which God 
has promised in the great feast which he shall spread! 
The speaker probably was well acquainted with Isaiah's 
prophecy respecting the Kingdom (Isa. 25:6) 
in which God's mercies and blessings to the world are 
figuratively represented as a feast, in the words, "In 
this mountain [Kingdom] shall the Lord of hosts 
make unto all the people a feast of fat things, a feast 
of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow." 

Thus gradually the minds of the company present 
had been led from earthly things and from commonplace 
matters and social chit-chat, which might have 
occupied their attention, to the consideration of the 
gracious promises of God. And undoubtedly this was 
our Lord's very object in accepting the Pharisee's invitation, 
and in leading the conversation gradually in 
this direction. Now he had an opportunity to teach 
something respecting this Kingdom and its blessings 
and the call to share it; and he improved it. His 
hearers, if they had in mind Isaiah's prophecy and 
God's promise to Abraham, would understand that the 
Kingdom or mountain of the Lord would be the house 
of Israel, in some glorious and exalted condition under 
Messiah, and that it was in and through this Kingdom 
that the feast of divine blessings, for all nations, was to 
be spread. Our Lord now, by a parable, drew attention 
to the Gospel call of great blessings and privileges, 
and would have his hearers note the fact that while in 
a general way they would all assent to the statement 
that the Kingdom would be a blessed one, and the 
feast there something to be greatly desired, nevertheless 
when the offer of that Kingdom would be made them 
temporal things closer to their hearts would make it of 
no effect to the majority. 

The parable represents a great feast, with a large 
number of friends of the host invited in advance, that 
they might be ready at such a time as the feast would 
be ready and announced. God himself is the host in 
this parable, and the Jewish nation were his friends 
to whom, as a people, he had given much advantage 
every way, chiefly in that to them were committed the 
oracles of God,— much knowledge of the divine plan 
for human salvation and the promises that if they, as 



the seed of Abraham, were faithful, they should have 
the invitation and privilege and opportunities of this 
great feast. The Lord addresses them through the 
Prophet, saying, "You only have I known [recognized] 
of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) Israel 
only was invited to this feast; but the feast was not 
ready until our Lord's day, and hence the invitation 

R2701 : page 287 

to partake of it did not go forth until then. Finally, 
however, the time had come; Christ, as represented in 
the bullock of the sin-offering, had already given himself, 
—the sacrifice being counted as accomplished from 
the time of its offering, when our Lord presented himself 
to John at Jordan, making a full consecration of 
his entire being, even unto death. In view of this 
sacrifice for sins, God could begin at once to call the 
already promised guests to the great feast of blessing 
and manifestation of divine favor toward those to whom 
he had promised it so long before, through their father 
Abraham. 

And thus it was that when Jesus came and called 
his disciples and sent them forth, the message was, 
"The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand;" the great feast 
of fat things for this nation, that God has so long 
promised, is ready; and whosoever wills may come 
and be received and participate in it. The message of 
Jesus and the twelve, and later the seventy, throughout 
all Judea, was the invitation of that favored people to 
come and enjoy the great feast for which they had impatiently 
waited and hoped and prayed for over sixteen 
centuries,— the great privileges and opportunities of 
the Kingdom. 

But as the parable shows, when the offer of the 
Kingdom was really made, when the invitation to partake 
of the blessings of the great Feast was really put 
before them, it proved that they loved the Kingdom 
and the future things far less than they and others 
might have supposed. On the contrary, the unanimity 
with which the invitation to the Kingdom was rejected 
made it appear almost as tho the rejectors had acted 
in concert in the matter. Their excuses for so little 
interest in the things which God had promised, and 
which they claimed to be eagerly longing for, were the 
apparent pressure of other duties which they must 
attend to, and which left no time for responding to the 
divine invitation to the Kingdom. With one the pressure 
came in the direction of seeing to his farm, and 
thus being not slothful in business; another felt that it 
might do very well for people who had nothing else to 
do, to give attention to a spiritual feast, but as for him, 
his time was fully occupied with his property, his 
oxen, sheep, store-business, and what not. Another 
felt that his duties, social ties, wife, children, etc., demanded 
all of his attention, and that therefore he could 



not accept the Kingdom privileges. 

And this, which was the sentiment of fleshly Israel, 
is largely that of spiritual Israel, also, now that the 
spiritual Kingdom is announced. Many seem to feel 
that what they would call the real and practical things 
of life need all of their attention. They want to "get 
along" in this world's affairs, and to be somebodies in 
it, and they find such interest in social and material 
matters a great hindrance to any response to the divine 
invitation to a share in the glorious Millennial Kingdom, 
as joint-heirs with Christ,— the great feast, the 
high calling which has come to us. Well, in one sense 
of the word this is all right, for it merely keeps out of 
the Kingdom a class which the Lord does not desire 
should be in it, and which if it did come in would 
need to be sifted out, later. Altho God has bidden 
many, he is seeking for this feast only such as will 
highly appreciate it above all other privileges— those 
who would be willing to sacrifice any and every other 
thing in order to share it. 

The first invitation to the feast, recounted in the 
parable, represents the first years of our Lord's ministry, 
which were specially directed toward interesting 
the scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the 
Law, who, as the leading men of that nation, and as 
our Lord said, occupying Moses' seat, really represented 
that nation as a whole; and the rejection of the invitation 
by these meant the rejection of it by that nation 
as a whole. Thus our Lord was careful to bring before 
the priestly class of that time the evidences of his 
Messiahship, so that when, for instance, he healed the 
ten lepers, he charged them to tell no man, but go and 
show themselves to the priests. Thus the priestly 
class was informed respecting the miraculous work of 
our Lord, perhaps more particularly than others. They 
therefore had the invitation to the feast more particularly 
than others. However, the fact that the chief 

R2702 : page 287 

representatives of Israel were unready for the invitation 
was not permitted to hinder, and our Lord, through 
his disciples, subsequently extended the invitation to 
another class. 

The trial of the nation as a whole, represented by 
its leaders, ended at Calvary, or rather five days before 
Calvary, when our Lord rode on the ass and wept 
over the city of Jerusalem, saying, "O Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest 
them that are sent unto thee: how oft would I have 
gathered thy children, as a hen gathereth her chickens 
under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your 
house is left unto you desolate!" As a nation, as a 
people, you have rejected the divine invitation to the 
great Feast, and as a nation you cannot taste of it. 
Nevertheless, according to divine intention and promise, 



through the prophets, God extended mercy to various 
individuals of that nation, after the nation as a whole 
had proven itself unworthy of the Kingdom privileges. 
The apostles were sent to gather, not the nation, but 
such individuals as were of humble mind, to share in 
the feast, and this calling of individuals, instead of the 
nation of Israel, was responded to exclusively by those 
who realized their own unworthiness,— the lame, the 
halt, the blind, who confessed that they were not perfect, 

R2702 : page 288 

but who desired perfection, and who rejoiced in 

the call to partake of the Kingdom privileges, and 

gladly forsook all else for it. Amongst them, we are 

assured, there are not many wise, not many great, not 

many learned, but chiefly the poor, for altho the poor 

are not always humble by any means, yet amongst 

them proportionately more were found who were of 

acceptable character; amongst the rich and the great 

humility would appear to have been at all times correspondingly 

scarce. 

This second invitation to the poor, the halt and 
the blind, in the streets and lanes of the city, as a 
picture would be very difficult to appreciate in our day 
of hospitals and almshouses, etc., provided by general 
taxation; but in the days of our Lord it would be very 
easy indeed to have collected a large crowd of indigent 
and infirm in short order. 

It will be observed that both of these first calls 
belong to the city— that is, Israel, the nominal Kingdom 
of God. But the two calls failed to find the sufficient 
number which God had predestinated should 
constitute the Kingdom class. He could indeed have 
induced others to come in, but, on the contrary, he 
purposely put the invitation to the Feast in such a 
form as would repel those who were not of the right 
attitude of heart— in such a form as would attract 
Israelites indeed, who felt and acknowledged their own 
unworthiness, and who would be glad, on entering the 
feast, to have on the robe provided for the guests 
(symbolical of Christ's righteousness), to cover the 
filthy rags of their own imperfection. But now, because 
a sufficient number was not found in Israel to complete 
the elect number, the message must be sent outside the 
city, outside of Judaism,— to the Gentiles; and thus 
the third message was, "Go ye into the highways and 
whosoever you meet, compel them to come in." The 
word "compel," however, gives a wrong thought here: 
it should properly be rendered, urge, persuade. 

And thus it has been that throughout the Gospel 
age, since the bringing in to the Gospel favor of as 
many Jews as were ready for it, the message has been 
turned to the Gentiles, "to take out of them a people 
for God's name," to partake of the great Feast with 
the remnant of Israel. As the Apostle Paul said to 



some of the Jews in his preaching: "It was necessary 

that the word of God should first have been spoken 

to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves 

unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the 

Gentiles; for so the Lord hath commanded us." (Acts 13:46,47.) 

They showed themselves unworthy of 

this great blessing or gift, in that they were interested 

more in the things that perish than in the glorious 

promises of the everlasting future. 

The Apostle Paul calls attention to this fact in 
Rom. 9:27: "Tho the number of the children of Israel 
be as the sand of the sea, a remnant [only] shall be 
saved." The Apostle further shows that the call of 
the Gentiles to be sharers in the Kingdom is merely 
the continuation of the original call, and that we are 
called in to take the places of those who neglected so 
great salvation and privilege. He illustrates this by 
the olive tree, saying that the natural branches were 
broken off that we, who by nature were wild, might 
be grafted in and become partakers of the root and 
fatness of the olive.— Rom. 11:17. 

This third call to the great Feast of the Kingdom 
blessings and privileges has progressed throughout this 
Gospel age, and to our understanding is now nearly 
complete— nearly all the places at the table have been 
provided with guests; only a few are yet vacant; and 
so soon as these places are filled, the great feast will 
begin, and we shall indeed enter into the joys of our 
Lord, and not only be privileged to feast ourselves, but 
to carry of its bounties and blessings to all the families 
of the earth. 

The same matters which hindered the Jews, under 
the first call, from accepting this invitation, have hindered 
to a large extent also many of the Gentiles who 
have heard the third call. It is impossible to be 
thorough-going business men, wealthy, influential, etc., 
and at the same time follow in the footsteps of Jesus, 
giving all of our hearts, talents and energies to the 
Lord in acceptance of his invitation to this Feast. The 
acceptance of the invitation to this Feast means a deep 
interest in it, beyond everything else, so that all other 
matters, whether houses or lands, father or mother, 
wife or children, shall be secondary to the interests of 
the Kingdom, and to our responsibilities to the terms 
and conditions of the invitation. Consequently, what 
was true respecting Israel has been true as respects the 
Gentiles, viz., that the call to the Kingdom has been 
generally rejected by those who had a considerable 
measure of this world's blessings and advantages— 
those who are rich, either in honor of men or social 
position or talents or reputation or money, have found 
it difficult to leave these all to follow Jesus in the narrow 
way: and, consequently, the Scriptural assurance 
is, not only that those elected in the end of the Jewish 
age were chiefly the poor and lowly, but that the same 
has been true amongst the Gentiles, and is true to-day: 



"Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, 
not many noble;" but chiefly the poor of this world, 
rich in faith.— 1 Cor. 1:26; James 2:5. 

This does not debar those who have riches of any 
kind, but really gives them all the greater privilege 
and opportunity; for they have that much greater 
talent which, if they will, they may sacrifice, and thus 
the more fully demonstrate their appreciation of the 
invitation and of the Feast, and be correspondingly 
appreciated by the Host. Let us all, like the Apostle 
Paul, lay aside every weight, every hindrance, every 
besetment, everything precious to us of an earthly 
kind, that we may run with patience the race set before 
us, in response to this invitation to the great Feast of 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Kingdom.— Heb. 12:1,2; 
Rom. 8:16-18; 12:1,2. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. OCTOBER 1, 1900. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 291 

The Bible Triumphant 291 

Protestantism in Japan 293 

"Methodism's Big Flock" 294 

Zionism Prospering Slowly 295 

Are the Heathen Saved or Lost? 295 

An Interesting Question 297 

Divine Care For the Lost 298 

The Prodigal's Return 300 

Encouraging Words From Faithful 

Workers 303 

Items: Tower Subscriptions, etc 290 

page 290 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 290 

A WORD ABOUT CREDITS. 

We are quite willing to give reasonable credits on our own 
publications, but cannot do this on other books— Bibles, etc. 
Please therefore do not order the latter until you can send the 



money. We supply Bibles at cost, merely for your accommodation, 
and we must pay cash to secure them at low rates. 



page 290 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR FRIENDS. 

Some time since we made the proposal that we would accept 
(from any one already on our list) one dollar for four six 
months' subscriptions to our journal— or more at the same rate. 
The plan met with favor and many sent in the names of friends 
—some of whom, we trust, are permanently interested. The 
offer is continued. These trial subscriptions may begin any 
quarter. Our experience shows that reading is almost indispensable 
to a clear knowledge of present truth; and that after 
reading MILLENNIAL DAWN the regular visits of the WATCH 
TOWER are necessary to full development. The circulation of 
WATCH TOWER literature is one way in which the Bride makes 
herself ready. Those who assist in the circulating have no 
mean share in this work. 



NAMES OF WATCH TOWER POOR LIST. 

While we are not only willing but anxious to have on our 
lists the names of all interested in present truth, we nevertheless 
require that the request come direct from the person desiring 
the WATCH TOWER; and that the request be repeated each 
December. 

ONE EXCEPTION TO THIS RULE. 

One exception would be that any who are contributors to 
the Tract Fund may send in such names of interested poor 
brethren, authorizing us to charge up the subscriptions as in 
offset to their donations. 



R2702: page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE BIBLE TRIUMPHANT. 



EVIDENCES corroborative of the Bible's truthfulness 
accumulate. Genesis notes Nimrod as 
the founder of the Chaldee or Babylonian empire before 
Abraham's day. (Gen. 10:8-12.) These and 



other features of the narrative have been doubted and 
considered mythical; but explorations in Babylonia 
seem to confirm the Bible record at every point. 

We have already mentioned the exploration of 
the ruins of ancient Nippur, once the royal capital, 
commenced some years ago by the representatives of 
the University of Pennsylvania, U.S.A. The past 
year, it seems, has been a very fruitful one, the ruins 
yielding to the searchers vast literary treasures,— the 
once National Library of Chaldea. The Biblia gives 
the following interesting description of the find:— 

"The most surprising feature of the discovery is 
that the person who collected the tablets and placed 
them originally in the pot was an old priest, who lived 
previous to and during the time of Belshazzar, and 
who was evidently a scientist of no mean discrimination. 
The pot was, indeed, his archaeological museum, 
not portentous in size, but the first museum 
known to man, and therefore more important for the 
bearing it has on the history of civilization than any 
of the great museums in existence to-day. Among 
the articles found in it were the following tablets: 

"1. One of Sargon, which gives his titles. This 
particular piece of baked clay may give information 
concerning the doings of centuries. It was the custom 
in those days for each king to inscribe a memorial 
tablet not only with an account of his victories, 
but with his pedigree, showing where he was born, 
who were his ancestors, the god he worshiped, and, 
in fact, anything else that might serve to impress posterity 
with his personal glory. These tablets, therefore, 
reveal the names and origin of many of the 
writer's contemporaries, predecessors, and, as the accounts 
of the successive kings dovetail into one another, 
they will all in the end constitute an unbroken 
history of this early civilization. There are, however, 
comparatively few of these tablets yet found which 

R2703 : page 291 

date so far back as 3800 B.C., hence the vast importance 
of this tablet. 

"2. A tablet written in the reign of Ur Gur. 
This king is famous for building and remodeling the 
old temple of Ekur, dedicated to the god Bel. This 
stone tablet states specifically that he rebuilt the temple 
wall, which had originally been erected by Narim 
Sin. He also erected many other buildings in Nippur. 

"3. A tablet, excellently preserved, stating the 
great hall of the temple was called Emakh. It also 
stated, to Professor Hilprecht's great amazement, that 
there were forty different shrines in Nippur, each of 
which was dedicated to a distinct god. This important 
fact will amaze Babylonian scholars, because it 
has hitherto been supposed that there was but one 
god, i.e. Bel, worshiped in Nippur. 



"4. A text inscribed by Ashur-etil-ilane, a king 
who ruled a short time over Assyria. 

"5. An important text of Assyria's last king, 
Sin-shar-ishkun. 

"Near the spot where Professor Hilprecht found 
this wonderful little museum there was picked up a 
peculiarly shaped barrel cylinder recording King 
Samsu-iluna's restoration of part of the Temple of 
Bel. This was about 2000 B.C. Near by lay a curious 
truncated barrel cylinder marked with the name 
of Assur-bani-pal, a king whose name is well known 
to the explorers. In addition to these, two hundred 
Hebrew bowls, excellently preserved and some of 
them quite large, were unearthed in another part of 
the mounds. But these were quite modern, having 
been left by the Jews who lived on the mounds of 
Nippur as late as 700 A.D. 

"No one can read an account of the work of Professor 
Hilprecht without being struck by the fact that 
the people of 7,000 years ago lived very much as we 
do to-day. There was the same appreciation of literature 
and art, as shown in the cuneiform scripts and 
in their sculpture. Wealthy people lived in the cities 
and employed attorneys to manage their tenantry who 

R2703 : page 292 

lived in the country on farms. When they bought 

jewelry a written guaranty went with it. In the 

archive room of Murashu Sons, attorneys of ancient 

Nippur, there was found a tablet guaranteeing that an 

emerald set in a ring would not fall out for twenty 

years. Houses were built on an extensive, not to say 

modern, plan, and were furnished more or less magnificently, 

as evidenced in the palace mentioned above. 

Fortifications were built, wars were carried on, conquests 

were made, and heroes were glorified. People, 

when they died, were not thrown hastily into the 

earth, but were laid away carefully in clay coffins, 

which are found to-day still covered with the beautiful 

blue glaze with which they were decorated by the ancient 

undertaker. And for the benefit of posterity, 

science was studied and museums were planned that 

they might be found in the dawn of the twentieth 

century, and the history of the race read as a sermon 

in stones." 

Commenting on these discoveries, the London 
Daily News says:— 

"The find has been much more important than 
could have been anticipated. In the course of three 
months, no less than 17,200 tablets, covered with 
cuneiform writings, have been recovered. These are 
not of the character mentioned in my former notice 
of the discovery of tablets, namely, the recovery of 
private business contracts, conveyances, letters, and 
the like, but bear more resemblance to the contents 



of an ordinary library. The tablets are historical, 

philological, and literary. They treat of mythology, 

of grammar and lexicography, of science, and of mathematics. 

There is reason to believe that they will for 

the first time enable the world to form an adequate 

idea of life in Babylonia such as could be possible only 

by the discovery of a national library, recording the 

national progress in literature, science, and thought 

generally. No document is found in this collection 

of a later date than 2280 B.C. As this date marks 

the invasion of the Elamites, the fact adds confirmatory 

evidence that the library was destroyed during 

this invasion. 

"The unexplored remains of the library are even 
more extensive than those already examined. The 
tablets are generally arranged with regularity on clay 
shelves around the rooms of the library, and Professor 
Hilprecht estimates that at their present rate of working 
five more years will be necessary to excavate and 
examine the contents. He thinks it probable, judging 
from the contents already found in the rooms excavated, 
and from various other reasons, that the 
unexplored part will yield 150,000 tablets to be added 
to those already discovered. As the library was one 
of great renown, the chief glory of the temple in early 
Babylonia, the chief college for instruction in law and 
religion, which, as in all early systems, were inextricably 
bound together, and, indeed, in all studies judged 
worthy of attention, it is evident that no examination 
of the contents can be too careful. It is, in fact, hardly 
too much to say that if the unexplored parts should 
prove as rich in results as that already found, there 
will be no example in the world's history, not even 
in Egypt, of so complete a recovery of the records of 
an ancient civilization.... 

"In the course of the present excavations a palace 
belonging to the pre-Sargonic period was uncovered 
beneath an accumulation of seventy feet of rubbish 
on the southwestern side of the Shatt-en-Nil, dividing 
Nippur in two parts. Professor Hilprecht himself, 
having never been doubtful as to the actual site of the 
temple library at Nippur since his first visit to Babylonia 
in 1889, considers the discovery of this large 
building, with 600 feet frontage, which will probably 
turn out to be the palace of the early priest-kings of 
Nippur, as the most important result of this year's 
campaign. Already the few rooms excavated have 
given valuable results in the shape of pre-Sargonic 
tablets, of seal cylinders of the earliest type, and clay 
figurines of early date and great interest. The palace 
was very extensive, and at least two stories high.... 

"Beyond doubt the greatest success of the year is 
that accomplished by the American expedition. The 
importance of the discovery of the pre-Sargonic palace 
and of the library of so famous a temple as that of 
Nippur was at once recognized. The systematic and 



thorough examination which it is hoped will be made 
next year promises to give a full and detailed picture 
of life in what the author of the Book of Genesis regarded 
as one of the oldest cities in the world, and 
one whose origin, even in his time, was attributed to 
the famous hunter whose name has become mythical. 
The results of the explorations will probably show 
that Nippur was as important in the fifth millennium 
before Christ as it was in the third; that it anticipated 
the civilization and the period when Babylon took the 
lead by at least two thousand years; and that at this 
early period the human race in Babylonia had acquired 
arts and knowledge which hitherto have only been 
attributed to a much later period." 



How does this agree with the claim of Evolutionists 
that Adam was but one remove from the highest 
type of monkey, and too ignorant at first to wear 
clothing? On the contrary, how these evidences of 
intelligence amongst the ancients corroborate the old 
Bible, at which "higher criticism," falsely so called, 
sneers! The Bible's declaration is that the first man 
was up, high up in intelligence, in the very image of 
God, and that he fell from that high estate because 
of sin. The fact is that during the 1656 years to the 
flood, the fall, the depravity of mankind, was very 
great; and that in Abraham's day, about 400 years 
later, the race was still further enervated, through 
climatic and other influences, as shown by the fact 
that Arphaxad, born two years after the flood, lived 
438 years, while his children, during those four centuries, 
gradually declined in vitality and years, so that 
Terah, Abraham's father, died at seventy: and it is 
not unreasonable to presume that the mental vigor 
suffered equally with the physical. And yet the Scriptures 
show us Abraham, every way a noble specimen 
of humanity: and now ancient Nippur's libraries, then 
in process of formation, show us that a high degree 
of intelligence was then prevalent among the sons of 
Ham, as well as in the family of Shem. 

R2703 : page 293 

But we caution all to beware of the dates ascribed 
to these ancient tablets, cities, etc.; for they are only 
scientific guesses: and since they are contradictory to 
Bible chronology, we know that they are unreliable. 
The worldly-wise, depressing the Bible as unscientific, 
and relying on their own "findings," endeavor to 
reconcile such archaeological testimonies with their 
previous errors instead of with the Bible. And scientists, 
misled into reckoning on "evolution" lines, have 
given to human history an age much beyond that declared 
in God's Word, which we accept as the only 



authority;— some of them going to more absurd extremes 
than others. 

Blessed is the man who putteth his trust in the 
Lord and in his Word. 

MANNA FOR THE FAMISHING OF INDIA. 



"The strange appearance of manna on the stems 
of the bamboo, was reported last March by the divisional 
forest officer, Chanda, Central Provinces, and 
notices of this phenomenon have been published in 
the local papers. The bamboo forests of Chanda consist 
of Dendrocalamus strictus, the male bamboo, a 
bushy plant from twenty to thirty feet in height, and 
affecting the cooler northerly and westerly slopes of 
Central and Southern India. This is said to be the 
first time in the history of these forests that a sweet 
and gummy substance has been known to exude from 
the trees. The gum has been exuding in some abundance, 
and it has been found very palatable to the 

R2704 : page 293 

natives in the neighborhood, who have been consuming 
it as a food. The occurrence of the manna at this 
season is all the more remarkable, since the greatest 
famine India has known is this year visiting the country, 
and the districts where the scarcity is most felt 
are in the Central Provinces.'— Nature. 

WHAT WILL BECOME OF PROTESTANTISM IN JAPAN? 



"The Japan Advertiser has it upon the best of 
authority that one of the American mission boards is 
next month to withdraw from Japan its only remaining 
representative, and is to leave its work, henceforward, 
entirely in the hands of the Japanese, who have 
become interested in it. 'The latter (says our contemporary) 
are to have the use of the buildings and 
property (of no inconsiderable value), and some pecuniary 
aid will continue to be granted them, but the work 
itself will be practically free from foreign guidance.'" 

A literary man, residing in Japan, Mr. Penman, 
makes comment on the above as follows:— 

"This extract shows clearly the failure of Protestant 
Christianity in this country; for it is failure, and 
not large-hearted trust in the Japanese Protestant, that 
has caused this retreat. There are at present independent 
Protestant churches in Japan; but, in the 
first place, their Christianity has become so vague 
that it can hardly be called Christianity at all; and, 
in the second place, they are not making headway. 



A Japanese journalist, who relates his experiences in 
the columns of the Kirisuto Tokyo Shimbun, says that 
he examined the roll of one of these churches some 
time ago, and found that out of a total membership 
of 323 no less than 86 persons were marked absent. 
He was informed that out of the remainder, 123 persons 
were Christian only in name, so that the work 
of the church had to be carried on by a little over 100 
converts; and even out of these the average attendance 
at church meetings did not exceed 77. And the last 
report of the Kumiai (Independent Japanese churches 
—Protestant, of course,) shows that the number of 
self-supporting churches has fallen from 40 to 34, and, 
if the truth must be told, there are not more than 24 
or 25 of these that are self-supporting in reality. 
"Not only are the 'Independent' churches thus 
going backward in point of numbers, they are, as I 
have just hinted, going woefully backward in regard 
to doctrine as well. I shall give a concrete example 
of what I mean. The Doshisha is a fine educational 
institution established by a Japanese Protestant who 
was, I believe, a sincere and able Christian. It was 
run for a number of years as a religious establishment 
in connection with the American Mission Board, and 
of course the trustees were all Christians of good 
standing, and generally clergymen. For some time 
they were Christians, but changes— mental and otherwise 
—occur rapidly in Japan, and only last year they 
had progressed so far toward Agnosticism that a 
breach with the American Mission Board occurred. 
I visited personally some of the leaders of the movement, 
and they told me that they certainly did not 
believe in the divinity of Christ; in fact, I failed to 
discover any one point of Christian belief that they 
did believe in. ...Ten years ago Protestantism had 
a very good outlook in Japan, and many highly educated 
Japanese embraced it. But it took the 'advanced 
thinkers' among the converts only a year or 
two to out-Spencer Spencer, and to-day the vernacular 
Protestantism of Japan is getting on as best as it can 
without any burning or shining light whatsoever. 
The burning and shining lights— in other words, the 
leading native ecclesiastics— became all of them 'philosophers,' 
and, while still professing to be Christians, 
attempted to call in German and other materialism to 
their aid. The English and American missionary 
bodies to which they belonged, naturally objected. The 
American Episcopal Church of Japan fell foul of Dr. 
Sagiura, a Japanese minister (who has had, by the 
way, the advantage of an excellent American education), 
who denied the miraculous birth of Christ. 
Many of the leading Japanese clergymen resigned; 
and, in another direction, the organ of the Lutheran 
Church in Japan, a magazine which maintained that 
the Bible is a revelation, was discontinued because 'no 
suitable editor could be found who was prepared to 



defend such a theory.'" 

Mr. Penman quotes a Japanese writer in a Tokyo 
magazine as follows:— 

"Can it be said that our Christian philosophy has 
been any more successful than our preaching of morality? 
I trow not. After attempting to call in German 
materialism to the aid of Christianity with poor 
results, our philosophers fell back on the ultra-idealism 
of Brahmanism and Buddhism, with the outcome 
that they have gradually explained away the personality 

R2704 : page 294 

of the Christian God, reducing him to a mere 
controlling force, or to a fixed law called Temmei. 
What possibility is there of building a system of morality 
on belief in the existence of such an entity as 
this?. ..If we ask what amount of real faith in 
Christianity there exists in this country, the answer 
must be discouraging. Christians dispute about opinions 
and discuss this doctrine and that, but beneath 
it all, it seems to me, there is little real belief. Christianity, 
in coming to us, has had the advantage of 
being associated with a system of civilization whose 
merits are acknowledged. It has been represented as 
part and parcel of that civilization, and hence has in 
the past received a certain amount of prestige that it 
is no longer likely to retain. The feeling of the nation 
in reference to the various elements composing 
what is called Western civilization has changed, and 
hence Christianity is no longer likely to be regarded 
as an inseparable part of that civilization. If things 
proceed thus, in thirty years Christianity in Japan 
will be effaced." 

We cannot vouch for the correctness of these 
pessimistic views of the Protestant situation in Japan: 
doubtless honest people view these things through 
various spectacles. We do know, however, that Mr. 
Penman's picture corresponds well with what we see 
right here at home— that the colleges and theological 
seminaries of this so called Christian land are hot-beds 
of infidelity called "advanced thought," "higher 
criticism," "Evolution," etc. We cannot wonder, 
then, that the same spirit has reached Japanese institutions: 
nor can we wonder that the Japanese, less 
bound to the Bible by traditions of the past, should 
be more free to speak and act out their unbelief;— 
especially when popularity, the masses of the people, 
etc., would all favor such a course. 

Surely the shaking and sifting will be thorough 
(Heb. 12:26); for it is the Lord that is back of it, 
wishing to thoroughly separate the little handful of 
wheat from the vast quantity of tares constituting 
nominal "Christendom," "Babylon." We may be 
sure, however, that not one grain of the true wheat 
will be neglected by the great Reaper.— Matt. 24:24. 



SEEKING 2,000,000 HEADS OF WHEAT AND TARES FOR 
"METHODISM'S BIG FLOCK." 



The public press has the following announcement:— 

"METHODISTS SEEKING 2,000,000 CONVERTS. 

THE TWENTIETH CENTURY MOVEMENT HAS OPENED 

OFFICES IN CHICAGO. 

200,000 WORKERS ENLISTED. 

GREATEST HARVEST OF THE YEAR'S REVIVALS EXPECTED 

IN THE LARGE CITIES. 

"CHICAGO, Sept. 8.— The twentieth century movement 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church to save 
2,000,000 souls is well under way. 

"Bishop James M. Thoburn proposed the plan 
at the General Conference of the church in May. It 
has been the chief topic at the ministers' meetings. 
The order has gone to the Bishops and will be handed 
down to each member of the church. Briefly, the 
scheme is to have 200,000 members each pledge themselves 
to bring ten converts into the church before 
Dec. 31, 1901. The Methodist church is so thoroughly 
organized that the movement will be carried out without 
a hitch throughout the country. 

"W. W. Cooper, secretary of the movement, has 
opened an office in the Methodist Church Block, in 
Chicago. 

'"A large part of the work ought to be done in 
the big cities,' says Mr. Cooper. 'This is the beginning 
of a revival that will extend through the first 
half of the coming century. Every organization connected 
with the church will be utilized to further this 
grand plan. There is much dead timber in the church, 
which, it is hoped, will respond to this invitation to 
extend the influence of Christ. 

'"It is quite true that church membership is not 
increasing in ratio to the census, so the Methodist 
Church has decided to start a great agitation.'" 

Last year witnessed a decrease in Methodist numbers, 
and this and other offsets are proposed. No 
doubt results will follow. It is as much a part of this 
harvest work to gather the tares into "bundles" and 
"bind" them, as it is to gather the "wheat" into the 
light and liberty wherewith Christ makes free and 
safe in his "garner." Should any ripe "wheat" be 
gathered into these "bundles," we may surely expect 
them to be gathered out again, speedily; for "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his," and is calling in a 
voice which all his true ones will hear and recognize 
and obey, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be 



not partakers of her sins and receive not of her 
plagues!"-2 Cor. 6:17; Rev. 18:4. 

No doubt this "Twentieth Century Movement" 
will spread among all denominations, and favor the 
"Union" movement. No doubt also it will lead to an 
increased bitterness against present truth and all who 
are loyal to it as the true gospel. It would not surprise 
us if this led to persecution, for no doubt many 
now, like Saul of Tarsus, will verily think that in 
persecuting the truth and its servants they are doing 
God service. 

R2705 : page 294 

REV. R. A. TORREY'S ARRAIGNMENT. 



At the Convention of Christian workers, Chicago, 
Sept. 19, Rev. Torrey, as reported by the Chicago 
Evening Post, said:— 

"Unbelief is rampant. Many regard it as a mark 
of intellectual superiority to reject the Bible, and even 
faith in God and immortality. It is about the only 
mark of superiority many possess, and perhaps that is 
the reason they cling to it so tenaciously. Many of us 
who are professedly orthodox ministers are infidels. 
Worldliness is rampant among church members. Many 
church members are just as eager as any in the rush 
to get rich. They use the methods of the world in the 

R2705 : page 295 

accumulation of wealth, and they hold just as fast to 

it as any, when they have it. Many do not believe in 

the whole Bible. The book of Genesis is a myth; Jonah 

is an allegory; and even the miracles of the Son 

of God are questioned. The doctrine of prayer is 

old-fashioned, and the doctrine of the Holy Spirit is 

sneered at. Conversion is unnecessary, and hell is no 

longer believed in. Then look at the fads and errors 

that have sprung up out of this loss of faith. ...Praylessness 

abounds among church members on every 

hand. Many Christians spend twice as much time every 

day wallowing in the mire of the daily papers as 

they do bathing in the cleansing waves of God's holy 

Word." 

ZIONISM PROSPERING SLOWLY. 



While the last Zionist Congress (London, August) 
was a success as respects numbers and enthusiasm, it 
revealed no progress on the part of its leaders in the 
accomplishment of its aims, or steps thereto. The 



London Spectator says of it:— 

"The main arguments of the speakers are the 
horrible position of the Jews in countries where, as in 
Roumania, they are actively persecuted, and the benefit 
they may be to Europe, as the vanguard of an army 
of intelligence for penetrating Asia. Both are sound 
arguments, but some hotter impulse than either would 
seem to be required before the majority of Jews will 
quit countries to which they are accustomed, for a 
country which has for ages been represented to them 
as desolate beyond experience. The English Jews in 
particular are too comfortable to move; the Jews in 
professions on the Continent fear to be declared foreigners; 
and the poor majority have no means of influencing 
the Turkish Government, which is not favorable 
to the movement. Some day or other, when the 
Seraglio is in acute want of money, a great experiment 
will be tried; but meanwhile Zionism is rather 
the highly interesting aspiration of a great race, than 
a practical design for the restoration of the Jews to 
their own land." 

Addressing the Congress and speaking on the 
"General Position of the Jew," Dr. Max Nordau is 
reported to have said:— 

'"Since they began to review the position of the 
Jew among the nations, during the sittings of the Congress, 
the drama had developed before their eyes, and 
every act was progressively heartrending. The book 
of Job must be taken to be the picture of the Jewish 
position. Anti-Semitism was growing more virulent. 
The press of Europe bore testimony to Jews being 
cast in prison for a crime to none so revolting as to 
the Jew. In Prussia these ridiculous charges had 
received their quietus, and the energetic action of the 
Government deserved the best thanks of Jewry. 

'"Why are we thus treated? Are we not as human 
as our neighbors? Are we not as innocent? Is 
our desire to support our wives and children less laudable 
in us than in them? There have been other religious 
persecutions, but none so gruesome.' 

"One historical parallel occurred to his mind. In 
1729-31 all the Protestants in Salsburg, Austria, were 
expelled from their homes on account of religious intolerance. 
They took all necessary comforts with 
them. Church dignitaries offered them valedictory 
blessings, and even accompanied them some distance 
towards their new land. King Fredrick William I. 
of Prussia offered them a home, and their new neighbors 
vied with each other in the heartiness of their 
greeting. But the poor 270,000 Jews exiled from 
Roumania carry nought but the rags on their backs; 
for their sick there was no medical consolation; and 
their future was as uncertain as their past was dark. 
They are accompanied on their rough road with suspicion 
and hatred; are met with repulses and rebuffs, 
and with the cry, ever growing sterner, 'Go further, 



further.'" 

ARE THE HEATHEN SAVED OR LOST? 



Inconsistency seems to be stamped on every doctrine 
and practice of "orthodox" Churchianity. For 
instance, point out to them that only one-fifth of the 
world's population make the slightest claim to be 
Christians, in the most formal sense, and that therefore 
the four-fifths who are professedly heathen can 
in no sense be saved in Christ, and that unless there be 
hope for them in the future, by an awakening from 
death to "a resurrection by judgment," there can be 
no other hope; and they will at once reply, Oh, no ! 
we believe and teach that the heathen can be saved 
and go to heaven if they believe in Mohammed or 
Buddha or Confucius or some other divinity, if they 
do the best they know how. 

You ask them, Will not heaven then be a place 
of common rather than choice spirits, with such a 
preponderance of heathen? and, What advantage then 
have Christians? and they are sorely perplexed, but 
generally not sufficiently perplexed to start a fresh 
investigation of the divine Word to see where the 
difficulty lies. When we further ask, Why the expenditure 
of millions of dollars annually, and the sacrifice 
of many lives of missionaries, if the heathen are 
saved anyway? they are confused at their own inconsistency. 
And if we then inquire, Do you not claim 
that the hearing of the gospel, with the natural ear, 
brings condemnation to eternal torment if it be rejected? 
And do you not admit that the vast majority 
of those who thus hear do reject the gospel? And 
putting this part of your faith with the other, do you 
not admit that one or the other must be wrong, or else 
that missionary effort is keeping millions of heathen 
people out of heaven?— Then they are confused and 
want (not to search for the truth but) to change the 
subject and stop thinking lest they lose their "faith." 
Poor things, they hold fast to their nonsensical delusions, 
calling them faith! 

But now, in line with the above, we have another 
question to propound to so-called Orthodoxy, based 
on the following clipping from the daily press:— 

R2705 : page 296 

"POPULATION ANNIHILATED. 



"FIVE THOUSAND CHINESE DRIVEN INTO THE 
AMUR RIVER, WHERE THEY PERISHED MISERABLY. 
SHOT IF THEY ATTEMPTED TO LAND. 



"LONDON, Sept. 21. --'Authentic accounts have 
been received here,' says the Moscow correspondent 
of the Standard, 'of a horrible massacre at Blagovestchensk, 
which was undoubtedly carried out under direct 
orders from the Russian authorities, and which 
then let loose the tide of slaughter through Amur. 

'"The entire Chinese population of 5,000 souls 
was escorted out of town to a spot five miles up the 
Amur, and then, being led in batches of a few hundred 
to the river bank, were ordered to cross over to 
the Chinese side. No boats were provided and the 
river is a mile wide. The Chinese were flung alive 
into the stream and were stabbed or shot at the least 
resistance, while Russian volunteers, who lined the 
bank, clubbed or shot any who attempted to land. 
Not one escaped alive. The river bank for miles was 
strewn with corpses.'" 

It is the claim of certain religious journals, and 
of many ministers of the gospel, that the present war 
in China for the protection of ministers and missions 
is a holy war in the interest of Christianity and its 
civilization, as against heathenism and its civilization. 
Now our question is whether this war is adding to the 
population of heaven or of hell, according to "orthodoxy"? 
It is surely a very important and proper 
question from their standpoint. Let us see; the succoring 
of the ministers and missionaries (every one 
of whom no doubt would have been passported to 
heaven by his own denomination) has cost the lives 
of probably 50,000 persons thus far, about 5,000 of 
the number being soldiers representing Christendom 
(as the Russians of the above clipping). Now did 
the entire 50,000 go to heaven?— the heathen because 
they did not know of Christ and the soldiers of 
"Christendom" because they were "soldiers of the 
cross"? If so, then the war already has saved 50,000 
and should be prosecuted vigorously. 

If our question be answered negatively,— that the 
heathen 45,000 went to torment, and the "Christian" 
5,000, being no more "saints" than the heathen, 
went to the same awful fate, then another question 
would be in order, namely: Would it not have been 
more Christlike for the few rescued ministers and missionaries 
to have taken death as martyrs, in their 
faith of an immediate entrance to heaven; and to have 
allowed the 50,000 thus far slain in the war, to escape 
the torture for a few years more at least? How inconsistent 
"orthodoxy" is in its every proposition respecting 
the very subject it professes to know all 
about; viz., the divine plan of salvation! 

But how consistent the Bible teaching on these 
subjects;— (1) That only consecrated believers in the 
atonement are Christians— "saints." (2) That the 
vast majority of those killed on both sides were merely 
"children of this world," and not to be reckoned among 



the "children of God" whose trial for "glory, honor 
and immortality" is now in progress. (3) That the 
hour is coming in the which not only these, but "all 
that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of Man and come forth," the masses "unto [i.e. to 
have an opportunity for] a resurrection [raising fully 
out of death, in perfect and everlasting conditions] 
by judgments," *disciplines, corrections in righteousness, 

R2706 : page 296 

which will prevail toward all men during the 
Millennium. 

CAN RESTITUTION CHANGE THE ETHIOPIAN'S SKIN? 



The following, from the New York World, is the 
third we have seen reported. These suggest and illustrate 
the process of restitution soon due. The item 
reads,— 

"FROM BLACK TO WHITE HE SLOWLY TURNED. 

"PARKERSBURG, W. VA., Sept. 8.— It has fallen 
to the lot of the Rev. Wm. H. Draper, pastor of the 
Logan Memorial Church, of Washington Conference, 
A.M.E. Church, of this town, to give a living affirmative 
answer to the famous Biblical question, "Can 
the Ethiopian change his skin or the leopard his 
spots?" Though once as black as charcoal, the 
Rev. Mr. Draper is now white. His people say that 
his color was changed in answer to prayer. Many 
years ago Draper was employed by a fair-skinned man, 
and he was often heard to remark that if he could 
only be white like his employer he would be happy. 
While in the white man's service Draper 'experienced' 
religion. 

"From that day forward he prayed constantly 
and fervently that he might become white. Thirty 
years ago his prayer began to be answered. He first 
experienced a prickling sensation on his face, and upon 
close investigation found a number of small white 
spots scarcely larger than the point of a pin. He became 
alarmed, thinking he had some peculiar disease, 
but he did not suffer, and aside from the prickling 
sensation felt nothing unusual. Gradually the white 
spots became larger and extended themselves, until 
now, after the change has been in progress for over 
thirty years, Draper has not a single dark spot on his 
body. 

"Many years ago, before this strange metamorphosis 
took place, Mr. Draper was in charge of the 
same church he has now. He was popular with his 
flock and his departure was a source of great regret. 



When he recently returned to Parkersburg there was 
great rejoicing among the churchmen because their 
favorite pastor was coming back. When, however, 
Draper appeared in the pulpit the first Sunday, not 
one of the congregation recognized him. In fact, it 
was all he could do to convince them that he, a white 
man, was the same old black preacher they had years 
before." 



*The word in this text (John 5:29) rendered "damnation" 
is very improperly translated. It should be "judgment," as in 
the Revised Version, and in verses 22,27 and 30 of this same 
chapter and many other places in the Scriptures where this 
word krisis occurs. 



R2709 : page 297 

AN INTERESTING QUESTION. 
THE SPIRITS OF JUST MEN MADE PERFECT. 

Question.— How should we understand the statement 
of Heb. 12:23, respecting "the spirits of just men 
made perfect"? 

Answer.— To appreciate this we must take the statement 
in its connections: The Apostle is contrasting the 
introduction of the Law Covenant with the introduction 
of the New Covenant; and let us remember that altho 
the Church is justified by the blood of Christ, which 
seals the New Covenant, nevertheless, the New Covenant 
itself is not considered as having gone into effect during 
this Gospel age; it is a covenant for the world of mankind, 
and the putting of it into effect brings the times 
of restitution of all things at the Second Advent. The 
Church, altho justified by the sacrifice which sealed the 
New Covenant, is really accepted under the Abrahamic 
covenant— accepted as the Seed of Abraham— members 
of the body of Christ— through which Seed all the 
families of the earth are to be blessed under the New 
Covenant, sealed at Calvary, during the Millenium. 

The Law Covenant, of which Moses was the Mediator, 
and which was given at Mount Sinai amid the 
thunderings and lightnings and voices, etc., was typical 
of the New Covenant of which Christ (Head and 
body) is the Mediator, and which is to be introduced to 
the world of mankind after the whole body of Christ 
has shed its blood and been completed and glorified. 
-Acts 3:22; Col. 1:24. 

The Apostle draws a parallel between the marching 
of Israel from Egypt and the Red Sea, up to Mount 
Sinai, where, under the leadership of the priesthood, 
they came under the Law Covenant with all who hope 



to become God's people, marching under the lead of 
Christ and the "royal priesthood" toward another 
mountain,— to Mount Zion, the Kingdom of God, the 
Millennial Kingdom, following under the banner of the 
antitypical Mediator, will come all of God's Israel, all 
who are willing to be delivered from the power of the 
antitypical Pharaoh, viz., Satan. 

When we consider how the Israelites approached 
Mount Sinai as a host, and that they did not all get 
there at the same moment nor the same hour, nor even 
in the same day, we find the parallel of this in the fact 
that the Lord's people throughout this age have been 
gradually approaching this Kingdom— not all at once, 
but one after another throughout the age. The last 
members of the Royal Priesthood are only getting close 
to the Kingdom, Mount Zion, now; and are to be followed 
in turn by all the hosts who will become true Israelites 
during the Millennial age, when light and 
knowledge shall be freely granted. 

With this picture before the mind, and reading the 
Apostle's words as translated in the Diaglott, we see a 
beauty in the expression: We have not approached the 
natural mountain with the terrors of the Law, the smoke 
and the clouds and thick darkness and lightnings and 
voices of words that spoke condemnation and death to 
any who erred; but we are approaching, and all of the 
Church throughout the age have been approaching, 
the glorious Mount Zion, the Kingdom of God, the 
Kingdom of blessing. 

And what shall we find in this Kingdom when we 
have fully reached it? We shall find the heavenly 
city, God's Kingdom of power and great glory. We 
shall find ourselves introduced to a new company of 
brethren— the heavenly host; and we shall find our 
loved ones who have traveled with us in the narrow 
way, in that first general assembling of the Church of 
the First-borns, whose names are written in heaven. 
There we shall find our Heavenly Father, the great 
Judge of all; there we shall find the spirits, the new 
natures of the justified ones fully perfected in the likeness 
of their Lord and Head— "We shall be like him, 
for we shall see him as he is." There we shall find 
in due time perfected human beings fully restored to 
the divine likeness in which father Adam was created; 
and there we shall find Jesus, who mediated the New 
Covenant; and there we shall ever appreciate the blood 
of sprinkling which cleansed us and presented us faultless 
before the Father in love. 

But altho we are approaching these grand and glorious 
things, we are not to expect that they will all be 
ushered in in a peaceful manner; on the contrary, as 
the Apostle points out (vss. 26,27), there will be a 
correspondence between the great time of trouble, with 
which the Millennial age and its New Covenant for 
mankind will be ushered in, and the way in which the 
Law Covenant to the Jews was ushered in— only that 



the New Covenant will be ushered in on a much grander 

and antitypical plane. There will be a shaking here, 

as there was a shaking there; but instead of its being 

the physical earth that will shake, it will be the symbolical 

earth,— society. And not alone the social structure, 

but also the heavens, or ecclesiastical structure, 

is to be shaken here. As the Apostle's words clearly 

intimate, the shaking will be a much more wonderful 

one than was its type, even as every antitype is much 

greater than its type. He explains that the shaking 

here is to be so thorough that it will shake everything 

that is shakeable, and that only the fixed, permanent, 

righteous things shall ultimately remain. And those 

things that shall be permitted to remain, he declares 

(vs. 28) pertain to the Kingdom of God, which is immoveable, 

unshakeable. 

It is this Kingdom toward which all of the Lord's 
people march throughout this Gospel age, that will 
then be fully attained amidst all that great shaking 
and confusion of the great day of trouble which is just 
before us. And as Moses went up into the quaking 
mountain, and was lost to the sight of the people below, 
so at, and in conjunction with these mighty manifestations 
of the time of trouble the entire Church will 
be "caught up," gathered to the Lord, changed to his 
likeness— passing through the portals of death, tho they 
shall not sleep, but be changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye. 



R2706 : page 298 

DIVINE CARE FOR THE LOST. 

-LUKE 15:1-10. -OCT. 21.- 

"There is joy in the presence of the angels 
of God over one sinner that repenteth." 

LOST, AS USED in connection with mankind, has 
quite a different meaning in the Bible from 
that commonly given it in modern theology. The latter 
uses the term "lost" in connection with reprobates, 
for whom there is no hope; it implies, according to 
"orthodoxy," hopeless, endless, eternal torment. But 
from the Scriptural standpoint the word "lost" is used 
in an almost opposite sense, as will be noted in the lesson 
before us. 

Our Lord, holy in word and in conduct, naturally 
would draw to himself especially the holiness people of 
his day, and these were the Pharisees, amongst whom, 
however, were many whose holiness was of a hypocritical 
character,— delighting in outward show rather than 
in purity and holiness of heart. Recent lessons showed 
us our Lord the guest and companion of prominent 



Pharisees, and how he improved the opportunity to 
preach the gospel to them as well as to others. But 
the Pharisees, accustomed to thinking of themselves as 
the holier class of the Jews, had gradually separated 
themselves from the lower elements of that people, so 
that in our Lord's time the two classes mingled very 
little; the Pharisees refusing to acknowledge the others 
as brethren and fellow-heirs of the divine promises. 
Consequently, when they perceived that the lower 
classes of the Jews were interested in Jesus' teachings, 
and that Jesus did not hold himself aloof from them, 
but mingled with and taught them just the same as 
others, they wondered, and this inclined them to repudiate 
Jesus, whom they would have been glad to 
have had as one of their number if he had been willing 
to be known as a Pharisee and to conform to their customs. 
It was to correct the wrong ideas of these Pharisees 
that Jesus gave five parables, which we are about 
to consider,— two of them in this lesson. 

The parable of the true shepherd who, loving his 
sheep and caring for them, left the ninety and nine 
well cared for by under-shepherds in the wilds (not 
in a desert) and went after the one lost sheep until he 
found it, gives us an illustration of the divine care. 
Possibly our Lord meant no further lesson than this to 
be taken from his words; but if we shall suppose that 
the parable was intended to be applied in its varied 
particulars, and to illustrate features of the divine plan 
of salvation, we would be obliged to suppose that the 
one sheep that was lost represented Adam and the human 
family, and that the ninety and nine never lost, 
but remaining under the shepherd's care, were the angels 
and other spirit beings, who never wandered into 
sin and away from God; and who always have been 
under his supervision and care. In this view the shepherd 
going after the straying sheep would represent our 
Lord Jesus, leaving the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was, and coming into human 
conditions in the interest of mankind. 

To take any other detailed view of the parable than 
this would seem inconsistent; as, for instance, to suppose 
that the lost sheep represented the degraded element 
of humanity, and ninety-nine sheep a holiness 
class, would be inconsistent in two ways: (1) "There is 
none righteous, no, not one," is the Scriptural declaration; 
and again, as the prophet has declared, "we all 
like sheep have gone astray." (Rom. 3:10; Isa. 53:6.) 
(2) Even if it should be claimed that the ninety-nine 
represented some who are relatively whole, tho not 
actually so, the illustration would be inapt; because it 
will not be questioned that only a small minority— one 
in ten thousand, or one in a hundred thousand of 
earth's sixteen hundred millions, is even in a condition 
of reckoned and relative harmony with Jehovah, the 
Great Shepherd. 

Viewing the one sheep as representing the whole 



of humanity, fallen in Adam and straying far from 
paths of righteousness, and viewing Jesus as the Good 
Shepherd, the representative of the Father, the Great 
Shepherd (Psa. 23:1), we see that the work of going after 
the lost sheep began at our Lord's first advent. We 
see the cost to our Savior incidental to his start for the 
recovery of the sheep, but we do not yet see the sheep 
recovered; for in no sense of the word is mankind 
brought back into harmony with God. We do, however, 
see that during this Gospel age God is selecting 
from humanity an elect Church, to be the body of 
Christ— members of the Good Shepherd, under Jesus 
as the Head; and we see that it is costing every member 
of the body something to prepare to join in this 
work of seeking the lost sheep— humanity in general— 
during the Millennial age. 

Already the sheep is found, in the sense of being 
located; indeed, in that sense of the word it was not 
lost. But as it was lost, in the sense of having wandered 
from God into sin and degradation, in the same 
sense of the word it must be recovered or brought back, 
by processes of restitution (Acts 3:19-21) out of degradation, 
out of the mire of sin, and the horrible pit of 
iniquity and death. It will require the entire Millennial 
age to bring back the sheep in the full, perfect 
sense of the parable; but meanwhile our Lord assures 
us that every step in this great plan for human salvation 
is viewed with interest by the heavenly host, the 
sheep who strayed not from the Father's fold: and the 
figure changing a little in our Lord's explanation, and 
no longer represented by one sheep, but by many (even 
as the human family, tho originally one, is now many), 
he declares that there is joy in the presence of the angels 
of God over one sinner that repenteth— that returns 
to the fold, to harmony with God. 

R2706 : page 299 

Those now returning to harmony with God are accepted 
in the Beloved, and justified freely from all 
things by the grace that was in him, and are, in the 
language of the Apostle, "returning to the Shepherd 
and Caretaker of their souls" (1 Pet. 2:25); and called 
to be co-laborers with the Good Shepherd, as members 
of his "body." 

In the case of Father Adam, the one original straying 
sheep, as in the case of many of his posterity, the 
lost condition is not the desirable one— far rather would 
he and many others have gone back again to the fold 
from which he strayed; but in the degradation and 
mire of sin, they became so degraded and helpless that 
it was impossible for them to return in their own strength 
by the way in which they went. They needed a Savior- 
one able to save them unto the uttermost— able to recover 
them fully from all condemnation of sin, and to bring 
them back completely into the fold of God; and just 



such an one the Heavenly Father has provided in our 
Lord Jesus: "He is able to save unto the uttermost all 
who come unto the Father through him." 

True, there will be a class, as the Scriptures clearly 
show, who, after having received at the Lord's hands 
all the blessings and opportunities which his love has 
provided for their recovery, will still persist in wilfulness 
—self-will, and thus spurn the Good Shepherd's 

R2707 : page 299 

proffered assistance. These, in the Scriptures, are said 
to "sin wilfully after they have come to a knowledge 
of the truth;" for such, the Apostle declares, there remains 
no longer an interest in the great sacrifice, and 
"it is impossible to renew" or recover them. Respecting 
the course of such it is written, "There is a sin unto 
death; I do not say that ye should pray for it." Whoever 
thus sins wilfully and persistently puts himself 
beyond the reach of the Good Shepherd, and dies the 
Second Death, and thus ceases to have any part or lot 
in the divine plan. (Heb. 6:4-6; 1 John 5:16.) It was 
not for the "goat" class that the Good Shepherd gave 
his life, and seeks in the desert; nor for the "wolves;" 
but merely for those who retain something at least of 
the "sheep" nature, despite their degradation in sin. 
Adam was a "sheep," or, as the Scriptures declare, a 
"son of God" (Luke 3:38); and while his transgression 
was a wilful one, in some respects, we have no reason 
to suppose that it was more than a wandering of the 
"sheep" from the fold, into ways of self-will: it did not 
mean a change of nature from a sheep disposition to 
that of a goat or a wolf. It did not mean that Adam 
preferred to be a "child of the devil." 

Had Adam at heart become intelligently and wilfully 
an enemy of God and of righteousness we cannot 
suppose that the all-wise Shepherd would have sent 
his Son after him as a "sheep." True, many of the 
children of Adam today have attained marked characteristics 
of goat nature, and, as the Apostle declares, 
are "enemies of God through wicked works." (Col. 1:21.) 
Nevertheless, the Apostle also explains that 
many of these are in this condition, not wilfully, but 
because they have been deceived by Satan into putting 
light for darkness and darkness for light;— the eyes of 
their understanding have been deceived. He explained 
that the "god of this world [Satan] hath blinded the 
minds of them that believe not" lest they should see 
the glorious light of truth. (2 Cor. 4:4.) Many of 
these, then, who through association with the Adversary 
have become goat-like in many respects, still have 
something of the sheep nature, which, under proper 
enlightenment, would assert itself and be glad to have 
the Good Shepherd restore them fully to divine favor 
and the fold. 

From this standpoint, which we believe is the true 



one, and the only one in harmony with the various 
features of the parable, we perceive that God takes no 
account whatever of those who will go into the Second 
Death; they will have no existence whatever, so far as 
God and his plan are concerned, from the moment they 
lose the sheep nature. And the one sheep which our 
Lord will recover during restitution times, and by the 
close of the Millennium bring fully back into the fold 
of God, will be the human family as God has recognized 
it from the first; viz., those created in God's image and 
likeness, and who never fully lose that image and likeness, 
and in whom his image and likeness will be revived 
and restored during the Millennium. The lost 
sheep, which originally was represented in one (Adam 
and Eve) in its recovery will be represented by hundreds 
of millions of the redeemed and restored of mankind. 

THE LOST PIECE OF SILVER. 



The parable of the woman who, having a bracelet 
on which were hung ten pieces of silver— a marriage 
token— on losing one of these set diligently to work 
until she found it, is another representation of the 
same thought expressed foregoing. The woman's energy 
in seeking for the lost piece of silver is given by our 
Lord as an illustration of divine energy on behalf of lost 
humanity. And here again we see that the Scriptures 
use the word "lost" in reference to the original loss, 
and not at all in respect to those who will be destroyed 
in the Second Death— the latter are not said to be lost; 
they cease to exist; they are not reckoned in the divine 
calculations at all, and not worthy to be mentioned. 
They are not at all like the original that was lost, which 
God recognized and proposes to recover. 

The ten pieces of silver were not only of value, but 
each had stamped upon it, as is the custom with coin, 
a certain image or likeness. And so with all the sons 
of God, angels, archangels, and we know not how many 

R2707 : page 300 

other orders of spirit beings, were made in the image 
and likeness of God. It was one of these that was lost— 
the human one, man. And it was that which was lost 
that was sought, and ultimately found. 

The houses of olden times, lighted mainly through 
the doorway, with the floors of earth (clay or sand or 
stones) more or less littered and defiled, well represented 
the condition of sin and degradation in which 
mankind was lost, as represented in father Adam, who 
bore the image and likeness of God, as represented in 
the lost coin of the parable. The parable does not represent 
the processes of restitution, but merely the 
original loss and the ultimate recovery of the same thing 



that was lost, and the energy put forth to this end. The 

lighting of the candle and the sweeping diligently represent 

the work of God through the Christ, which will 

be accomplished by the end of the Millennial age, when 

that which was lost and sought for, will have been fully 

recovered. 

The restored race, when returned to the heavenly 
Father at the close of the Millennial age will, each and 
all, be as perfect in his image and likeness as was Adam 
in his creation, with the added benefits of larger knowledge 
and fuller appreciation of the divine One, whose 
likeness they will bear. No account is taken in this 
parable, either, of the increase in the numbers of the 
human family, nor of those members of Adam's posterity 
who, by reason of wilful sin (the love of sin more 
than righteousness) will be "destroyed from amongst 
the people." (Acts 3:23.) They have no standing in 
the Father's sight; indeed, the Father takes no cognizance 
of any except that which was lost, and that 
which will ultimately be restored to him by his faithful 
representative, Christ, who seeks and finds. 

The great time of rejoicing, both in heaven and in 
earth, will come at the close of the Millennial age, when 
all things in heaven and in earth will be heard praising 
Him that sitteth upon the throne, and the Lamb; 
but now, in advance of the complete rejoicing, our Lord 
assures us that all the heavenly host rejoices in every 
evidence of the accomplishment of the great work; rejoices 
over one sinner that repenteth— who fully turns 
from sin to harmony with God. And if the angels in 
heaven rejoice, so, in proportion as they are in harmony 
with God and the heavenly beings, will all who profess 
to be God's people on earth have rejoicing in the recovery 
of fellow-creatures out of the snare and blindness of 
sin and Satan. 

This was the particular lesson which our Lord 
sought to impress upon the Pharisees— that instead of 
holding themselves aloof from, and feeling offended at, 
those who were hearing Jesus gladly, they should, if 
they were in harmony with God and the heavenly holy 
ones, have rejoiced to see any evidence of repentance 
and reformation; and should have been glad to assist 
back into harmony with God those who, as the Apostle 
expresses it, were "feeling after God, if haply they 
might find him."— Acts 17:27. 

And this must be the attitude of all the Lord's 
people to-day: if they have not this sentiment of heart 
it is an evidence that they have not the spirit of the 
Lord. And to have such a feeling of loving interest in 
the recovery of others out of sin, and a disposition to 
assist them back to harmony with God, not only is an 
evidence of a condition of heart which is in harmony 
with God, but will be found to be an aid to such themselves, 
an assistance in making straight paths for their 
feet, that they themselves, under the Shepherd's care, 
may ultimately reach the fold in safety. 



So then, let all of the Lord's dear people who have 
already been found by the Good Shepherd, and who 
have accepted his loving care and assistance back to 
God, cultivate more and more the spirit of sympathy 
for others, and of helpfulness and cooperation in the 
work in which the Good Shepherd is engaged— not yet 
in seeking for humanity as a whole, but now specially 
in rendering assistance to those whom the Lord is, in 
the present age, seeking out as the "first-fruits" of his 
work and victory,— edifying one another, building one 
another up in the most holy faith, encouraging one 
another: helping one another to put on the wedding 
garment, and to be meet for the inheritance of the saints 
in light, as joint-heirs in the Kingdom.— 1 Thess. 5:11; 
Jude 20; Col. 1:12; Rom. 8:17. 



R2707 : page 300 

THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN. 

-LUKE 15:ll-24.-OCT. 28. 

"I will arise and go to my father." 

HAVING GIVEN in the foregoing parables of The 
Lost Sheep and The Lost Coin, an outline of 
God's general dealing with the human family, our Lord 
now gave a third parable as illustrating God's special 
dealings with the people of Israel. He wished not only 
that his hearers should have the general illustration of 
God's goodness and care for the recovery of the lost, 
but now he would give a special lesson that would bring 
the matter close home to his hearers— both Pharisees 
and publicans— and show to all the real situation 
and the proper line of conduct for each to take. 

It will be noticed in this connection, that while 
our Lord was known to be friendly toward sinners, he 
was never known to condone sin. The friendship of 
the publicans was not gained through our Lord's falsifying 
matters to them and claiming that they were 
not sinners; but on the contrary, by his declaring them 
to be sinners, by showing his sympathy and love, and 
that their case, so far from being a hopeless one, as the 
conduct of the Pharisees would imply, was hopeful, if 

R2708 : page 301 

they would but repent and turn to God. The "father" 
in the parable, represents Jehovah God, and the "two 
sons" represent two classes in Israel, the elder son 
representing Moses and the prophets, and all who "sat 
in Moses' seat," as representatives of the Law, with 
all who sought to conform their lives to its requirements, 
—Pharisees, etc. The younger son represents 



the remainder of that people Israel— the class which 
was inclined to wilfulness and waywardness as respects 
the divine Law. 

These two classes, all Israel, were inheritors together 
of certain wonderful blessings and promises— the 
blessings being equally divided between them, but the 
promises remaining for those who would be faithful to 
the will of the Father. The elder son represented the 
class which, having respect to the promises, enjoyed 
the blessings at home with the Father, that is, in fellowship 
with God as his people. The younger son represented 
the class which ignored the promises, took its 
share of present blessings, and departing from God 
wandered afar from him, in sin and disregard of the 
Law. 

The latter class had anticipated much pleasure in 
the wayward course; but as a matter of fact found, as 
all transgressors do, that "the way of the transgressor 
is hard." And in this respect the sinner-class of Israel 
was no different from any other class of sinners at any 
other time living in violation of the known law; it is 
an attitude of want, of hunger, of dissatisfaction, discontent; 
it is a condition of slavery to sin and of receiving 
of sin's wages;— in the present life, wages of 
unhappiness, melancholia, heart-aches as well as body-aches. 
The parable represents this son as thoroughly 
disgusted with his condition, resolving to return to his 
father's house— not expecting to be an inheritor of the 
great promises, the rights to which were admittedly forfeited, 
but merely hoping to have the privilege of being 
admitted to the house as a servant, not hoping to be 
received as a son. 

Our Lord thus illustrates the condition of some of 
the publicans and sinners hovering about him and listening 
to his teachings, respecting whose reception and 
instruction the Pharisees were finding fault. Our Lord 
would have them see the attitude of the Heavenly 
Father toward these returning ones, and in the parable 
pictured him as seeing the repentant prodigal a long 
way off, and as having compassion for him, and great 
willingness to receive him. How this must have touched 
the hearts of the publicans who heard,— to think that 
God was willing to receive them back again, not to 
spurn them as the Pharisees did! Our Lord proceeds 
with the picture further, to show that the Father not 
only received the prodigal, but, beyond his expectations, 
received him as a son, not as a servant,— providing for 
him a new robe of righteousness, and making for him 
a great feast of welcome. 

Then, as illustrating the attitude of the complaining 
Pharisees, the elder brother is pictured in the parable 
as disappointed at the return of the prodigal 
brother. Thus our Lord revealed to them how different 
was their attitude of heart from that of the Heavenly 
Father; and thus he gently reproved them. The parable 
shows the attitude of the Pharisees in declining to 



call the prodigal "brother," saying,— "This thy son," 
while the view of the Heavenly Father to the contrary 
is expressed in the words, "This thy brother was dead 
and is alive again." 

The Pharisees and others of the Jewish nation who 
sought to keep the Law— to be faithful to God's requirements, 
were, so far as that was concerned, in the 
right attitude; and up to that time and point were 
heirs of all that God had promised, and had to give; 
and had they been not only outwardly religious but 
religious in heart also, they would have been fully prepared 
to have received at our Lord's hands the great 
blessings of the Kingdom privileges which, being in a 
wrong attitude of heart, they despised and rejected and 
lost. This their loss is represented in the parable by 
their refusal to go in to the feast made by the Father, 
to which they were as welcome as the returned prodigal, 
and in which feast, had they been in a proper attitude 
of heart, they would have had a prominent place 
with the Father in bestowing the welcome on the returned 
one. But as they were not in the right attitude 
of heart to receive their repentant brethren, neither 
would they have been in the right attitude of heart to 
be the Lord's instruments of general blessing in his 
Kingdom. He selects for joint-heirs with himself in the 
Kingdom, not the self-righteous, who despise others, 
but such as are of an humble heart, and who, receiving 
divine mercies and favors as a grace, are filled with 
thankfulness, and having the spirit of humility and of 
harmony with the Father, rejoice to cooperate with him 
in all of his benevolent plans for the recovery of the lost. 

To hitch this parable on to the general theme presented 
in the two preceding, we might view the prodigal 
son as representing, in a secondary sense, all the 
remainder of mankind outside of those few in Israel 
who were seeking to do the Father's will; and from 
this standpoint we can see that the feast of fat things 
provided for the sinners in Israel corresponds to the 
feast to be opened ultimately to the whole world of 
mankind under the Kingdom (Isa. 25:6), that all may 
return to the Father's house and that all who thus return 
will be received of God through Christ, not as 
slave-servants, but as sons. 

The two preceding parables make no reference to 
the human will in the matter of the recovery of the 

R2708 : page 302 

lost; but this parable makes the human will very prominent. 
It was the will of the elder son which for a time 
kept him in the Father's house; it was the will of the 
prodigal son that led him forth, his wilful going into 
the depths of degradation not being hindered by the 
Father. Likewise, it was his own will that led him to 
retrace his steps to the Father's house; and it was only 
the will of the elder son that hindered him from entering 



into all the joys of the festal occasion with which 
the parable closes. 

This parable also ignores the Second Death, and 
the class that will ultimately be cut off therein. The 
son that was lost, and subsequently was found, was lost 
in his going away into sin, and not lost in eternal torment. 
He was found in his return to God. He was 
dead, so far as the Father was concerned, when he was 
away; but he was alive again when he willingly 
returned. 

The lesson to the Pharisees, in this parable, like 
the others, was in respect to their proper duties toward 
their brethren, who in receiving Jesus were showing 
evidences of a return to God. Indeed, so far as we 
know, few, if any, of our Lord's disciples were of the 
religious class of that time, who claimed to sit in Moses' 
seat, and to be in every sense of the word the favorites of 
the Father in that covenanted nation. That the Pharisees 
did not profit greatly by the parable seems evident: 
few from that class were willing to abandon their position 
of vaunted superiority, and to acknowledge that 
in everything they were wholly dependent upon the 
Father's grace, and of themselves could do nothing. 

Some parallel to those conditions which obtained 
in the end of the Jewish age might be found now in 
the end of the Gospel age, even as we have found that 
in every particular the Jewish people and their harvest 
time were a pattern or figure or illustration of the Gospel 
age and spiritual Israel. Amongst spiritual Israelites 
to-day, in our Lord's second presence, a message 
is going forth to the groaning creation, a message respecting 
the Father's love, and its lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths; a message respecting the ransom 
given by our Lord Jesus, that it was "a ransom 
for all," and that his death was "not only a propitiation 
for our sins [the Church's] but also for the sins of 
the whole world;" a message that the whole world, thus 
redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, is to have 
full opportunity of returning to divine favor during the 
Millennial age, "the times of restitution of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began." 

Now, how is this message received by nominal 
Christendom, as to some extent corresponding to the 
elder brother of the parable? Does it not appear that 
the message of restitution for a "groaning creation" 
(Rom. 8:22) is received in much the same manner that 
evidences of God's grace toward the Jewish prodigal 
were received? Does it not appear that many of our 
dear friends, whom we would have expected to rejoice 
to find the heavenly Father willing to receive back the 
repentant world, and that he has made full provision 
for their return to fellowship with himself through Jesus, 
and full preparation to let them all know of his 
grace in Christ,— does it not seem that this gracious 
message of "good will toward men," "good tidings of 



great joy to all people," should be to all Christians a 
gladsome message? 

It surely should be such to all who have the Father's 
spirit; to all who love their neighbor as themselves. 
But we know how bitterly the message is rejected by 
some who, to outward appearances, have long been 
favored of the Heavenly Father, and who are well versed 
in his law, and who have been seeking to keep close at 
home, in the sense of outward obedience to the laws of 
righteousness. What would their course of conduct 
in respect to his message of present truth imply? Would 
it not imply that outwardly they had been sons of God, 
in obedience to the laws of righteousness, but that 
they had at heart been far from him, even when with 
their lips they drew nigh unto him, and when they bent 
their knee in prayer to him? 

Would it not seem that if they had the Father's 
spirit of love and kindness and generosity and justice 
and truth they would be glad, yea, rejoice exceedingly 

R2709 : page 302 

to know that after the selection of the Church of 
this present age to be the Bride and joint-heir with 
Christ in the Kingdom, the Heavenly Father had a 
great and wonderful plan of restitution for the world of 
mankind in general? If they had the Father's spirit, 
if they had the spirit of him who left the Father's glory 
and humbled himself to our conditions, even unto 
death, to be a co-worker together with the Father in 
the great work shortly to be accomplished for the recovery 
of the lost? It certainly should fill the Lord's 
"brethren" with joy to know that it will be a part of 
their privilege as members of the body of Christ to join 
with him in this great work of bringing back the lost 
sheep, of sweeping diligently and finding the lost coin, 
and, in every sense of the word, of welcoming back to 
the Father's house the lost brother. 

It is not for us to judge the hearts of men; that 
is beyond our power; but the Lord seems to be using 
his truth in such a way that it shall become the discerner 
of the thoughts and intents of the hearts, and 
that, sharper than any two-edged sword, it shall separate, 
shall discover, shall manifest, who have the spirit 
of the Lord, and who have not his spirit. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his."— 
Heb. 4:12. 



page 303 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take much pleasure 
in writing you this morning, because of the joyful influence 



of the truth upon my heart. It was my happy 
privilege to be present at the Convention at Chicago— 
and to return full of its uplifting influence. The Lord 
was certainly with us there, and I think I can safely 
say that any doubts that may have remained in my 
mind as to the truth and Scripturalness of "this way" 
were fully removed, and I came home with a peace of 
mind and courage to go into the church prayer-meeting 
and tell those who have not heard of this fuller truth 
what I had seen and heard and felt. 

May God bless you, dear Brother, and spare you 
long to think and act and speak for him, and in defence 
of his gospel. Brother Dixon and myself went to Milwaukee 
yesterday to attend Pilgrim Hay's meeting, and 
returned well pleased with that also. Quite a large 
company gathered to hear him. He will be with us 
this evening. I will enclose you one of the invitation 
cards we had printed. 

I have wished many times that I had the third 
chapter of DAWN, VOL. I., in tract form, for general 
distribution among Christian people. It seems to me 
it would act as an excellent opening wedge for the entire 
series— such a faithful and logical defense of God's 
inspired Word. 

Yours in love of the Master, 

H. D. White,— Wisconsin. 

R2709 : page 303 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Some time ago Brother 
Woodworth witnessed my method of handing out the 
Volunteer TOWERS and was so well pleased with it 
that he made me promise to write to you about it. I 
don't consider it anything out of the ordinary, but for 
the sake of my promise I will give it to you. 

With a bow and a smile I say, "Sample— WATCH 
TOWER"; or "Free sample WATCH TOWER." If any 
questions are asked, I say, "An unsectarian religious 
magazine." My reasons for this method are, I seek to 
interest them thus, or rather to arouse their curiosity in 
knowing what the paper is; rather giving them the impression 
that I am seeking subscribers. In this way 
they will read with an unprejudiced mind— it does not 
arouse their antagonism by giving them the impression 
that you have something to refute the arguments they 
have just been listening to. If any know of the WATCH 
TOWER and do not care for it, they can refuse to take 
it, and thus one is saved for some one else. I think I 
am justified in giving the impression that I am seeking 
subscribers; if anyone becomes interested, he will become 
a subscriber, and it is for such that we specially 
labor. With much love, I am, 

Yours in the best of bonds, 

JOS. L. HOAGLAND,-Pennsylvania. 

page 303 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Possibly you may remember 
that when I was in Milwaukee some months 
ago I sent you a newspaper clipping regarding a colored 
man in Wilmington who had turned from black to 
white, through the loss of the pigment under his skin. 
I now enclose a clipping from the New York World of 
Sept. 9th, regarding a similar case at Parkersburg, W. 
Va. Do you not think these may possibly be granted 
as illustrations of how the Lord purposes to remove 
race and color distinctions during the "age of the ages"? 

I also enclose a clipping from same paper, same 
date, regarding the intended gathering in of 2,000,000 
more into Methodism's "great big flock." [The two 
items mentioned appear in the "View"— EDITOR.] I 
thank you with all my heart for your kind, encouraging 
letter of Sept. 13. In humility and love, 

Your brother and servant, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH,-New York. 

R2710 : page 303 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The TOWER for Aug. 15 
is at hand and read, and I cannot resist writing to you 
on the subject, but by no means for the purpose of getting 
an answer as I well know the value of your time. 
When first, in the great joy of having received the truth, 
I hastened to tell my dear brothers and sisters in Holland, 
I met with terrible rebuffs. My very dear youngest 
sister sent me a tract, in which a parson, Cjeharsi 
—hireling (whose the sheep are not) warned his flock 
(pen) against the "soul-damning doctrines of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN." "It added," said he, "and lopped off 
Scripture," and to prove that he never did such a thing 
he went on to say that "the wages of sin is death and 
eternal torment." 

Ever since '94 I have quietly but persistently spoken 
of my Lord as I know him now. Lately my sister's 
notice has been drawn to the fact that I was concerned 
about her "soul's condition," and I pointed out to her 
how she, knowing that I had imbibed "soul-damning 
doctrines," had never taken a step to prevent my going 
into the tortures of hell fire, while she would give her 
time to, and get concerned about the welfare of some 
man in prison, who had merely transgressed the "traditions 
of men." My letter was largely prompted by 
one from a second sister, who has youth, beauty, 
wealth, talent and society in her favor, but who gives 
all to nurse the sick. She has worked her way to be 
directress of the Reformed hospital in Amsterdam, our 
native city. Hers is a life of actual service, and, tho 
still in orthodoxy, she confessed that she was touched 
by the evident love and interest I manifested in Christ's 
teaching, and that I had the "gift to analyze thought." 
Oh, how glad I will be if I may have stepped out so 
far past myself to show them my only Head and Master! 



Souls full of love and consecration, but yet of the 
heart "slow to understand." Just think of lives like 
those clearly seeing, so that they too may receive the 
"gift to analyze (order) thought." 

Oh, how dearly I hope I may have sufficient light 
in me that it may shine clearly enough for others to 
see! I fully appreciate what you say about sudden 
deaths. The fact that we have an understanding of the 
plan of the ages is not a guarantee that the mind of 
Christ is in us. If, in one sense, it is a sign of exceeding 
love and benefaction, it brings with it no less a responsibility. 
Not all those who understand these truths 
are destined for one office and one purpose. I do not 
care for the reward, I do not ask for one; all I ask and 
all I care for is to render efficient service to at least 
some sin-laden, faltering one for His Name's sake. The 
15th Psalm has been my choice one from childhood; 
and from it I learned, amid the luxurious surroundings 
of a banker's home, to ask why I had received so much 
when others had so little, others whom I loved and 
honored, and who were more worthy than I. Good as 
my father was, both as man and Christian, I saw that he 
did not earn his wealth, and that the world was but little 

R2710 : page 304 

better for his being in it. I made up my mind (I can 
easily remember) at the age of 12, that I would right 
the wrong if I could, and to-day I am still laboring 
towards that end. I feel that I swore then— and whether 
to my hurt or not I do not know— and I have not 
changed since. I do know that, according to the psalm, 
I have been blessed far beyond my deserts, for "Mine 
eyes have seen thy salvation;" yea, I behold Canaan's 
glittering shores. It is therefore quite immaterial to 
me, reverently speaking, what occurs. The Kingdom 
cometh not by observation, that they should say, lo 
here, or lo there, and I would pluck my right eye (that 
wherein I thought I saw aright) rather than lose the 
Kingdom. 

With prayers, brother, that the spirit of meekness, 
love and humility may be increasingly yours, that so 
you may prove faithful to the last, I am 

Yours in the service of the truth, 

DANIEL F. BOTSSEVAIN-Canada. 

page 304 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have not written to 
you for a long time, but it is not because I have forgotten 
you, nor because you are long absent from my 
thoughts. I am still rejoicing in the light of truth, and, 
I trust, still pressing along the narrow way, altho, I 
fear, in but a halting fashion. If it were not for the 
positive information in God's Word that not many 
noble are being called, but rather the base things, to be 



joint-heirs with Christ, and that there is no condemnation 

to those who are in Christ, I (in common with 

many others, I presume) should be inclined to despair 

when I consider what little progress I have made in 

seven years' time, since I was first led out of sectarian 

darkness. 

The principal article in the last TOWER was especially 
good: you hit the nail when you said that many 
Christians had seen nothing more in the Golden Rule 
than the negative injunction to refrain from injuring 
another; for I had not noticed anything more in it, until 
you called our attention to it at the Philadelphia 
Convention. 

The manifestation of a good spirit still characterizes 
all the meetings in Philadelphia, and the light of 
truth is spreading most decidedly among others in this 
city and vicinity. Sr. Walker and the children join in 
love and best wishes for your physical and spiritual 
welfare. Yours in Christ, 

SMITH WALKER,-Pennsylvania. 

R2710 : page 304 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the first opportunity 
to personally thank you for your attendance at 
the Saratoga Convention. I realize that to be present 
cost you some sacrifice and inconvenience, perhaps, but 
if you could have heard the expressions of satisfaction 
at its close, and the expressions of regret that it was so 
soon over, I know that you would have felt well repaid. 
But, dear Brother Russell, your reward is in the hands 
of him who is the "rewarder of all those that diligently 
seek him," and our thanks are feeble indeed when 
compared with the satisfaction which he gives in this 
life, and the hope which he sets before us to be given 
us in the life to come. All the brethren expressed 
themselves in these words, "A feast of fat things' if 
ever there was such a feast," and I found it in my own 
heart to echo the same words. I was very sorry to 
miss the sessions during the day on Tuesday, but it 
could not be avoided. However, it seemed that my cup 
of satisfaction was full. 

It seems, as one brother expressed it, that every 
Convention is a little better than the preceding one, and 
that this must be true is indicated by the fact that we 
are in the end of the days, and the end draws on apace. 
How good our Master is to so freely disclose to us things 
which are intended for our consolation and hope and 
purification. 

As we comprehend more and more of the plan of 
the ages and of the love of God, which he manifested 
in his Son, we exclaim, "Who is a God like unto thee; 
great and marvelous are thy works!" And as we come 
to comprehend also that the plan and the love, both, 
include even us, we feel constrained to adore such a 
God, and to spend our lives in his service. Remember 



me, as I remember all saints, before the throne of grace. 
Yours in his service, 

R. H. BARBER,-New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a word to tell you 
that all our plans are turned over,— no doubt with the 
Lord's permission. I cannot go to Giengen: just today 
I received a letter from Sister Finkh, in which she 
informs me that the fact of renting a dwelling for me 
has aroused such an excitement and hostility amongst 
church people there that the people who rented me the 
rooms are so afraid as to annul it. Two ministers 
came three or four times to the woman, and finally told 
her that she would bring a curse upon herself, if she 
would take me in her house; they would write to the 
church authorities, and went to the police, etc. Sr. 
Finkh was attacked in the street by a woman, who cried 
aloud after her ugly words, and the ministers themselves 
used such expressions in speaking of me as 
would be punished here, if spoken publicly. Sr. Finkh 
and the other three seem to be most earnest, and will 
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, even unto 
death. There is already such hatred as to kill the 
Lord's true people, if they were permitted at all. 

I do not know, at this moment where to go, but 
trust the Lord will show me soon, as I wish with all 
my heart to follow his leading only. Pray for me, 
dear brother, and for the dear sisters at Giengen. 

Yours in our glorious hope, 

M. E. GIESEKE,-Germany. 

[It is remarkable what an antagonism the truth 
awakens among the preachers and church officials of 
Babylon. We hear much of Christian union and liberality 
and fraternization of Catholics and Protestants, 
but such things apply to and among those who preach 
"bad tidings," and is not considered applicable to us 
who proclaim the "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people." Strange, is it not? And yet 
how it reminds us of the bitterness of the hatred of 
the church officials of Jewry at the first advent. As 
our Lord declared, they "hated the light," and the 
greater the light the more was their hatred, until they 
attempted to extinguish the Light by killing him. The 
hatred above described indicates the spirit of murder 
(1 John 3:15): will it ever lead to literal murder?— How 
soon?-EDITOR.l 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. OCTOBER 15, 1900. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 307 

Poem: The Christian's Goal 308 

Seasons of Refreshing 308 

"Thy Saints Shall Glorify Thee" 309 

The Song of Moses and the Lamb 310 

"Thy Saints Shall Bless Thee" 313 

Following the Voice of Conscience 314 

The Unjust Steward 315 

"Ye Cannot Serve God and 

Mammon" 317 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 318 

Encouraging Words From Faithful 

Workers 319 

About Pilgrim Visits, etc 306 

page 306 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 306 

ABOUT PILGRIM VISITS. 

We are surprised at the limited number of responses to our 
request of Aug. 1. issue that all desiring visits of "Pilgrims" in 
future shall write us a postal card at once so saying— and answering 
the queries propounded in that issue. 

We cannot think that the limited number of responses received 
indicate the measure of appreciation entertained for this 
Pilgrim service, which is free— no collections even. If this service 



is not appreciated highly we will certainly discontinue 
some of the Pilgrims, and hereafter endeavor to serve chiefly 
those who have expressed a desire for such ministries. We 
feel confident, however, that you have merely overlooked or 
neglected the matter, and shall hope to have at once responses 
from all who have expressed deep appreciation of the Pilgrim 
services in the past. We desire the answers on postal cards and 
by numbers so that they will be compact and uniform and easily 
referred to. If you know of friends at near-by post offices 
please mention names of such post offices on the card. 



page 306 

NAMES OF WATCH TOWER POOR LIST. 

While we are not only willing but anxious to have on our 
lists the names of all interested in present truth, we nevertheless 
require that the request come direct from the person desiring 
the WATCH TOWER; and that the request be repeated each 
December. One exception would be that any who are contributors 
to the Tract Fund may send in such names of interested 
poor brethren, authorizing us to charge up the subscriptions as 
in offset to their donations. Those who desire the TOWER and 
hope to pay for it in the future may order it on credit; with the 
understanding that, if never able to pay, they may at any time 
have the debt canceled on request. 

SEND NO MONEY BY MAIL: IT IS UNSAFE. 



R2710 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



WORLD MOVEMENT TOWARD DENOMINATIONAL UNION. 



A CONTEMPORARY thus sums up the recent 
tendencies toward union on the part of 
Churchianity,— in full harmony with what our pages 
for the past twenty years have shown will be the procedure 
of "Babylon" just prior to her fall "as a great 
millstone into the sea." We quote as follows:— 
"The question of denominational union is fast 
becoming one of the most important questions of the 
day in all Protestant lands. In Germany, as we have 
lately pointed out, a strong movement exists for the 
federation of the state churches, amounting to nearly 
fifty in number; and federation is one step on the 
road to organic union. In Scotland, the Congregationalists 



and the churches of the Evangelical Union 

—sometimes called Morrisanians— amalgamated their 

forces a short time ago; and the Free and the United 

Presbyterian churches are to become organically one 

next October, as already mentioned in these pages. 

In South Australia the three leading Methodist denominations, 

and in Canada all the various Methodist 

bodies have for some years been one. This is an encouraging 

record. 

R2711 : page 307 

"Besides this measure of union already attained, 
there are promising movements under way in England. 
All the great Protestant churches outside the Establishment 
have for some years had a strong federal 
organization, as we have several times pointed out. 
During several years past an attempt has been made 
to unite organically two of the Methodist bodies— the 
Princeton Methodists and the Bible Christians. Both 
are offshoots of the original Wesleyan parent stock, but 
separated from it on questions of church government." 

CHRISTIAN THEORY AND PRACTICE CONTRARY. 



The following is from the Orient, a Japanese journal: 
"Japan enjoys the unique distinction of being the 
only non-Christian power that has been admitted into 
what is called the comity of nations on a footing of 
perfect equality, and, to judge from the utterances of 
the European and American press she is by no means 
the least respected power. Unfortunately the cause 
of this respect is not such as to satisfy all Japanese. 
Japan has made great progress in the arts of peace; 
but that is not really why she is respected. That respect 
was earned in a short nine months by the achievements 
of the Japanese army and navy. Now, that 
sort of thing is pleasing enough to a nation's amour 
propre, but on calmly thinking the matter over some 
Japanese would wish that the respect of Western nations 
had been earned by something else than by mere 
proficiency in the art of slaughter conducted on modern 
scientific principles. Russia, too, is respected and 
feared. Yet she is the only non-constitutional country 
in the comity of nations. The liberty of the individual 
and of the press is under the tyranny of mere 
administrative orders in Russia, and official peculation 
is nearly as rife as in China. And this gives rise to 
strange misgivings. Are the so-called Christian nations 
really followers of the religious cult they so ostentatiously 
and proudly profess?... 

"Without going so far with Count Tolstoi as to 
say that his rendering of the real meaning of Christianity 
is the correct one, we do go so far as to say 



that the precepts of the Sermon on the Mount are the 
most important in the so-called Christian code of morality. 
And these precepts, unquestionably, are against 
war, and all against according honor to any nation or 
any man on the mere grounds of success in the exercise 
of brute force, much less of success in slaughtering 
enemies. And yet it is precisely on these grounds 
that non-Christian Japan has been accorded the respect 
of so-called Christian Europe and America! 

"We can very well understand the old Hebrews 
respecting us for success in war, for the old Hebrew 
God was a God of battles. But we have always understood 
that the Christian Father in heaven was no 
mere tribal war-god, but a God of love. The present 
situation is not a little puzzling to us poor benighted 
heathens of Japan, who have earned the respect of 
those who profess to follow the precepts of Christ on 

R2711 : page 308 

the Mount, by success in slaughtering our enemies, 
and by that alone. Will real Christians kindly explain 
what it all means?" 



In our "View" of last issue we made a typographical 
error, in stating that Terah, Abraham's father, 
died at seventy. It should have read— two hundred 
and five years. 

R2711 : page 308 

THE CHRISTIAN'S GOAL. 



THOUGHTS SUGGESTED BY THE CHICAGO CONVENTION. 



Perfect love— the mark for the prize; 

How shall I reach it, O Lord? 
The way thou hast walked is a narrow way, 

So we read in thy precious Word. 
We eagerly start in the way with joy, 

Thinking our love is pure; 
But the Father, seeking our perfectness, 

Purgeth us more and more. 

Till, by dint of strokes and of tears 
Made to look back o'er bitter years 

Our hearts in anguish deep exclaim 

"Woe is me ! " "Wretched man that I am ! " 

We know that in us dwelleth no good thing, 
But in the Beloved do we stand; 



O glory and honor and praises to him 
Who holdeth us in his hand! 

Perfect love! O Lord can it be 

Thou in infinite mercy canst see 
In one so unworthy, so helpless as I, 

A heart that unto thee would draw nigh? 
Perfect love! Lord, can it really be 

Thou hast so loved and cared for me, 
That when in me did sin so abound 

Thy grace more abundant was found? 

Perfect love— the mark for the prize 

Thou hast placed beyond the skies! 
O yes, our dear Lord, we will patiently run, 

With our eyes on thee alone; 
Not looking back on the way we have come, 

Battles fought, and victories won; 
But forgetting those things which are behind 

Press along our reward to find. 

Perfect love— we do see it in him, 

Who gave his life, our poor lives to redeem; 
That we might as sons to our Father draw near, 

For in Jesus we've nothing to fear, 
As in the light of his glorious face 

We press to the end of the race; 
Standing complete in his Righteousness, 

He alone our perfect dress. 

-MRS. C. A. OWEN. 



R2711 : page 308 

SEASONS OF REFRESHING. 



AS THE time for the Dallas, Texas, Convention 
drew near, it became evident that it would 
serve only a small proportion of the Texas friends 
who would desire to attend, and so arrangements were 
made for two other gatherings in that large State- 
about 300 miles apart;— namely at Houston and at 
San Antonio. And another local convention of nearby 
friends was held at Columbus, Ohio, on the Editor's 
return trip. All were seasons of refreshment in spiritual 
things, profitable, we trust, to all who attended. 

At Dallas the attendance was about 300; from all 
parts of Texas, from Oklahoma, Indian Territory, 
Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama and California. The 
three days were practically one continuous meeting 
with necessary intermissions for food and rest. Fifteen 
brethren and seven sisters symbolized their real 
baptism into Christ's death, by immersion in water. 



At Houston we had only a one-day meeting, but 
it was a good one; full of love, joy, fellowship of kindred 
minds; its influence will abide, with some at least, 
through life, yea throughout eternity, no doubt. The 
attendance was about one hundred and twenty-five, 
chiefly local. 

At San Antonio we had great refreshment during 
two days' meeting with about one hundred and fifty 
of God's dear people, mostly from local points. Two 
informed us that they had driven over one hundred 
miles in a wagon, there being no good rail road connections, 
and, anyway, the expense being a consideration. 
The Lord's blessing was with us all in bountiful 
measure as we considered together the grandeur 
of our high calling, and the "mark" to which all must 
attain if they would win it. 

At Columbus we had but one day, but it was one 
full of refreshment, as we met about one hundred dear 
brethren and sisters from local points, and communed 
together concerning the exceeding great and precious 
promises and arrangements of God for the elect, and 
through them for all the families of the earth, in 
God's due time. 

The arrangements at every point were most complete, 
and with the cordial reception accorded ourself 
and all visiting brethren, bespoke— amongst all— a 
"Love divine all love excelling." 

We shall cherish fondly to the end of our pilgrimage 
the remembrance of the hearty greetings and 

R2712: page 309 

many kind attentions, great and small, lavished upon 

us by loved ones whom we had never met before, but 

who, for all that, were far from strangers. We accepted 

these attentions as done "unto the Lord" and to us 

a representative of Him and his truth; and not as personal 

tributes. If, as our Master promised, even a 

cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple shall 

be rewarded by him, surely these many kindnesses to 

us as his servant will bring showers of spiritual blessings 

to many; and in this we rejoice. 

Much as we enjoy these conventions and realize 
that they are spiritually profitable to many, we feel 
nevertheless that they must not be indulged so freely 
next year, nor until the concluding two volumes of 
the DAWN series are prepared. The conventions of 
this year have retarded VOL. VI. a full year. We 
have not as yet gotten started on it, and yet our daily 
increasing mail clearly shows its need. We have in 
mind for 1901 a convention at Buffalo, N.Y., to which 
point the Pan-American Exposition will undoubtedly 
secure low excursion rates. 



R2712: page 309 

"THY SAINTS SHALL GLORIFY THEE. 



They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power; 
to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious 
majesty of his Kingdom."— Psa. 145:5-12. 

VARIOUS ARE the view-points from which mankind 

regards its Creator. The world of mankind 

in general notes merely his mighty acts, without 

appreciating his glorious character. This is suggested 

by the Prophet, saying, "I will speak of [meditate 

on] the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous 

deeds, and men shall speak of thy terrible acts: 

but I will declare thy greatness." (Vss. 5,6.) The 

world speaketh of its own, and according to its intelligence 

respecting the Almighty; but the Lord's people, 

specially instructed by him and taught of the holy 

spirit, know of the Lord and his greatness in a sense 

that the remainder of mankind know them not. 

As the Apostle declares, "The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 
...But God hath revealed them unto us by his 
spirit." (1 Cor. 2:14,10.) As our Lord again declared, 
"To you it is given to know the mysteries of 
the Kingdom." "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; 
and your ears, for they hear." (Mark 4:1 1; Matt. 13:16.) 
We are not, then, to be surprised at the wide 
difference of understanding of God and of his mightiness 
and of his character, as viewed by the saints and 
by the world; rather we are to expect such a difference 
of view. The Apostle explains the reason, telling 
us that the god of this world hath blinded the 
minds of them that believe not, so that the glorious 
light of God's goodness, shining in the face of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, does not shine into their hearts, to 
give the light of the knowledge of the divine character 
and plan. (2 Cor. 4:4.) And he explains again that 
we who were at one time in darkness, are now enlightened 
by the Lord, having been translated out of 
the dominion of the prince of darkness, into the dominion 
of God's dear Son. (Col. 1:13.) And it is 
this enlightened class that the Apostle urges should 
make progress in the knowledge of the Lord, growing 
in grace, growing in knowledge, and thus growing in 
the love of God and in the appreciation of his character. 
He urges this, saying that it is necessary, to 
the intent that we may comprehend with all saints, 
the lengths and breadths, and the heights and depths, 
and to know the love of Christ, which passeth all 
[human] understanding.— Eph. 3:17-19. 

Alas! the great majority of Christian people, 



while they have escaped from much of the blindness 
of the Adversary, are still subject to his confusing errors 
and misrepresentations of the truth, and are thus 
blinded still in great measure to the divine plan; looking 
at things more from the human standpoint than 
from the divine standpoint, and framing their creeds 
and confessions accordingly. Ah, they forget how 
the Lord has declared, "My plans are not your plans, 
neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord, for 
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my 
ways higher than your ways, and my plans than your 
plans." (Isa. 55:8,9.) Because of this measure of 
blindness that rests upon the mass of the nominal 
church— even amongst Protestants— it follows that, 
not seeing the divine character and plan in their true 
light and beauty, the vast majority of Christian people 
cannot take the standpoint of the saints in this prophetic 
testimony before us, but they take rather the 
standpoint of the natural man: when they think of the 
Almighty they think rather of his wonderful and terrible 
acts than of his own greatness, because they know 
comparatively little of the glorious honor of his majesty, 
and do not see how his wonderful deeds declare 
his greatness. 

From the standpoint of the average Christian, 
God is anything but gloriously honorable in his majesty; 
indeed, thinking of the Almighty from the 
standpoint of their creeds, the majority of noble-minded 
Christian people feel ashamed of God and of his plan. 
One class declares that his glorious honor and majesty 

R2712: page 310 

is manifested in his election of the Church to glory 

and eternal life, and in the passing by of the great 

majority of others, condemning them to an eternity 

of torture— and that since "known unto the Lord are 

all his works," God foreknew and foreordained whatsoever 

comes to pass, and thus purposed the eternal 

torment of the vast majority of his hundreds of millions 

of human creatures before creating them. Can 

these dear Christian friends declare the honor and 

majesty, the greatness and goodness, of their Creator? 

No! Hindered by such a false view of God's plan and 

of his mighty works, they cannot discern in such a 

course either justice, or love, or any other great or 

honorable quality, that they should honor or reverence 

it. Hence, like the world, they merely take note of 

the mighty power of Jehovah, and fear him, but are 

unable to take the position of the saints and to glorify 

his name and declare his righteousness. 

Another large body of Christian people repudiate 
the foregoing false view, asserting another equally 
untrue, and almost equally dishonoring— tho their 
thought is to glorify God, and to relieve his character 
of the stain of injustice, inequity and lovelessness with 



which the foregoing view would besmirch it. These, 
therefore, claim that God loves every member of the 
race, and is doing, and has been doing since the fall, 
everything within his power to rescue Adam's fallen 
race from their difficulties. But with such a view how 
could they extol the greatness and the honorable majesty 
of the Almighty? If for six thousand years he 
has been unable to accomplish anything, where is the 
power, where is the honor and majesty to be seen? 

Surely all would confess that any bright, honorable 
man, if granted the one-hundredth part of the 
omnipotent power of the Creator, could accomplish 
more in one hundred years than all that has been accomplished 
in six thousand years, toward the rescue 
of the race from ignorance, superstition and sin! How, 
then, could these dear Christian friends who, with good 
purpose of heart, are nevertheless blinded by a false 
theory— how could they tell forth the glorious honor 
of the divine majesty, and show this and his greatness 
from his wondrous deeds? Surely they would be dumb 
in any such effort. 

THE SONG OF MOSES AND THE LAMB. 



Only those who see the divine plan of the ages, 
and the relationship between the past, the present, and 
the future, are in any degree able to make known the 
greatness of our God, his glorious power, and his 
honorable majesty. This class is referred to by the 
Revelator as singing the song of Moses, the servant 
of God, and the song of the Lamb— they sing in the 
sense of declaring in harmonious and beautiful cadences 
the relationship of the types and figures of the 
Law and the Prophets of the Mosaic dispensation with 
the antitypes of these of the Gospel dispensation; 
showing that all things written in the Law and in the 
Prophets are finding glorious fulfilments in the Lamb 
of God and in the great plan which the heavenly Father 
is working out through him.— Rev. 15:3,4. 

The Revelator tells us the substance of this song; 
namely, "Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord 
God Almighty! Just and true are thy ways, thou King 
of saints!" But what great and marvelous work has 
God performed, and how shall we see that he is both 
just and true in all his ways and dealings? From the 
standpoint of those who can sing this song everything 
must be clear as noonday! 

First amongst the great and marvelous works of 
the Almighty was the sentence of death upon father 
Adam and his posterity because of disobedience— not a 
sentence of eternal torment, which would be as unjust, 
and unreasonable, as it is untrue and contrary to the 
Word of God— not the false presentation respecting this 
divine act that is held forth in all the creeds of Christendom, 



—but the great and marvelous act which God 

R2713 : page 310 

declares he accomplished when he let fall upon our 
race the sentence of death, which has brought in its 
train all the various disasters and difficulties, mental 
and physical, to which our fallen flesh is heir, all of 
which are tending to, and resulting in death, the penalty. 
As we look at this marvelous work, we must 
concede that it was just (in that it was merited), that 
it is true (in the sense of not being an unreasonable 
penalty), true in the sense that it was exactly what 
God forewarned father Adam the penalty of disobedience 
would be. "Just and true are thy ways, thou 
King of saints." 

But Jehovah's first great and marvelous work 
of condemnation was, after four thousand years, followed 
by another great and marvelous work; viz., the 
work of redemption. How stupendous this work of 
the ransoming of all Adam's race of hundreds of millions 
by the sacrifice of one man! How great and 
wonderful indeed this act, and how just and true, and 
how fully in harmony with every feature of divine 
justice and love! Even the philosophy of the ransom 
is explained to the Lord's people,— how that all mankind 
were included in one man's sentence, to the intent 
that in due time the penalty of sin could be paid 
on behalf of all mankind by the one sacrifice for sins, 
"the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom 
for all." (1 Tim. 2:5,6; Rom. 5:12,18,19.) Was 
not this a great and marvelous work? Who that realizes 
the lengths and breadths, and heights and depths 
of this manifestation of divine justice and divine love, 
can do aught else than sing this song of Moses and 

R2713 : page 311 

the Lamb, declaring to all who have ears to hear it, 
"Great and marvelous, just and true are thy ways, 
Lord God Almighty." But few see it clearly; and 
hence few can sing this wonderful story to others. 
But there is still another feature to this song, and 
it is glorious also, tho it pertains not to the things 
that are past, but to the things yet to come. It declares, 
"Who shall not reverence thee, O Lord, and 
glorify thy name?" It looks forward to the time when 
this great redemption, accomplished by the blood of 
the Lamb, shall be made available to every member 
of the human family. It looks forward to the glorious 
Millennial age, to the time when, under divine providence, 
the knowledge of the Lord, essential to faith, 
and to any acceptance of his favor and mercy through 
Christ, shall be extended to every creature,— who 
indeed will not reverence the Lord and glorify his 
name? Surely, as the Scriptures have declared, at 



that time, "Every knee shall bow and every tongue 
confess," and while this bowing and confessing may 
at first be compulsory, and not with all the volition 
of the heart, yet the Scriptures assure us that ultimately 
all who will not come into heart harmony with 
the Lord and with all his gracious arrangements and 
provisions, shall be cut off from amongst the people, 
—in the Second Death. (Acts 3:23.) So that ultimately, 
instead of the universe being filled with hundreds 
of millions who to all eternity will wail and 
gnash their teeth and blaspheme God's holy name in 
agony— instead of this the time shall come when every 
tongue in heaven and in earth shall be heard praising 
God, and giving honor to him that sitteth on the throne 
and to the Lamb, forever; for by that time all evildoers, 
all lovers of unrighteousness, shall be cut off 
from amongst the people. 

But this song continues, and has yet another 
strain. It declares, "Thou only art holy"— all holiness, 
all perfection, wherever it is found, must proceed 
from God, the great fountain of holiness. How 
strange, then, that any of God's dear people (and we 
ourselves were once amongst this number) should so 
misunderstand the divine character and plan as to 
misrepresent the same as being the very essence of 
unholiness, injustice, unkindness, inequity, lovelessness, 
toward the great mass of God's creatures! It 
will indeed be a glad day when all shall reverence 
God's name, and when all shall recognize that he is 
indeed the fountain of holiness. 

But there is still another strain in this song, and 
it is a grand one also, like all the others,— reaching 
down into the Millennial age. It declares, "All nations 
shall come and worship before thee; for thy 
judgments are made manifest." "All nations" will 
include, not only all the nations then living, but all 
the nations of the dead, just as does the promise which 
God made to Abraham, saying, "In thy seed [the 
Christ, Head and body] shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed"— all nations. 

How few, how extremely few, are able to learn 
this song ! How extremely few learn it so well as to 
be able to sing this song to the glory of God! How 
many who supposedly were trained to sing "the good 
tidings of great joy" for all people, are in the pulpits 
to-day singing totally different songs; some of them 
songs of "Evolution," declaring that there was no 
fall, consequently no redemption from a fall, and consequently 
that there is to be no recovery from a fall; 
but that man is grandly climbing up, up, up, and 
proving to be his own Savior, and hoping to attain 
they know not what,— they know not when. 

Others are singing the song of Calvinism, predestination, 
foreordination and election. Others are 
singing the song of Arminianism, and hoping that 
God will be able to accomplish much in the future 



through their assistance,— which they hold he has 
unsuccessfully been trying to do for six thousand 
years. Others are singing the song, "In union there 
is strength," and seeking to combine for what they 
term a "social uplift," or "the salvation of society." 
Others are singing the song of works and universal 
salvation. But how few are able to sing this song of 
Moses and the Lamb, or to see how God's great and 
marvelous works of the past reflect gloriously upon 
his character, both for justice and love, and give us 
the best of all assurances for the working out in the 
future of the glorious plan which he has already outlined 
and begun! 

And we are told the reason why so few can sing 
this song— that it is only for those to sing who have 
"gotten the victory over the beast and his image and 
his mark and the number of his name." These symbols, 
representing earthly institutions which now hinder 
and bind and enslave the Lord's people to creeds, 
must be overcome by every soul that would hope to 
be able to appreciate this song, and to sing it in his 
daily life to others according to his opportunities. 
Those who try to sing this song while yet in Babylon 
find their mistake. 

PROCLAIM LOUDLY THE MEMORIAL. 



Coming back to the Prophet's testimony respecting 
the message, showing forth the Lord's honor and 
majesty, we find in the 7th verse a wonderful testimony 
to the central feature and greatest manifestation 
of the divine character and plan. The Psalmist 
says (Leeser's translation), "The memorial of thy 
abundant goodness shall they loudly proclaim, and 
they shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness." What 

R2713 : page 312 

memorial has God given us of his abundant goodness? 
Which of all his great and wonderful works could be 
thus termed a memorial of divine favor? We answer 
that this memorial, this great act, was none other than 
the gift of God's dear Son, to be our redemption 
price, as the Apostle declares, "In this was manifested 
the love of God toward us, because that God sent his 
only begotten Son into the world, that we might live 
through him." (1 John 4:9.) But as very few realize 
the great act of justice accomplished in the sentencing 
of father Adam and his race to death, so very 
few can appreciate, as a special manifestation of God's 
abundant goodness, the death of Christ as the full offset 
for Adam's sin, the full ransom, the full payment 
of his penalty and that of his race. 
The reason for this is that they esteem that the 



ransom was paid only for the Church, a little flock. 
From this standpoint it was not a manifestation of the 
abundant grace and goodness of God, but of a very 
limited grace and favor for a very limited number, a 
handful, as it were, out of the great mass of humanity. 
But when we come to see that our Lord Jesus' 
sacrifice was "a propitiation for our sins [the Church's 
sins] and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world," and that this "ransom for all" is "to 
be testified in due time" to all, and made available to 
all, that ultimately all may benefit thereby if they 
will, and return to harmony with God and to eternal 
life,— from this standpoint only can we see the greatness 
of that transaction, finished at Calvary, and how 
it is a "memorial" of God's abundant goodness. And 
only such as see this can heartily and loudly proclaim 
it, and sing joyfully of the righteousness of God, 
which not only was manifested in the righteous penalty 
against sin, but which again manifested itself in 
the righteous payment of that penalty on behalf of 
every creature. 

The Psalmist continues, "The Lord is gracious 
and full of compassion; slow to anger and of great 
mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies 
are over all his works" (vs. 8). Is not this just 
what we should expect in our Creator, if we recognize 
him to be the full embodiment of Justice and of Love 
and of Wisdom and of Power? And yet how different 
is this description of the divine character from the 
general view, as held by the masses of Christian people, 
blinded by the Adversary and misled by their 
creeds! Instead of thinking of the Lord as gracious, 
do they not think of him as awfully ungracious, and 
have they not pictured him, not only in their creeds 
but also in their hymns of praise, as being awfully 
bitter and malignant against his creatures, ungracious, 
pitiless, full of anger and of no mercy? Have they 

R2714: page 312 

not, on the contrary, represented that Jesus our dear 
Redeemer must plead with the Father, and show his 
wounds and appeal for us, ere any compassion could 
be exhibited, and then only in the most limited degree? 
But not thus false was the Prophet's view of Jehovah, 
given by inspiration. Jehovah is gracious and 
full of compassion; he knows that the motions of sin 
are in our flesh, tending downward, and in his great 
mercy and compassion he has provided in Jesus for 
our every difficulty, our every trial, for the covering 
of our every weakness and imperfection, and with 
those who become his people, and who even haltingly 
seek to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, he is slow to 
anger and of great mercy. False ideas of the divine 
character and the divine dealings with the world of 
mankind have not only perverted the hopes of God's 



people as respects the world, but have also inculcated 

in their hearts misconceptions of God's sentiments 

toward his Church, so that the majority of his people 

do not appreciate the kindness, the mercy, the love, 

the compassion of our Father in heaven, and failing 

to appreciate these they have more or less of the fear 

of which the Apostle speaks, saying, "Fear hath torment," 

and correspondingly they lack "the peace of 

God which passeth all understanding" to rule in their 

hearts. It is only when by the grace of God the eyes 

of our understanding are opened to see how our heavenly 

Father is not against us, but for us, and how 

under his providential arrangement all things are 

working together for good to those who love, and who 

are seeking to attain to the gracious things which he 

has offered them in his Word,— only then are we enabled 

to know him, appreciate him, and to offer him, 

in the best and fullest sense of the word, the tribute 

of our hearts and the praise of our lips. 

Now we come to the climax, as it were, of our 
text, and note that while the Lord's saints see his 
greatness and honorable majesty connected with every 
feature of the divine plan, and while they are telling 
these good tidings to others, and speaking of his mighty 
doings in the past, their message would not be complete 
without a testimony respecting his glorious Kingdom. 
"They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom" 
—the Millennial Kingdom. They cannot tell of 
the majesty of the divine plan and not tell about the 
Kingdom. To tell of the fall, and to tell of the 
righteous sentence upon the fallen race, and to tell of 
the redemption accomplished through the precious 
blood of Christ, and that it was paid on behalf of 
every member of the Adamic race, would not finish 
the good tidings of great joy. It is necessary, therefore, 
to speak of the glory of God's Kingdom, and to 
talk of his power as it will be manifested in that Kingdom. 
As the sentence and the execution of the sentence 
manifest the justice of God; and the redemption 

R2714: page 313 

through Jesus manifests the love of God, so the Kingdom 
of the Lord will manifest his power to save to 
the uttermost all those who come unto the Father 
through the Son. 

The glory of the Lord's Kingdom will not consist, 
as some have supposed, of some saints sitting 
with the Savior on a bright cloud and looking over 
the battlements of heaven to see the remainder, the 
numberless millions of mankind, writhing in agony. 
O no ! If this were all that we could say of the Kingdom 
of our God we should rather prefer to say nothing. 
There would be no glory in such a Kingdom; 
it would be an everlasting reproach to the King that 
he had conceived a plan which had resulted so horribly, 



so indescribably bad, that it should mean the 

eternal torment of hundreds of millions of his creatures. 

Nor will the glory of the Kingdom consist, as 

some others of God's dear people suppose, in a manifestation 

of a handful of saints, the glorified Church, 

with the Lord, and with the remainder of the race 

blotted out of existence without ever having had 

knowledge and a full opportunity under favorable conditions 

to avail themselves of the great memorial of 

God's love, the redemption. O no! There would be 

no glory, but a discredit to such a Kingdom and to so 

meagre an outcome to the great "memorial." 

Nor will the Kingdom be, as some others of God's 
dear people have conceived it to be, one in which 
Christ and his Church shall, during the Millennial 
age, bless merely the living nations of the world, and 
bring to them the blessings which God has promised, 
but leave all the remainder of the race who have died 
for six thousand years, from Adam down to the present 
time, in darkness, in ignorance, in death, without 
any opportunity under that Kingdom. O no! A human 
plan might thus favor the millions living at the time 
of the establishment of the Kingdom, but forget or 
ignore or pass by the hundreds and thousands of millions 
who have gone down into the great prison-house 
of death; but God's ways are not as man's ways nor 
his plans as man's plans. The glory of the Kingdom 
of which we are authorized to speak, is a Kingdom 
which is to bless all nations, the dead who have gone 
down into the tomb, as well as those who have not 
yet gone into death. It is a Kingdom in which God's 
power will be most marvelously manifested. 

Let us "talk" together now of his power as the 
Prophet has suggested. It will be a mighty power 
which will overthrow the reign of sin, which will bind 
the power of Satan that he shall deceive the nations 
no more, and which will establish the Lord Jesus and 
his glorious Church in power and great glory, with 
dominion over all the earth, with authority to execute 
judgment,— to punish sin and to reward every effort 
toward righteousness. But the power of God as it 
will be manifested, will be still greater than all this; 
it will be a power which will lift up out of the miry 
pit of sin, out of the weaknesses of the flesh, out of 
his imperfections, mental, moral and physical, every 
member of the human family who desires to make 
progress and to return to the grand perfection of human 
nature represented originally in father Adam, 
and from which he and all in him fell, through disobedience. 
In this sense of the word it is a resurrection 
power, raising up, up, up, from the low conditions 
of sin and death to the high conditions of perfection 
and righteousness. It not only will thus take 
hold of the people who will not at that time have 
fallen asleep in death, but this mighty power of the 
Kingdom will take hold also of those who have gone 



down into the tomb, and who are in the great prison-house 

of death; even as our Lord declared, that he 

will open the prison-doors and say to the prisoners, 

"Show yourselves; come forth." "And all that are 

in their graves shall hear his voice and come forth" 

(John 5:28,29), and the coming forth shall be unto a 

resurrection by judgment— that so many as will, may 

avail themselves of the blessed privileges and opportunities 

of that great judgment day (the Millennial 

age), and profit by the stripes and corrections in righteousness 

which will then be administered, and grow 

in grace, grow in knowledge, grow in love and grow 

in perfection of being, until by the close of the Millennial 

age, if they will, they shall have arrived back 

again into full harmony with God, and received fully 

all the perfections of human nature lost through the 

fall, and redeemed by the great "memorial" of divine 

favor. 

No wonder, then, that the saints, when they glorify 
God, speak of the glory of his Kingdom and talk 
of the mighty power of God which shall then be manifested, 
and how then shall be made known to the 
sons of men God's mighty acts; how they shall then 
see clearly the meaning of the original sentence as 
they do not now see it; how they shall then see clearly 
the meaning of the great redemption, as they do not 
now see it, and how they shall then see clearly the 
provision of divine power in the Kingdom for their 
blessing;— that seeing these mighty acts of God in 
their true light, they also may glorify the Father 
which is in heaven, and they may appreciate the majesty 
of his Kingdom. 

"THY SAINTS SHALL BLESS THEE." 



The Prophet intimates that all the saints shall 
have the privilege of thus declaring the Kingdom, and 
of thus honoring the name of our God; and this seems 
to be literally fulfilled to-day, for the Lord seems to 

R2714: page 314 

be bringing to the attention of all of his saints (his 
consecrated people everywhere) the present truth; to 
the intent that they may have its light upon their 
pathway, making manifest unto them the glorious 
character of our God, through a knowledge of his 
great plan of the ages. Moreover, the Lord seems to 
be putting it within the power of every one of his 
saints to thus glorify his name and to speak forth the 
truth to others. To some he has granted the talent 
of oratory and opportunity to use it and to speak forth 
his praises in this way; to others he has granted a 
talent for private conversation, that they may thus 



tell of his Kingdom and speak of his glorious majesty 

and make known his plans to such as have hearing 

ears. To others still he has given the privilege of 

declaring his message through the circulation of the 

printed page; and to some he seems to have given opportunities 

for using all of these various methods of 

singing the song of Moses and the Lamb. And we 

may rest assured that none can be of the company of 

the Lord's saints in this time, and know of his goodness 

and his wonderful honor and majesty, and not 

have a desire to tell the good tidings of great joy to 

all who have an ear to hear; and those who are most 

earnest, most zealous in proclaiming the message, are 

sure to have the most blessing in their own hearts, 

and in their own experiences, and to grow the most in 

grace, in knowledge and in love. 

R2715 : page 314 

"I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, 
and of thy wondrous deeds. Thy saints shall 
glorify thee; they shall speak of the glory of thy 
Kingdom, and talk of thy power, to make known unto 
the sons of men thy mighty acts, and the glorious 
majesty of thy Kingdom." 



R2715 : page 314 

FOLLOWING THE VOICE OF CONSCIENCE. 



A BROTHER writes us interestingly as follows. 
We omit names for obvious reasons. 

I want to thank you for your last letter. The 
Lord has poured out upon my distracted mind a great 
blessing since I fully and unreservedly gave up all. 
So far as I understand my present attitude toward the 
dear Master, I am now "beheaded," having bowed 
reverently and joyfully to his will. It seems that the 
mere unconditional resolve to separate wholly from 
Babylon brought me a blessing. But I have not yet 
sent in my contemplated letter to the Presbytery. The 
same meets in regular session the 9th of Oct. I shall 
endeavor to have it ready to go before that meeting 
for action. The pastor of the local church (Presbyterian) 
here has promised to help the matter along 
and to defend my case, should a defence be called out. 
This promise he made after I had explained to him, 
one day this week, my reasons for the step. At first 
he tried, by arguments and persuasion, to induce me 
to change my mind. 

"Wait a while," he said, "until you see the outcome 
of the revision movement. The Confession of 



Faith will, and must be changed. I am out of harmony 
with several of its doctrinal statements myself, 
and the brethren of the Presbytery know it too, and 
some of them hate me for it like poison. Let us stand 
by our guns and fight the thing out, brother." 

"No," I said, "I cannot follow your advice, 
brother, tho I know it is well meant. My mind is so 
fully made up that I cannot be induced to take a backward 
step." 

"Well then, if that is the case, where do you wish 
to be dismissed to— what church, or association? We 
cannot dismiss you at large or at random, you know. 
Our book makes no provision for such a case. In fact, 
I have never heard of such a case before." 

"My request is, and must be, for unconditional 
dismissal," I answered. "I wish to be absolutely 
free from ecclesiastical bondage. I recognize no human 
organization as the Church of Christ. All of 
them exist without the authority or recognition of the 
Lord Jesus Christ; hence, none of them are his. His 
Church has no name on earth. But I can conscientiously 
say this of the Presbyterian Church as I know 
it: In practice it is the best of the denominations and 
sects, but in doctrinal teachings it is nearly as bad as 
the Roman Catholic system." 

Not one word of comment in reply! Instead he 
gave me this item of confidential information: 

"Brother, I will tell you something by which you 
can see how most of our brother ministers stand on 
the Westminster Confession: At our last meeting a 
young man from the German Theological Seminary 
in Iowa came to us for examination and ordination. 

Dr. , our Stated Clerk of Presbytery, was chairman 

of the examining committee, and I was also on 

the same. After Dr. got through with him and 

expressed himself as satisfied, I took the book, and 
turning to the statements on election and reprobation 
I read the whole chapter to him, and then asked him 
solemnly, 'Do you believe this?' He looked at me a 
minute, and then said: If you will let me explain it, 
I will show in what sense I believe it.' 'No, no,' I 
said, 'you cannot and you must not try to explain it; 
you must believe it or you are not entitled to ordination 
according to our form of government. Now 

R2715 : page 315 

let me ask you once more, Do you accept this doctrine 
as it stands?' Brother, that young man answered very 

emphatically, 'No!' Dr. said, And neither do 

I!' And I also said, 'Neither do I!' 

"Did the Presbytery ordain him on such a confession 
as that?" I asked. 
"Not one dissenting vote in the committee." 
"Such inconsistency is inexcusable, and wrong 
before God," I said. "It is only another strong argument 



in favor of my decision to get out and be free." 

Then we parted, he cordially offering me his assistance 

if needed, as above stated. 

Your counsel with reference to the spirit of my 
letter of request for dismissal, is appreciated and fully 
approved. I believe the Lord will suggest to my mind 
the words he would have me say. I will send you a 
copy of the letter when I write again. I think of you 
daily, and my love goes out to you as a brother high 
above a brother by birth. 



R2715 : page 315 

THE UNJUST STEWARD. 

LUKE 16: 1-13. --NOV. 4. 

"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." 

WHILE THE previous parables of this dinner-table 

talk were addressed specially to the 

Pharisees, this parable, and the one following it, concerning 

a rich man and a poor man (Dives and Lazarus), 

were addressed not so exclusively to the Pharisees, 

but, as the first verse of our lesson declares, to the disciples 

also, as well as to the Pharisees at the same table. 

The reason why the first three parables were addressed 

to the Pharisees only, and not to the disciples, is evident 

—the disciples needed no such instruction, having 

no prejudice against the poorer classes, recognizing 

themselves as amongst the "lost" who were glad to be 

found by the Good Shepherd. 

The steward of this parable corresponds to the 
elder son of the preceding parable, and to the rich man 
of the succeeding parable; it applies specially to the 
scribes and Pharisees, who, as our Lord declared, on 
another occasion, "sat in Moses' seat"— represented 
Moses, and the Law Covenant of which Moses was the 
Mediator, and the blessing obtained through that covenant, 
of which Moses was the original steward, and they 
now the steward, as his representatives. In what did 
this stewardship consist? The Apostle Paul asks this 
question, and answers it, saying, "What advantage 
then hath a Jew? Much every way; chiefly because 
to them were committed the oracles of God," the knowledge 
of God, with typical justification and at-one-ment 
with him, and an interest in the promises made to the 
fathers. 

The Jews, as represented in Moses and his successors, 
failed of their stewardship— failed to use in a 
manner satisfactory to God the favors committed to 
their care. Nor, indeed, were they wholly to blame 
for this, as the Apostle Paul points out; they were weak 
through the fall, incompetent to be administrators of 



so great a trust; and God knew this when he gave them 
the stewardship— he knew that they would fail to keep 
the Law perfectly. He had fully intended that in due 
time he would depose them from the stewardship and 
give it to the one whom he had foreknown— to Messiah. 

Now the time had come when this change of administration 
was about to be effected, and God was 
calling upon the representatives of Israel to give an account 
of their stewardship, and informing them that 
a new dispensation was about to be ushered in. Our 
Lord Jesus in this parable wished to point out to them 
what would be the wisest course for them to pursue 
under the circumstances. He shows them what an 
earthly steward would do under such circumstances, 
and tells them there is wisdom in such a course, saying, 
"The children of this world are wiser in their generation 
than the children of light:" you, as God's people, 
more favored than any others with light on the divine 
character and plan, are not acting as wisely as you 
would do if you were earthly stewards. 

Here we are met with the difficulty that the majority 
of people do not clearly comprehend— the scope 
of a steward's privileges in olden times. We have no 
such office to-day amongst civilized people. A steward's 
office was a confidential one; he had the liberty 
and full authority to do anything and everything that 
the owner himself could do with his goods. He could 
make presents or cancel debts, or use in any manner he 
chose the goods under his care, and could not be held 
responsible as a culprit before the Law, because the 
nature of his office as a steward was such that he fully 
represented and acted for his employer. The latter 
could discharge him from the stewardship as a penalty 
for unfaithfulness, but this would be his only punishment, 
because in making him steward he fully authorized 
him to use his judgment. 

In the parable the unjust steward— unjust in his 
previous use of his master's affairs, that is, unrighteous, 
unsatisfactory, imperfect— as soon as he realized the 
situation, made no attempt to defend himself, nor to 
claim that he had done perfectly; but before rendering 
up his accounts he dealt leniently with some of his 
lord's creditors, remitting parts of their indebtedness. 
(This may have been a wise course, as, for instance, 
to-day bankruptcy laws similarly release debtors from 

R2716 : page 316 

obligations which they could not pay; and similarly 
creditors frequently, in their own interest, agree to accept 
sixty per cent., fifty per cent., forty per cent., or 
some other proportion of the original sum as for the 
whole of a debt, seeing that the debtor is unable to pay 
the account in full, and with a view to his encouragement 
to do the best he can. The Jewish Jubilee year 
of full release from all debts was along the same line 



of leniency and wise business policy represented in the 
"Bankruptcy Law" of today.) It is not because of this 
last conduct of the steward that he is called unjust 
(unrighteous) in the parable, but because of his previous 
stewardship, not having come up to the full, perfect 
demands of his master. 

Now, applying the parable to all of the Jewish 
nation, especially to those who sat in Moses' seat and 
had the control of matters, and who decided what was 
and what was not the proper interpretation of the Law, 
our Lord intimated that if they were as wise as earthly 
stewards they would make use of their opportunities 
in a somewhat similar manner. Now how could they 
have done this— supposing that they recognized the 
fact that they had not fulfilled the requirements of God 
under the Law, and supposing also that they realized 
that the time had come for a change of dispensation, 
and that God was demanding an account of them 
and informing them that a new steward would take 
possession of matters— under such circumstances how 
should these in Moses' seat have acted? We answer, 
that in harmony with the lesson of the parable, they 
should have said to themselves: We realize that we 
ourselves have not kept the Law of God perfectly; indeed, 
that it is not within our power to do so. We 
realize that a change of dispensation is impending, and 
that we are called upon to make an accounting, and 
that we can only admit before God that we have made 
a failure as respects the carrying out of the demands of 
his Law and the gaining of eternal life under it,— and 
as respects the use of the many advantages every way 
which God has given us. We have used our advantages 
in some respects well, but we failed on the whole 
to accomplish anything in the world, or to gain eternal 
life, either for ourselves or for any,— and we cannot 
dispute, therefore, that "By the deeds of the Law 
no flesh should be justified in God's sight." 

Since, therefore, it must soon be evidenced to all 
that our stewardship has resulted in failure and that we 
are dispossessed, the wise thing for us to do is to turn 
about at once, and deal kindly and generously with 
these sinners (the prodigal son class) and, instead of 
denouncing them as sinners more than ourselves, we 
should say to them frankly, We cannot keep this perfect 
Law of God, and we know also that you cannot 
do so; but now, instead of being hopelessly discouraged 
and cast down, do the best you can; we will remit part 
of the exaction of the Law, admitting that you are unable 
to keep it perfectly, and will merely require of you 
that you keep it to the best of your ability— fifty per 
cent., or eighty per cent., according to your circumstances 
and conditions— according as you are able, keep 
the Law. 

Had the scribes and Pharisees taken this position 
they would have healed the breach as between themselves 
and the people, and their honesty in admitting 



that they themselves could not keep the Law would 
have been a distinct advantage to them, subsequently, 
in connection with the new dispensation. And this 
very conduct of candid admission and of sympathy for 
others, and assistance in lifting their burdens would 
have brought them into such a condition of heart that 
they would have been ready for the Gospel; and the 
lower classes, from which they had hitherto held aloof 
as sinners, would have had a kindly feeling toward 
them, and as a result they would have retained a measure 
of their sympathy, at least, in the time of trouble which 
came upon them when their polity was overthrown. 

But did the scribes and Pharisees follow any such 
course? By no means. On the other hand they put 
on a brassy front, made broad their phylacteries, made 
still louder claims respecting their own perfection of 
heart and life, deceiving their own selves probably as 
much as or more than they deceived others. They boasted 
that they should ever continue to be stewards of the 
manifold grace of God; and, as our Lord declares, so 
far from lifting the burdens and condemnations of the 
Law from the shoulders of the people, who were honest 
enough to confess inability to keep the perfect law, 
these scribes and Pharisees, on the contrary, bound upon 
the people heavy burdens which they would not assist 
to lift with their little finger. --Matt. 23:1-4. 

Thus doing they became more and more hypocritical 
and case-hardened, until, in his later descriptions 
of them, our Lord declared them to be whited 
sepulchres, outwardly fair and beautiful, inwardly full 
of corruption, dishonesty, hypocrisy; knowing themselves 
to be infractors of the Law they were outwardly 
claiming and boasting perfection. This not being said 
to the Pharisees alone, but to the disciples "also," implies 
that they were to notice how the parable fitted 
and how unwisely this steward class was acting. Even 
at the table the Pharisees, perceiving to some extent at 
least the trend of the parable, "derided"— being covetous. 
But our Lord pressed the lesson home to them 
saying, "Ye are they which justify yourselves before 
men; but God knoweth your hearts." You are the 
unjust steward and soon all will witness your rejection. 
"The Law and the prophets [of which you are the representatives] 
was [recognized of God] until John [the 

R2716 : page 317 

Baptist]; since that time the Kingdom of God is preached 
[the new, the Gospel dispensation], and every one 
[should] press toward it." (Verses 14-16.) You, leaders 
of the people, however, not only will not enter 
yourselves, but those desiring to enter you hinder. 
(Matt. 23:13.) You should see that your institution 
is bound to Moses and the Law as a wife to her husband 
—so long as it liveth. It is needful, therefore, 
that the Law which you represent should die, that Israel 



may be liberated and thus be prepared to be united 
(married) to Messiah by a new covenant.— Verses 17,18; 
Rom. 7:1-4. 

We are not informed that this parable had special 
application in the end of this Gospel age, but since we 
know from other Scriptures that natural Israel and its 
harvest time were a pattern or illustration of spiritual 
Israel and this age and the present harvest time, therefore 
we are justified in looking for some parallel as 
between the condition of the unjust steward in our 
Lord's day and a similar class in this present time. 
And looking about us to-day for a class corresponding 
to those who sat in Moses' seat, we find a class to-day 
sitting in Christ's seat, as respects the Gospel Church. 
This class is composed of elders, Sunday School teachers 
and superintendents, ministers, bishops, archbishops, 
etc. These as a whole are representing a great stewardship 
of divine favor as respects the Lord's people 
today. They perceive that a change of dispensation 
is upon us, that their creeds and traditions from the 
past are being called in question, and that they are 
being required to render up an account. They perceive 
that the account will not be a very flattering one, and 
that if the whole truth were known to the people as it 
is known to God, they would be found derelict, unfaithful 
to their stewardship in many respects. They fear 
the crisis; they put off the day of reckoning as far as 
possible; they hush the murmurs of the people and the 
questions respecting creeds, and as the Lord said of the 
steward of his day, so it will be true of these: "That 
which is highly esteemed amongst men is an abomination 
in the sight of God."— Verse 15. 

These representatives of the nominal church, who 
hold a position of stewardship as respects the masses 
of the Lord's people, are disposed, as were the Pharisees, 
their prototypes, to put a bold face upon matters, 
to brave it out rather than to confess the truth. As 
for instance, in the matter of creeds that are being called 
in question: Many, even of those who were at first disposed 
to demand the revision of the Westminster Confession 
of Faith, have concluded that this would be 
showing the white feather, and admitting that they had 
been in error in the past, and imperfect in their interpretation 
of the divine Word, and hence calculated to 
discredit them with the people; and now the tide is 
rapidly turning and the same ones who were demanding 
a revision are now voting to the contrary, that the 
creed is good, thoroughly satisfactory to them, that 
they would not change it for anything. They are so 
anxious to be highly esteemed of men that they seem 
to forget altogether the one from whom they received 
their stewardship, and who is about to take it from them. 

What would be the proper course for this steward 
class of the Gospel age? We answer, that the proper 
course would be to do what our Lord recommended to 
the Jewish stewards; viz., they should candidly confess 



to the people the errors of the creeds and their own imperfection 

in attempted exposition of the divine Word, 

and their own failures in the past in respect to a proper 

use of the oracles of God and a proper application of 

R2717 : page 317 

the exceeding great and precious promises. And while 
acknowledging their own errors and shortcomings, they 
should modify the demands made of the people and 
bring them into conformity with their ability. For 
instance, they should say to the people, How much 
did we say that you owed to God, and what penalty 
did we say would be imposed upon you? If we said 
you were to receive a penalty of eternal torment, count 
that now as being an error, and write down instead, 
" A j ust recompense of reward. " If we taught you 
that your obligations to God are according to the Jewish 
law, and as represented in the Ten Commandments, 
and that unless these were kept perfectly in letter and 
in spirit you would have no hope of eternal life, alter 
and amend that feature of your faith, and write instead 
that, under the New Covenant, God will accept the 
most imperfect works of those who have consecrated 
themselves to him, providing those imperfect works 
are the best that they are able to offer; and providing they 
are offered in the name and merit of him who loved us 
and who bought us with his own precious blood. 

If the present stewards would follow such a course 
they would undoubtedly be respected through the future, 
but following their present course, the time is 
surely coming when they will be despised as hypocrites 
and blind guides, who mislead their confiding flocks into 
the ditch of skepticism and the great time of trouble. 

This parable may be considered as ending with the 
eighth verse, the instructions which follow being separate 
and distinct, and along a somewhat different line, 
and addressed specially to those who accepted the 
Lord's teaching, his disciples. 

"YE CANNOT SERVE GOD AND MAMMON." 



This after-lesson is on the subject of the impossibility 
of having two masters, God and Mammon. Mammon 
represents earthly riches, not only financial wealth, 
but honor amongst men, etc.— the thing which was 
particularly hindering the Pharisees from taking the 
proper course and acknowledging their error and seeking 
for and obtaining mercy. Mammon still is a great 
hindrance to all who desire to be the Lord's disciples. 
Whoever worships Mammon— and it may be self or 
wealth or fame or position and honor amongst men, 
one or all of these— whoever worships Mammon cannot 
at the same time be a true worshiper of God, 



a true follower of Christ; because God and Mammon 

R2717 : page 318 

are rivals before our hearts. If we attempt to divide 
our love and attention, and to give part of it to God and 
to his service, and part of it to Mammon, the results 
will be unsatisfactory to God, unsatisfactory to Mammon 
and unsatisfactory to ourselves. 

We must, therefore, decide either to live for self 
and earthly things or to renounce and sacrifice these 
in the interest of God and of heavenly things. The 
worshipers of Mammon may have certain advantages 
as respects the present life, in the way of earthly prosperity, 
but Mammon cannot give eternal life. It is 
the gift of God, and those who would have God's gift 
must be God's friends, God's children; and he demands 
of such that they shall manifest their love and devotion 
to him by renouncing Mammon, by joyfully sacrificing 
earthly name and fame and favor and interest, thus 
showing their higher appreciation of his love and favor, 
the riches of his grace, and the exceeding great and 
precious things which he has promised to give them in 
the life to come. 

These are to "make to themselves friends;" in 
other words, to lay up treasures in heaven, by the sacrifice 
of the Mammon of unrighteousness;— that is to 
say, the sacrifice of the various interests of this present 
time of unrighteousness, "this present evil world." 

Some may have very little of Mammon at their 
disposal to sacrifice; but the Lord encourages us all by 
saying that he that is faithful in that which is least, 
thereby gives evidence of how faithful he would be if 
he had much; and the Lord accepts the little sacrifices 
which we are able to make as tho they were greater 
ones. "She hath done what she could" is the best of 
testimony as respects the use of present opportunities 
in the Lord's service, whether it refer to a mite or a 
million, a little influence or a great one. It is not the 
amount that God is seeking, but the character, the disposition 
of heart; and whoever has the right disposition 
of heart and is careful in the small affairs of life, to 
serve the Lord with all that he possesses and to the 
extent of his ability, such an one will have committed 
to him the true riches— the heavenly riches. Not merely 
may he expect to enter into the glories of the heavenly 
Kingdom, but even in the present life he will begin to 
get a first-fruits of those riches in his own heart, in his 
own experiences; for it is unquestionably a fact that 
the heirs of glory, those who are in the right relationship 
with God and running faithfully in the race, not 
only will get the prize at the end of the race, but already 
get blessing which the world can neither give nor 
take away;— the joys of the Lord, the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding ruling in their hearts; 
so that they can sing for joy, even in the house of their 



pilgrimage— even in the present unsatisfactory tabernacle 
condition, in which we groan also, being burdened 
with its weaknesses. 

But if we are not faithful in the little things which 
confessedly are not our own, and merely given to us as 
a stewardship— the things, the opportunities, the talents, 
which are merely put within our grasp as stewards 
of the Lord,— if we are not faithful in using these 
with an eye single to the Lord's glory, how can we expect 
that he will ever give us true riches of grace, to 
be our own forever, either in the future or in the present 
life. 

The sum of this lesson to the disciples, then, is that 
as no man is able to serve two masters and satisfy both, 
and do justice to both, their interests conflicting, no 
more can we serve God and righteousness, and at the 
same time be pleasing and acceptable to the Adversary 
and those who are in harmony with him who now rules 
in this present dispensation, the "prince of this world." 
All of the Lord's consecrated people, those who would 
lay up treasures in heaven and be rich toward God, 
must be willing to become of no reputation amongst 
those who are not consecrated, and who, whatever their 
professions, are really serving Mammon, selfishness, 
the present life, and not sacrificing these interests to 
the attainment of the heavenly Kingdom. 



R2717 : page 318 

THE RICH MAN (DIVES) AND THE POOR MAN (LAZARUS). 

-LUKE 16:19-31.-NOV. 11.- 

THIS PARABLE is a continuation of the series, 
a part of the table-talk at the banquet at the 
Pharisee's house. It is the culmination, so to speak, 
of the entire series of parables. The first represents 
mankind in general, as the lost sheep, and the Lord's 
interest therein, and its final recovery to the fold; the 
second respecting the lost coin, represents the same 
thought, with the additional feature of the diligent 
sweeping and bringing in of the light in order to the 
recovery or restitution of the lost race. The third applies 
this same principle to the Jewish nation, and reproves 
the Pharisee class, the elder brother, for not 
having the Lord's spirit of love and mercy in respect 
to the sinner class, the prodigal. The fourth represents 
the unwisdom of this Pharisee class in hypocritically 
pretending to others that they kept the Law and were 
acceptable stewards, whereas they themselves were well 
aware that they came short of the glory of God, came 
short of fulfilling their stewardship, and must therefore 
be ejected from it; and points out to them a proper 
course, which they did not, however, take. And now, 



finally, this parable of Dives and Lazarus, the fifth of 
the series, brings the instruction to a climax by picturing 
the favored class as the rich man, who enjoyed, 
but did not rightly appreciate the blessings showered 
upon him,— selfishly shutting up his heart against the 
poor sinner at his gate; not acknowledging that he 
himself also was imperfect and came short of the glory 
of God and the perfect keeping of his Law. 

This parable shows what the results would be as 
respects both classes— the final outcome. We will not 
deal with it here, since we have already treated it with 
considerable elaboration in our issue of March 15 and 
April 1, 1900. But inasmuch as some may have loaned 
or given away that copy, and since we have a good 
supply of them on hand, we conclude to send an extra 
copy of that one with this issue to supplement this lesson. 
Those who find themselves possessed of two 
copies will no doubt have good opportunity for using 
the extra one to the Lord's praise and to the blessing 
of some who in more or less darkness are "feeling after 
God [his plan], if haply they may find him." 



page 319 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Glory to God! By 
the aid of the Holy Spirit I am now feasting on the 
meat due to the household of faith. The Lord has 
anointed my eyes to behold the prize of the calling from 
on high. The separation has come; I am the Lord's. 
I have not only covenanted with God that I will be 
dead to all human things, but with the aid of His spirit 
I have resolved to perform that covenant throughout 
my earthly career,— keeping my "body under," keeping 
my will out of sight, and to perform only the Lord's 
will. I am no longer simply justified, I am now sanctified. 
Praise the Lord! I have forsaken all and am 
willing to suffer with him that I may also be glorified 
with him. Words cannot express the joy and peace 
dwelling in my heart. 

How is it that I remained in darkness so long? 
The Lord's ways are certainly wonderful and past finding 
out to those who have not his spirit. I now better 
understand the purpose of his dealings with me. It 
was a hard lesson to learn, but thanks be to God for 
the permission to learn it. This world has no longer 
any attraction for me. It is all a fleeting show for 
man's delusion given. Heaven is my home, and O how 
I long to be there! How I long to receive the crown 
which the righteous Judge shall give me at that day! 

The Lord is sustaining me, spiritually as well as 



physically. To earn a living, I am doing some light 
work during the week,— "collecting." I could not 
preach for money again. The Lord only knows how I 
regret having ever preached for a salary. But then I 
was not consecrated: now I know different; nor am I 
preaching for sects: I am only preaching for the Lord 
Jesus whenever and wherever opportunity presents itself. 
And, praise the Lord, I am now preaching "present 
truth." 

In connection with my work during the week I 
have opportunities to sell the DAWN. Perhaps the Lord 
will lead me into the colporteur work. His will be 
done! I don't suppose that you remember me. We 
met at the Council Bluffs Convention. 

Pray for me, for I need much divine strength. 

Yours in Christ, J. A. KIEFERLE,-Colorado. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-As we did not get to 

bid you "good-bye," at Chicago, nor have an opportunity 

to express our sentiments concerning the convention, 

I take this means of letting you know how much 

we enjoyed the meetings and how much good they have 

done us. Not only do I speak as to Sister Owen and 

myself, but the rest of the dear ones who were present 

from here (18 in all) have been greatly refreshed 

and blessed, and this morning at meeting I could see 

the blessed spirit of our Convention shining from their 

countenances, and they still wore the "convention 

smile" which was to me an inspiration in itself. One 

dear sister who has come into the truth since our Convention 

last summer and who was at our late one told 

me this morning that since attending the Convention 

and meeting with so many of the Lord's people and 

hearing various phases of the truth discussed, all her 

doubts had vanished, and that she could not sleep last 

night for thinking of these blessed truths and God's 

wonderful goodness to her in allowing her to see them. 

She said, "The room seemed to be filled with joy and 

all I could do was to lie still and praise the Lord," and 

her bright, happy face this morning was a clear index 

to the deep well of joy springing up in her heart since 

coming out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

This dear sister's experience is doubtless but the 
counterpart of the experiences of many others. And 
if the Convention did us, who have the blessed privilege 
of daily fellowship with those of like precious faith, 
so much good, think what it must be to those dear 
isolated ones who, so far as human fellowship and sympathy 
are concerned, must stand alone through all the 
long days of waiting till their change come. 

The foregoing brings vividly before my mind the 
memories of my first convention. It was in Allegheny 
in 1890. I was then "a cake not turned." I did not 
know whether I believed in "restitution" or not. I 
well remember how timid I was, how fearful lest I 
should be led wrong. I almost felt as if I were going 



to the "enemy's country." But of this one thing I was 
determined; I would not allow any one "to pull the 
wool over my eyes," but I would see and know for 
myself "whether these things be true." 

Sister Owen has preserved the letters I wrote her 
while at Allegheny this first time, and I send some extracts 
from them, thinking they would be of interest 
to you. In my first letter I wrote as follows:— 

"I hardly know how I stand on their doctrines (now, thank 
God, I do know how I stand on our doctrines, I stand squarely 
on them with both feet), but I feel content to trust God to bring 
me into the full light. I find that the people here have a great 
advantage over us, and we are just beginning to learn, just in 
our letters, so to speak." 

Next day I wrote,— 

"We had the best meeting last night that I have been in 
for a long time; it was a love feast indeed. ...O how I wish 
you were here! Think of a houseful of consecrated people and 
the pleasure of worshiping with them. I am coming more fully 
into the light and am thinking of being immersed tomorrow. 
Brother Russell preached a sermon on this subject the first day 
that I was here that was better than anything I had ever heard. 
...I believe him to be the most consecrated preacher that I 
have ever met and have learned to love him. I may stay longer 
than Monday as he has given me a pressing invitation to do so." 

My last letter, written perhaps two days later than 
the one above, is so expressive of my feelings at that 
time that I give it verbatim. 

"MY DEAR WIFE:— I did not write you yesterday, thinking 
to start home last evening, but Brother Russell insisted on my 
staying longer. I may stay until tomorrow evening. I am up 
before the family this morning; I am troubled with sleeplessness 
to some extent. Last night I went to bed very tired, and 
thought that I would go right to sleep, but I could not sleep for 
meditating on the goodness and mercy of God to me. And now 
my heart burns within me as I think of his many blessings. 
Praise his name forever! 

"You know how undecided I was when I left home. Well, 
through the increase of knowledge and the sweet communion of 
God's people, the mists of darkness have cleared away, and 
yesterday I symbolized my burial with him through water baptism. 
I have consecrated all I have and am or hope to be to 
God. Will you join me in this? I know you will. O, how I 
wish you were here with me that you might partake of the 
spiritual food that the Lord has supplied in such abundance. 
But I will bring home (I hope) all that my heart will hold and 
we will enjoy it together. 

"I look forward with joy to the many precious hours that 
we will spend together studying the Word of God and loving 
its great truths more than ever now that we begin to see them 
more clearly. The doctrine of Restitution' is not a cunningly 
devised fable' but is foreshadowed in all the types in a 
way that we never dreamed of, and I believe that the Lord will 
reveal more and more of his great plan to us if we follow on to 
know the truth. Let us humbly and prayerfully do this, looking 
unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.' 



page 320 

"You will have to be content with this fragment until I get 
home. Kiss the dear children for papa. With much love, yes, 
with more love, I remain as ever, CHARLEY." 

I love to live over again these scenes; they are 
most precious to me, my dear brother, and to-night I 
can truthfully say that the love there begotten towards 
yourself has only grown deeper and stronger with the 
lapse of years, and I feel a deep and loving concern in 
all that concerns you. Looking back over these intervening 
years I can see much of weakness, much of 
humiliating defeat. Yet, thank God, many victories. 
He has permitted us to gather some precious grains of 
wheat, amongst them Brother and Sister Ransom and 
a good many others who are yet in the narrow way. 

Just a few words regarding the singing. I think 
it was excellent. Brother McPhail did splendidly, and 
the new books are such a treat. Yours in our dear 
Redeemer, C. A. OWEN,-Indiana. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR SIR:— About three weeks ago, on coming 
out of church, a young woman handed me a copy of 
your paper. I should like to thank her. I have read 
and re-read it, and it is a great relief to me to be convinced 
that there is no place of endless torment prepared 
for the wicked. I have not been able to understand 
how a God of love could inflict such terrible punishment 
upon his creatures, many of whom have been 
called to endure great suffering in this life. It is right, 
of course, that those who will not submit to God's 
authority should be destroyed, but I am glad to be able 
to hope that another opportunity for repentance will be 
given them. I intend to lend my paper to friends, 
hoping to make converts, and will be glad to have some 
of the tracts which you send free. If I were able I 
would buy some but cannot do more than subscribe 
for the paper. Respectfully yours, 

Miss S. E. RITTENHOUSE,-D.C. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-We cannot ever hope to have 
you and the other dear brethren (who assisted so graciously 
and unselfishly in making the gathering at this 
place on Sept. 29, 30, and Oct. 1 such a profitable one 
for our spiritual growth and upbuilding) fully understand 
this side the second vail what a deep spirit of 
gratitude and love fills our hearts for you. In every 
possible respect has the convention passed beyond our 
greatest hopes, and to whom but our very present Lord 
can we ascribe such unmistakeable direction in even 
the minutest detail? To him and the glorious Father 
be all the praise and glory, yet we forget not to thank 
him for the humble, loving instrument he has used of 
late years, so effectually to dispense and serve present 



truth to the balance of the household of faith. May 
the Lord continue to keep and richly bless you as that 
faithful servant. With much love, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN,-Dallas, Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I find that I am a 
little behind with my contribution for the WATCH 
TOWER. I beg to enclose postal order which will pay 
for another year. How thankful I have been since 
my spiritual eyes were opened to see the grand and 
glorious truths that the Lord's people were promised 
through his Word. The Bible to me has had a greater 
charm and is quite a new book. How true it is that 
many of the things were so difficult to understand, 
but we had faith in God, that he was too wise to err 
and too good to be unkind. Hence we used to say, 
"Why, in God's good time all will be cleared and 
made right;" we forgot the fact that they were for a 
good and wise end. 

I was, so to speak, cradled in Methodism, having 
been carried by a dear Father, who passed away some 
sixteen years ago, to Sunday school and more or less 
was always connected with School and Church. I had 
a splendid class of young women, which to leave was 
a sore task for me, but I found that it was impossible 
for me to continue teaching and speaking about things 
which were quite contrary to the Word of God. After 
leaving the School I had the Super- and vice Superintendent 
to visit me. I told them I could no longer 
continue. They thought I was doing wrong. The 
glorious truths which are rich to me were as foolishness 
to them. But oh! how they forget, or do not 
know, that Satan is blinding their eyes to the truth: 
One of the many questions I got is this one, "How is 
it that you have just found it out, and how is it that 
so few believe it? Have you, as the Word of God 
has told us, searched the Scriptures and proved all 
things? Are you not content to take what our ministers 
and teachers give us?" I find it very difficult to 
make much impression in our place, full of prejudice 
and blindness, tho I am happy to say I have an opportunity 
to spread the grand truth, having a wide connection 
in business; I am able to converse with many 
Christian travelers who come here; some listen with 
great interest. I have given many DAWNS and also 
many tracts, and I am hoping and trusting that some 
may be led into the light and liberty of God's dear 
children. Thank God for all his blessings. 

Yours in Christ, HENRY BELL,-England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In renewing my subscription 
for ZION'S WATCH TOWER for another year 
I would like to give expression to some of the feelings 
of gratitude which I have in my heart toward you, for 
the great work you are doing in said journal re the 
preparing of the little flock and getting ready the bride 



for the Bridegroom. I have received great and, I 
trust, lasting good from the reading of the TOWER. 
At times I have difficulties, but I find the sure way to 
get them answered is simply to wait, and not to trouble 
you with them, for you are sure to be discussing 
within a few weeks the very questions I am desirous 
of asking. In fact, speaking personally, I could ill 
afford to be without the helpful influence and practical 
lessons which are to be found in every issue of the 
TOWER. Any thing which helps us to walk closer to 
the Master, and enables us to abandon ourselves more 
entirely into the hands of our loving Father, must 
be coming from that same source. And I wish also to 
specially thank you for what some brother called a 
pleasant surprise, in other words, for the visit of a 
Pilgrim and Mrs. Henninges to this far away Scotland. 
It will take a more eloquent pen than mine to 
describe the blessed times we had together, listening 
to the good news as proclaimed by Brother Henninges. 
Please send them back soon, and earn some more of 
the gratitude of one along the narrow way which is 
ever getting narrower. But he giveth more grace. 
Yours in Christ, JOHN THOMPSON,-Scotland. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. NOVEMBER 1, 1900. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 323 

Still Debating Infant Damnation 323 

Dead Bodies and Quickened Bodies 325 

The New Creature Alive, the 

Old Dead 329 

"Unthankful, Unholy" 330 

Proper Christian Daily Living 332 

Why the Christian Should Live Separate 
From the World 335 

Looking For That Blessed Hope 336 

About "Pilgrim" Calls 322 

Marked New Testaments 322 

page 322 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 322 

ABOUT "PILGRIM" CALLS. 

We find to our joy that the Pilgrim visits are greatly enjoyed 
by the friends of the truth:— the limited responses to our 
previous notice being the result of misunderstandings. Some 



presumed that our inquiry was for places where a "Pilgrim" 
had never yet stopped and who desired one. Others thought 
we meant to send the "Pilgrim" at once and direct from Allegheny, 
and thought the distance and expense too great to ask. 
Now they understand that our method is to make out routes in 
advance and that we wanted to know where the "Pilgrim" 
visits are most appreciated in order to specially include such 
places in those routes. We have many responses. Some are 
from very remote places not likely ever to be reached: and yet 
some have already been reached of which at first we had the 
same thought. We will do our best to serve all. 

page 322 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 

We have now a goodly supply of the Marked New Testaments. 
The markings are in red ink, making prominent verses 
which are specially forceful as respects various features of the 
divine plan for our salvation. The ransom, justification, sanctification, 
the second coming of our Lord and the resurrection are 
made quite prominent in these markings. Price postpaid two 
for 25 cents or $1.10 per dozen by express at your charges. 

The publication, markings, etc. are not our work. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Thursday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 



R2718 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



STILL DEBATING INFANT DAMNATION. 



IN DEBATES on creed revision among Presbyterians 

no feature has called forth such heated 

discussion as that relating to "elect infants dying in infancy. 

This clause of the Westminster Confession, 

with those clauses which have popularly been taken as 

interpreting it, follow:— 

III. 3. "By the decree of God, for the manifestation 
of his glory, some men and angels are predestined 
unto everlasting life, and others foreordained 
to everlasting death. 



III. 4. "These angels and men thus predestined 
and foreordained are particularly and unchangeably 
designed, and their number is so certain and definite 
that it can not either be increased or diminished. 



X. 3. "Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated 
and saved through the Spirit, who worketh 
when, where, and how he pleaseth; so also are all 
other elect persons who are incapable of being called 
by the ministry of the Word. 

X. 4. "Others, not elected, altho they may be 
called by the Word and may have some common operations 
of the Spirit, yet they never truly come to 
Christ and, therefore, can not be saved. Much less can 
men not professing the Christian religion be saved in 
any other way whatsoever, be they never so diligent 
to frame their lives according to the light of nature, 
and the law of that religion they do profess; and to 
assert and maintain that they may, is very pernicious 
and to be detested." 

From a remote period these statements have been 
popularly supposed to teach, by implication, that non-elect 
infants dying in infancy are damned. However, 
the recent General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church (South) claimed that no such interpretation 
could rightly be put upon the clause, and refused to 
consider a proposition to alter it. For instance, Dr. 
Warfield, of Princeton, says, "I think we may characterize 
the interpretation of Chapter X., section 3 
[of the Westminster Confession], which finds a body 
of non-elect infants dying in infancy implied in its 
statements, as one of the most astonishing pieces of 
misrepresentation in literary history." Rev. Dr. Eugene 
Daniel also asserts that it is unjust to say that 
the Confession implicitly teaches the damnation of 
non-elect infants. He points out that it teaches positively 
the salvation of elect infants, but makes no attempt 
whatever to solve the Creator's intentions with 
regard to non-elect infants. 

It seems peculiar indeed that anyone claiming to 
believe in Calvinistic predestination of adults could 
dispute that the same conditions prevailed in infancy. 
But hearken to other interpreters of the Westminster 
Confession, as follows:— 

Rev. Dr. Horace L. Singleton (The Homiletic 
Review, September), states that prior to the Westminster 
Confession all of Christendom had believed that 
infants dying without baptism are damned, but that 
Confession took a step forward in asserting that elect 
infants, even if unbaptized, are saved. He says:— 

"The sacramentarian doctrine of the papal and 
other prelatical churches, and the logical conclusion 
of Arminianism, left no other provision for infant salvation 
than baptism. To die without it was to be 



lost forever. This detestable doctrine the Confession 
of Faith was designed to destroy. It does destroy it. 
The Christian Church and the world are debtors to it 
for removing the gloom which surrounds the death of 
babes. The Assembly divines were all Calvinists, in 
entire accord with the second Scotch Confession, which 
on this subject 'abhors and detests among the doctrines 
of the Roman Antichrist his cruel judgment against 
infants dying without the sacrament' The Calvinists 
of the Westminster Assembly who indorsed or approved 
that Confession, would surely not frame an 
article on infant salvation which would imply that any 

R2718 : page 324 

dying in infancy were without the pale of God's grace 
and redemption. So they made provision for all by 
referring all to the sovereign will of him 'who worketh 
when and where and how he will.' Only Calvinistic 
theology and a Calvinistic Confession can say 
that. The phrase contains the essence of Calvinism. 
What is that? Why, the grace of God is sovereign 
both in its source and application. 

"As to the device of the doctrine of infant damnation, 
not one of the other denominations can point 
at the Presbyterian Church and say: Thou didst it.' 

"The Roman Catholic Church in the Council of 
Trent decreed, and the decree still stands:— 

'"If any denies that new-born children must be 
baptized, or says that they do not derive from Adam 
anything of original sin which makes the washing of 
regeneration necessary to cleanse them for an entrance 
into everlasting life, let him be accursed.' 

"The Lutheran Church did not rid itself altogether 
of Roman sacramentalism. Its Augsburg Confession 
teaches that 'Baptism is necessary to salvation.' 
It condemns all 'who affirm that children are 
saved without baptism.' 

"Archbishop Cranmer, the first primate of the 
English Church, said in his 'Catechism': If we should 
have heathen parents and die without baptism, we 
would be damned everlastingly.' 

"...The founder of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church, John Wesley, in his Treatise on Baptism,' 
1756, says:— 

"If infants are guilty of original sin, then they 
are the proper subjects of baptism, seeing in the ordinary 
way they can not be saved unless this be washed 
away by baptism. It has already been proved that 
this original stain cleaves to every child of man, and 
that they thereby are children of wrath and liable to 
eternal damnation.'" 

The Independent (August 30) says:— 

"It is a mere evasion to assert that 'elect infants' 
can mean all infants. It would be as easy to say 'all 
infants', as 'elect infants' if that were intended, and 



if it were not contradicted by the doctrine clearly expressed 
in the Confession, that original sin is worthy 
of eternal death. That the plain meaning of the Confession 
and its implications throughout includes infants 
among those who are lost, is sufficiently proved 
from the language of Dr. Twiss, prolocutor of the 
Westminster Assembly, who says distinctly in his 
'Vindicae' I., 48:- 

'"Many infants depart from this life in original 
sin, and consequently are condemned to eternal death 
on account of original sin alone. Therefore, from the 
sole transgression of Adam condemnation to eternal 
death has followed upon many infants.' 

"What Dr. Twiss said was the belief of the rest 
and the teaching of the Confession." 

The Rev. Henry Frank quotes John Calvin himself, 
saying:— 

"John Calvin says with his accustomed clearness: 
'The children of the reprobate [i.e., the non-elect] 
whom the curse of God follows, are subject to the 
same sentence'. (Opera II.) Again: 'You deny that 
it is lawful for God, except for misdeeds, to condemn 
any human being. ...Put forth your evidence against 
God, who precipitates into eternal death harmless, new-born 
children torn from their mother's bosom.' ('De 
Occulta Dei Providentia'). 'As the eggs of the asp 
are deservedly crushed, and serpents just born are deservedly 
killed, tho they have not yet poisoned any 
one with their bite, so infants are justly obnoxious 
to penalties' (Molineaux of France).... 

"Once again hear John Calvin: 'Very infants 
themselves bring in their own damnation with them 
from their mother's womb; who, altho they have not 
yet brought forth the fruits of their iniquity, yet have 
the seed thereof enclosed within them; yea, their 
whole nature is a certain seed of sin; and therefore 
it can not be otherwise than hateful and abominable 
to God.' 

"Now let us learn what the framers of the Confession 
themselves said concerning this damnable doctrine. 
William Twiss: If many thousands, even all 
the infants of Turks and Saracens, dying in original 
sin are tormented by him in hell-fire, is he to be accounted 
the father of cruelties for this?' For a vivid 
picture of the disposition of these eternally damned 
infants by this mild and maudlin Presbyterian God, 
read Samuel Rutherford, one of the Scotch commissioners 
who assisted in framing the creed. 'Suppose 
we saw with our eyes a great furnace of fire, ...and 
all the damned as lumps of red fire, and they boiling 
and louping for pain in a dungeon of everlasting brimstone, 
and the black and terrible devils, with long and 
sharp-toothed whips of scorpions lashing out scourges 
on them; and if we saw our own neighbors, brethren, 
sisters; yea, our dear children, wives, fathers, mothers, 
swimming and sinking in that black lake, and heard 



the yelling, shouting, crying of our young ones and 
fathers....'" 



It will now be quite in order for some very conscientious 
Presbyterian brother to tell us that John 
Calvin knew nothing about Calvinism anyway; or to 
assure us that tho there were damned non-elect infants 
in times past, there are none today, tho God and his 
Word have not changed in the interim. 

If, instead of saying elect and non-elect infants, 
Brother Calvin had said the children of the non-elect 
are damned when they are born, he would have come 
much nearer stating the matter truthfully, however 
erroneous his conception of the facts. For the word 
damned in plain English simply signifies condemned, 
and the same is true of the Greek word translated in 
these two ways in the Bible.... 

No one can dispute that the Scriptures plainly 
teach that condemnation (damnation) passed upon all 
men because of father Adam's transgression (Rom. 5:12), 
and hence the declaration that mankind are 
"born in sin." (Psa. 51:5.) The only exceptions 
to this rule of being born condemned (damned) being 
in the case of children one or both of whose parents 
are believers.— 1 Cor. 7:14. 

But then, the great difficulty of "Orthodoxy" lies 
in the fact that it has accepted theories respecting this 

R2719 : page 325 

original condemnation (damnation or curse of God) 
framed in "the dark ages," that it means condemned 
(damned) to everlasting torture, either in fire and 
brimstone or something worse: a thought as opposed 
to the Scriptural teachings as to sound reason and 
common sense. If, however, the Scriptural thought 
be attached to the condemnation (damnation) and it be 
seen that all of Adam's race are born aliens and strangers 
from God, his enemies and under condemnation 
(damnation) to death as imperfect beings unworthy 
of God's favors, including everlasting life,— then all 
is plain, all is reasonable. 

It will then be seen that as Adam's sin and its 
penalty were entailed upon his children, so the harmony 
with God of a believing parent would properly 
and consistently attach to his children until they shall 
have reached years of discretion and ability to accept 
or reject divine favor for themselves. 

However, the children of unbelievers have the 
opportunity of accepting God's grace when they come 
to years of discretion, provided they have the necessary 
"ears to hear"— ears of the heart. And even 
such as, under Satan's influence, are deaf to the voice 
of God now speaking to us through his Son— and who 



therefore continue through the present life under condemnation 

(damnation), we have the assurance will in 

the Millennial age have the ears of their understanding 

opened and then have opportunity to obey and be 

blessed with the gift of God— eternal life. 



R2719 : page 325 

DEAD BODIES AND QUICKENED BODIES. 



"O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from this dead body? 
I thank God [for deliverance] through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

So then with my mind I serve the law of 

God, but with the flesh the law of sin." 
-Rom. 7:24,25.- 

MUCH PERPLEXITY has been caused to 

many Christian minds by the statements 

of the seventh chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans. 

Some have concluded that he here teaches that 

he lived a life of sin, according to the flesh, but a life 

of righteousness according to his mind; and yet they 

are ready to concede that this is rather a perplexing, 

unreasonable and unsatisfactory view of the matter. 

Others reach the conclusion that the Apostle must 

here be describing his condition of heart and mind 

before conversion, while he was still a sinner; yet 

these also find difficulties, and confess that many features 

of such a view are quite inconsistent with the 

Apostle's language. We submit the following interpretation 

of the chapter, as proving itself correct by 

its harmonizing with all the Apostle's statements in 

this chapter and elsewhere. 

The Apostle is addressing believers at Rome, 
"beloved of God, called saints" (1:7). Some of these 
were probably converts from amongst the Gentiles, 
while undoubtedly a considerable proportion were 
converts from Judaism. This is implied by the fact 
that the Apostle in this Epistle so particularly explains 
the Law, not as to Gentiles having no knowledge of 
the Law, but as to Jews having full knowledge of it. 
The Epistle is a very comprehensive statement of the 
entire plan of God. The Apostle begins in the first chapter 
by showing that God was not responsible for 
the prevalent degradation, ignorance, sin, etc., throughout 
the world, and concludes with the crushing of Satan 
under the feet of the saints during the Millennial 
reign of the Christ. He explains that at one time 
God gave to mankind in general certain knowledge 
and blessings, but that "when they knew God they 
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but 
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish 



heart was darkened. Confessing themselves to be 
wise they became fools." He explains that thus gradually 
men came down to idolatry and bestiality, dishonoring 
and degrading themselves, and "perverting 
the truth of God into a lie;" "for which cause God 
gave them up to vile affections and to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things which are not proper;" and 
they became filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, 
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, 
murder, dispute, deceit, malignity, etc., etc. Thus 
he accounts for the various degrees of degradation, 
ignorance and superstition prevalent throughout the 
world.-Chap. 1:21,22,25,26,28,29. 

Proceeding, he shows that while Israel had received 
God's Law, under a special covenant, and with 
special favors at his hands, they had not been saved 
by the Law, any more than the Gentiles had been 
saved without the Law; and that therefore both Jews 
and Gentiles needed just such a Savior as God had 
provided. Answering the supposed argument of the 
Jews, he declares, "Not the hearers of the Law are 
just before God, but the doers of the Law," and he 
argues that the Jew who rested in the Law, and made 
his boast of being of God's favored people, and who 
by reason of these favors knew the will of God more 
particularly than the Gentiles, would not, by reason 
of this knowledge and advantage, be justified under 
the Law, but could only be acquitted by a perfect 
keeping of that Law; and that since the Jews did not 
keep the Law perfectly they could not claim the reward 
promised by the Law, namely, eternal life. Hence, 
so far as eternal life was concerned, they had no more 

R2719 : page 326 

claim upon it than had the Gentiles, who had less 
knowledge as well as less outward piety. He asks: 
"Are we [Jews] better than they [Gentiles, living 
according to the light that they possessed]? No, in 
no wise; for we have before proved both Jews and 
Gentiles, that they are all under sin; as it is written, 
There is none righteous, no, not one." 

The Apostle's argument is that none being righteous, 
none could be acquitted or approved before God, 
whether they had the Law or did not have it. Thus 
he proved that the Jews as well as the Gentiles, up 
to the time of Christ, were all under sin, all under 
condemnation, and that none of them had any claim 
upon eternal life, according to divine arrangements 
thus far made. For "By the deeds of the law there 
shall no flesh be justified in his sight."— Chap. 2:13,17; 
3:9,10,19,20. 

Next the Apostle proceeds to show that whoever 
would be justified before God, whether he had previously 
been a Jew, favored with the knowledge and 
advantages of the Law, or a Gentile, in blindness and 



ignorance doing to the best of his knowledge, God 
has now provided for both, one way to be saved and 
to come into harmony with him— namely, through 
Christ. He shows that the Law, so far from justifying 
the Jews, showed them to be in a condition of sin, 
by their inability to keep it perfectly. But this Law 
which had condemned the Jews, because of their failure 
and inability to keep its conditions perfectly, 
served the more abundantly to attest God's justice; 
it became a witness to God's righteousness— that he 
had been right in his declaration that Israel had not 
kept the Law, and that all mankind, being in a fallen 
condition, were unfit to receive his favors; and it witnessed 
more than this: it witnessed to the justice of 
God in providing the ransom for sinners, in the person 
of his Son our Lord— "even the righteousness of 
God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and 
upon all them that believe [whether Jews or Gentiles]: 
for there is [now] no difference, for all have sinned 
[and consequently all are unworthy of divine favor 
upon any basis of works of their own, and must therefore 
needs be redeemed with the precious blood, and 
their penalty met for them, ere they could be received 
back into harmony with God]; being justified freely by 
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 
whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] 
through faith in his blood."— Chap. 3:19-26. 

Appealing to those who had formerly been Jews, 
and who had been inclined to boast of themselves as 
God's favored people, and inclined to think that in 
some sense of the word they were still more favored 
of God than those formerly Gentiles, the Apostle says, 
in view of the preceding facts, "Where is [the room 
for] boasting then?" and he answers, "It is excluded." 
There is no room for boasting; the Jew and the Gentile 
having come into Christ are on a common level- 
both have been justified by faith in Christ; neither 
was benefited or injured by his previous experience, 
whether under the Law or without the Law, if now 
by God's grace they had received adoption into his 
family through Christ. Boasting on the part of those 
who previously had been Jews would certainly be excluded, 
for they had not been able to perform the 
works which their Law Covenant had demanded, and 
now being exempted of God, under the law of faith, 
it would hinder them from any boasting as respects 

R2720 : page 326 

the law of works. "Therefore we conclude that a 
man is justified by faith, without [necessity for] the 
deeds of [works demanded by] the Law." 

The Apostle proceeds to show that the Lord's 
operation of favor on account of faith does not make 
void the Law, with which for centuries he had dealt 
with Israel,— the Law of Righteousness. On the contrary, 



the fact that it was necessary to justify the 
Jews by faith, and the fact that they could not be 
justified under the Law of Works proves, not that the 
Law of Works was bad, but that it was good, and that 
the Jew was imperfect through the fall, so that he 
was unable to obey the perfect Law given. Thus 
God's dealings through the new Law of Faith really 
upholds and magnifies his old Law of Works, for the 
latter had to be fulfilled by Jesus on behalf of his people, 
in order that he might be the Redeemer of the 
world in general, and set free from the Law of Works 
those who had been under it, that they also, with the 
remainder of the world, might be accepted of God 
under the Law of Faith.— Chap. 3:27-31. 

Buttressing his argument, the Apostle shows that 
Abraham was not justified by the Law of Works, the 
Law Covenant, but by faith; and hence the claim advanced 
by some that the Mosaic Law was necessary, 
with faith for justification, was an erroneous one; because 
Abraham was called the friend of God, and had 
his faith counted to him for righteousness, not only 
long before the Law was given at Mount Sinai, but 
even before the outward sign of circumcision was given 
to himself— the latter being given, not as a requirement 
to his justification, but as a seal or mark of justification 
and harmony with God, to which he had 
already attained.— Chap. 4:1-15. 

As Abraham was justified by faith, and received 
into favor with God because of his exercise of faith, 
so, says the Apostle, it is with us. "Being justified 
by faith we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ." And how and why through our Lord? 
Because, says the Apostle, "He was delivered for our offences 
[bearing the condemnation which those offences 

R2720 : page 327 

implied and involved— the very offences or weaknesses 
of the flesh which hindered Jews from keeping the 
perfect law given at Sinai, and being justified under 
it by works of obedience to it]."— Chap. 4:25; 5:1. 

This justification, which we receive through faith 
in Christ, becomes to us the basis of our new hopes 
in him,— of becoming his disciples, and, if faithful, ultimately 
joint-heirs with him in the Kingdom. This 
the Apostle expresses in the words, "By whom also 
[additional to justification and its peace] we have access 
by faith into this grace [the privilege of adoption 
into God's family] wherein we stand, and rejoice in 
the hope of the glory of God [in the hope of sharing 
in God's glory and Kingdom with our Lord and 
Head]." The Apostle proceeds to prove, not only 
that the death of Christ was necessary as the off-set 
to Adam's transgression, and the payment of his penalty, 
but he demonstrates that this penalty was fully 
paid, and that God has accepted it on behalf of the 



world in general, and not of the Jews only, and has 

transferred all to Christ; for as "the judgment was 

by one to condemnation, the free gift is of many offences 

unto justification. As one offence resulted in 

a pronouncement which affected all to condemnation, 

even so by one righteous act a pronouncement was 

made [by the same Justice] which affects all men [permitting 

their attainment] unto justification of life." 

And, adds the Apostle, the Law Covenant was 
introduced, not for the doing away of sin, but that 
sin might be more distinctly seen to be sin, and in its 
true colors; not, however, with a view to the injury 
of the Jews, with whom that Law Covenant was made, 
for if sin abounded amongst them the more by reason 
of their greater knowledge through the Law, then 
God's grace abounded proportionately the more; for 
as sin hath reigned unto death, even so there is to be a 
reign of grace unto eternal life under righteous provisions 
through Jesus Christ our Lord.— Rom. 5:12,17-21. 

The next point is, If God's grace will be caused 
to abound in proportion to the sentence, so that he 
who has many and deep sins can be as fully and completely 
forgiven and released as he who has fewer and 
smaller sins, shall we then argue that we may as well 
delve deeply into sin, assured that God's grace will 
be that much the more abundantly provided for us? 
No, says the Apostle; those who have come into the 
position to see and comprehend this much of divine 
mercy and favor must first have made a consecration 
of themselves to God, otherwise their eyes of understanding 
would not be opened widely enough to grasp 
the subject with clearness and definiteness; and if one 
had made a consecration of himself, and immersed his 
will into the will of God in Christ, and thus reckoned 
himself dead to the world and to sin, how could such 
persons live lives of sin or take pleasure therein? So 
surely as they have received the holy spirit, the new 
mind, that surely that new mind would be out of harmony 
with sin, craving, hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness, truth, etc. 

We are therefore to reckon ourselves dead to sin, 
but alive to God through Christ; and we are not to 
let sin reign in us, because we, as new creatures, are 
begotten of a different spirit, that is at warfare with 
sin, as sin is at warfare against righteousness. Instead, 
therefore, of continuing to be servants of sin, 
and yielding our bodies to that service, we are to 
recognize ourselves as "new creatures in Christ," servants 
of God, his ambassadors and representatives; 
and are to seek to use our members, our bodies and 
their talents, in the new service of righteousness,— 
remembering our past experience in sin, that its wages 
are degradation and ultimate death, and that this 
privilege which we have now entered upon as new 
creatures, redeemed by the precious blood, is God's 
covenant through Jesus Christ our Lord, and means 



to us eternal life, if we maintain it.— Chap. 6. 

Having reached this climax of the argument, and 
having demonstrated the process of our justification 
and our subsequent adoption into the divine family; 
and having shown the necessity for maintaining our 
standing as new creatures, and gaining victory over 
the weaknesses of the flesh; and that all these privileges, 
nevertheless, are not of the Law but of grace 
and of faith— the Apostle next turns his attention to 
another phase of the subject in Chapter 7. He has 
in mind, and is specially addressing the Christian 
brethren at Rome who were formerly Jews, as he says, 
"I write unto you who know the Law." He wishes 
to demonstrate to them logically that altho the Jews 
previously, through the Law Covenant, had "much advantage 
every way," yet now since the introduction 

of the New Covenant they were to some extent at a disadvantage 
—hindered or bound by the old dead covenant, 
unless they recognized it as dead, and cut loose 
from it. They were tightly bound by the Law given 
at Sinai; because as a nation they entered into a positive 
covenant with God, through Moses, the mediator 
of their covenant. St. Paul represents this as a marriage 
contract between that people and the Law Covenant; 
picturing the Jews as the wife, and the Law 
Covenant as the husband. He shows an incompatibility 
between them, but that nevertheless the Jews 
would be bound by their covenant, as a woman would 
be bound by her marriage contract, so long as the husband 
would live. 

Hence the Jews, as a people, were less at liberty 
to enter into a New Covenant with Christ than were 
the Gentiles, because they were already bound to the 

R2720 : page 328 

Law Covenant through Moses. The Apostle proceeds 
to prove three things: 

(1) That the Law Covenant, or husband of Israel, 
had not been abrogated, had not been executed, 

as a bad law, but had died a natural death, through 
the fulfilment of the purpose of its creation; and that 
hence, 

(2) Every Jew might properly consider himself 
as released from all obligation to the (dead) Law 
Covenant, and might properly be united or married to 
another, Christ, accepting the terms of the New Covenant, 
with its grace, mercy and peace through believing, 

now offered to them. 

(3) It was proper that they all should see how 
much better was the New Covenant, into which they 
would enter by becoming united with Christ, than was 
the old covenant, which, he declared, had died a natural 
death. 

However, he would not have them think evil of 
the first husband, the Law Covenant. On the contrary, 



he assures them that it was a good husband to 
them— "The Law is holy and just and good," all must 
speak well of the Jews' first husband. Nevertheless, 
argues the Apostle, we all realize that we did not receive 
from the Law Covenant the blessings we so earnestly 
coveted; we did not receive an actual cancellation 
of our sins, but merely a temporary covering of 
them, which required to be renewed and made mention 
of year by year continually (Heb. 10:1), nor did we 
obtain the longed for everlasting life. As Jews, we 
cannot blame the Law Covenant; we must only blame 
ourselves;— nor can we blame ourselves (for I may 
consider myself a representative, in thought and conduct, 
of all true Jews, and may speak for them, says 
the Apostle); and I can truly say that while living 
under this Law Covenant I approved it with my mind, 
with my heart, and I endeavored to serve it accordingly, 
but when I came to perform its requirements I 
found another law, a law of sin working in my members, 
which hindered me from rendering the obedience 
I desired to render to that Law Covenant. 

Not that it hindered me entirely, for I certainly 
succeeded in some degree in conforming life and conduct 
to its requirements; but since I could not render 
perfect obedience to its every requirement I necessarily 
failed, because in that Law Covenant no provision 
was made for my weaknesses and imperfections which 
I had inherited, and which were my share of the fall 

R2721 : page 328 

of our race. I found, on the contrary, that even tho 
I had been able to perform the requirements of the 
Law in nine points out of ten, and had failed in the 
tenth point, and even tho that failure were properly 
attributable to inherited weaknesses, and was entirely 
contrary to my desires of heart, nevertheless it was 
failure, and my efforts as a whole were branded failure, 
and the great prize of eternal life was denied me under 
that covenant. 

Thus I found myself in a terrible predicament: 
my heart crying out for God and for righteousness, 
and earnestly desiring to fulfil the requirements of 
my covenant and to gain life everlasting, but I found 
myself wholly unable to fully obey its requirements; 
I found them entirely beyond my reach. Not that 
they were beyond the reach of my mind, for with my 
mind I grasped them and enjoyed them and appreciated 
them; nor that they would have been beyond the reach 
of obedience of my body, had my body been perfect; 
but, O wretched man! I find that my body is a dead 
body, that sin has gained such a power over it and so 
chained it down to things that are evil, in fact and in 
intention, that I cannot do the things that I would,— 
that when I would do good and keep the perfect law, 
sin is present with me, and hinders,— being an integral 



part of my body; so that the good that I would 
do, the perfect life that I would live, I am unable to 
perform, and the evil things that I would not do, which 
my mind, my will, rejects, and which I strive against, 
those things to some extent I find myself unable to 
resist; and here was my helpless condition as bound 
to the Law Covenant. I realized that I never could 
gain, through its assistance and offers, the glorious 
perfections that I desired, and the eternal life which 
could accompany only these perfections. 

What shall I do? How can I escape this condition 
of things? I thank God that a way of escape has been 
provided; I thank God that in his due time he has 
sent Jesus, as a great Redeemer, and that through his 
death the world of mankind has been redeemed from 
the original sentence, and additionally that all we who 
were Jews and under the Law Covenant are set at liberty 
from that covenant— that the death of Jesus on 
our behalf means the death of our Covenant, which, 
tho in some respects an advantage, was very unfavorable 
to us because of our inherited weaknesses. I thank 
God that now I am at liberty to become united to 
Christ, at liberty to consider my union with Moses 
and the Law Covenant as at an end, at liberty to take 
on me the vows and covenants required of all called 
to be the Bride of Christ. Thanks be unto God for 
this deliverance from the bondage of the Law of Works 
into the liberty of the Law of Faith in Christ Jesus! 

The advantage of this new position in Christ over 
the old position in Moses is that now God accepts my 
new mind, my heart desires, accompanied by my best 
endeavors; and under this New Covenant, through the 
merits of the ransom, he justly ignores and hides from 
his sight the imperfections of the flesh, which are contrary 
to my wish, and against which I am striving. 

R2721 : page 329 

It may be said of me, then, and of all such, that it is 
with our minds, with our hearts, that we are serving 
God— even if, to some extent, contrary to our wish 
and endeavor, our flesh should, either through weakness 
or ignorance, serve the law of sin at times.— 
Romans 7. 

THE NEW CREATURE ALIVE, THE OLD DEAD. 
-ROM. 8:1-11.- 

Under the covenant through which we are united 
to Christ, our mortal bodies are reckoned as dead, as 
sacrificed, as no longer us, and our minds are reckoned 
as the new creature adopted into the family of God, 
and seeking to serve God and to grow into his likeness, 
by being conformed to the image of his dear Son. 
It is therefore according to the standpoint from which 
we view the matter that we could say of these new 



creatures that they are holy, and that the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled in them, and that the 
wicked one toucheth them not.— 1 John 5:18. 

In such expressions we are referring exclusively 
to the reckoned "new" creatures, and are ignoring 
entirely, as dead, their mortal bodies. But if we should 
speak from another standpoint, and attempt to say 
that we are actually perfect in the flesh, it would be 
untrue, and not only so but would be an ignoring of 
the merit of Christ's sacrifice, and our continued need 
(while in the fallen flesh) of a share in the justification 
which it provides. Those who would thus speak 
of their flesh as perfect, would hear the Apostle speaking 
to the reverse, saying, "In my flesh dwelleth no 
good thing,"— no perfection; and all imperfection is 
un-right, and all unright-eousness is sin. Hence, says 
the Apostle John, "If we say [speaking of our flesh, 
and ignoring the justification provided in Christ to 
cover its blemishes] that we have no sin, we deceive 
ourselves, and the truth is not in us."— 1 John 1:8. 

St. Paul proceeds to clearly mark the distinction 
between the new mind, which consecrated in Christ 
is accepted as the "new creature," holy and acceptable 
to God, and our mortal bodies, which he calls "this 
dead body"— originally dead, under divine sentence, 
because of sin, but redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ, and justified, and then included in our sacrifice, 
when we gave our little all in consecration to the 
Lord, as living sacrifices— to be dead with Christ, to 
suffer with him even unto death. He declares that it 
is to those who are walking after the spirit, seeking 
to serve the Lord in spirit and in truth, from the heart, 
that are freed from the condemnation; and that this 
includes the thought that they do not now walk after 
the flesh, desiring to fulfil its desires. And here we 
are to closely distinguish between the walking up to 
the spirit, and walking after the spirit. We should of 
course follow as closely to the spirit of truth and 
righteousness as possible, and yet we cannot hope, so 
long as we are in the imperfect flesh, that we could 
ever walk up to the spirit of the divine requirements, 
tho we are to strive in this direction continually. One 
thing is positive, however,— we must not walk after 
the flesh. To do so would imply that we had lost the 
new mind, the new disposition, the new will,— that 
we had become dead to those hopes and covenants 
which had led to our consecration. 

Any who get into this condition of walking after 
the flesh,— seeking to serve the flesh, therein have 
the evidence that their minds had become "carnal," 
that they had lost much, if not all, of the new mind, 
the new disposition. All such should know most 
unequivocally that the carnal mind is at enmity against 
God, and hence that God could not fellowship it or 
favor it in any sense or degree. The Apostle urges, 
then, that all remember that they who are in the flesh, 



who live in harmony with their fallen propensities, 
serving their fallen fleshly natures, are not pleasing 
God and that such an inclination or course leads toward, 
and, if persisted in, would end in death. 

He proceeds to reason that if the spirit [mind, 
disposition] of God [the spirit of holiness] dwell in us 
we cannot be in sympathetic accord with the fallen 
fleshly nature and its appetites and ambitions. We 
may know, on the contrary, that if any man have not 
the spirit of Christ he is not of the body of Christ at 
all, and not to be considered as identified with the 
elect Church,— and Christ's spirit is not a spirit of 
harmony with sin, but of opposition to sin, for did he 
not lay down his life to vanquish sin, and to deliver 
us from its power and dominion? Whoever, therefore, 
claims to have the spirit of Christ, but loves and 
wilfully practices sin, and with his mind serves sin, 
such an one deceives himself, for he has neither part 
nor lot in Christ. 

The Apostle proceeds further along the same line, 
arguing that our adoption into God's family, our begetting 
to newness of heart and mind, and our acceptance 
thus as members of the body of Christ, while it 
means, first of all, that the body is ignored and reckoned 
as dead, because of sin, and only our spirits or minds 
are reckoned righteous and alive, the beginning of 
our eternal existence, nevertheless this good condition 
is not to be considered the limit of our ambition and 
attainment in Christ-likeness. On the contrary, we 
are to remember that the spirit of God is powerful: 
that in the case of our Lord Jesus it was powerful 
enough to raise him from the dead; and as we become 
more and more imbued with and controlled by the 
holy spirit of God in our hearts, in our minds, divine 
power will come gradually to us through this channel 
of the holy spirit, which will permit a figurative raising 

R2721 : page 330 

of our mortal bodies from their death-state into 
activities of spiritual life, in the service of the Lord. 
"If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the 
dead dwell in you [in sufficient measure, aboundingly], 
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 
also quicken [energize] your mortal bodies [not your 
immortal resurrection bodies] by his spirit that dwelleth 
in you." 

It is our hope that in due time the Lord by his 
spirit will give us new bodies in the resurrection; and 
that those new bodies will be immortal, perfect in 
every respect; and that then not only our minds, but 
our bodies also will be fully in harmony with God and 
his every law and work of righteousness. That will 
be glorious— it is already a glorious prospect; but the 
Apostle holds before us the thought that even our 
present mortal bodies, sentenced, then justified, then 



reckoned dead because of sin, consecrated, may be so 
quickened or energized now, that instead of being any 
longer servants of sin, or even merely dead to it, they 
may, under the careful watchfulness of the new mind, 
be used as servants of righteousness, of truth. This 
means, of course, a high Christian development, a 
large attainment of "the measure of the stature of the 
fulness of Christ." It is the measure or attainment, 
nevertheless, which every one of the Lord's people 
must continually strive after, and their success will 
be proportioned to their attainment of the mind [disposition] 

R2722 : page 330 

of Christ, holy conformity to the Father's 

will in all things. And how comforting, in this connection, 

is the promise of our Lord, that our heavenly 

Father is more willing to give the holy spirit [spirit of 

holiness] to them that ask him, than are earthly parents 

to give good gifts unto their children!— Luke 11:13. 



R2722 : page 330 

"UNTHANKFUL, UNHOLY." 

-LUKE 17:ll-19.-NOV. 18.- 

"Be ye thankful."-Col. 3:15. 

LEPROSY is a very prevalent disease in eastern 
lands, and amongst the Jews lepers were 
specially proscribed— separated from others— not allowed 
to have intercourse with their own families nor 
to come near anybody, but obliged to keep at a distance, 
and on the approach of a stranger to cry out, 
"Unclean! unclean!" From the standpoint of the Law 
it is evident that leprosy was meant to represent sin and 
its loathsome, contagious and consuming character. 
A traveler in the Orient writes: "As our traveling 
party passed out the western gate of Nablus, the site 
of ancient Sechem, a group of repulsive lepers greeted 
us with calls for help. They showed various forms of 
that terrible disease: the nose or the lips or a hand or 
a foot eaten away; the limbs distorted, and one case at 
least was a leper 'white as snow.' When we were fairly 
in our tents beyond the city westward, those lepers 
came, fifteen in all, and seated themselves afar off, in 
a semi-circle, facing our tents, with one of their number 
a little in advance of the others, holding out a dish 
for alms, and, as with one voice, they cried aloud to us 
to have pity on them and give them aid." Another 
writer describes leprous conditions thus: "The hair 
falls from the head and eyebrows; the nails loosen, decay 
and drop off; joint after joint of the fingers and 



toes shrink up and slowly fall away; the gums are absorbed 
and the teeth disappear; the nose, the eyes, the 
tongue and the palate are slowly consumed." 

The horrors and loathsomeness of leprosy and its 
contaminating qualities, both by heredity and infection, 
well illustrate the disease of sin, which has taken 
hold of the entire human family, and which separates 
and alienates from God and all that are pure and in 
harmony with him. The isolation of lepers was distinctly 
enjoined in the Law, but no cure or remedy was 
prescribed. The disease was treated from a religious 
standpoint, and in every case made amenable to the 
judgment of the priests: they decided whether or not 
a case of leprosy had developed, they banished the leper, 
and in the event of anything occurring to cure him, the 
priests must pass upon his cleansing before he would 
be readmitted to society. So, in the great malady of 
sin, God commits to the hands of the antitypical priesthood 
—Christ and the faithful under-priests now being 
selected from the world— the work of pronouncing and 
making manifest what is sin, as distinct and separate 
from what is righteousness, and thus to separate between 
the clean and the unclean, between those who 
are in harmony with God, and those who are out of 
harmony with him. And in the coming age, when 
the Royal Priesthood shall be glorified and in official 
power to bless the world with the knowledge of God 
and the knowledge of how to become free from sin and, 
through the merit of the precious blood, to attain to 
full restitution,— to purity and perfection of mind and 
heart and body,— it will be this Royal Priesthood that 
will have the deciding of when the purification has been 
complete— when sin has ceased to exist in the condemned, 
and they have been brought back into full 
harmony with God and righteousness. 

Travelers tell us that in the locality mentioned in 
our lesson— the borders of Samaria and Galilee— leprosy 
still abounds rather more than elsewhere; and that 
groups somewhat like the one described in our lesson, 
are frequently to be seen. This group stood afar off, 
as they were compelled by law to do; yet recognizing 
Jesus as the great Teacher, of whose miracles they had 
heard something, they conceived the hope that he might 
have compassion upon them and heal them of their 
loathsome disease. Therefore they lifted up their 

R2722: page 331 

voices together, crying, "Jesus, Master, have mercy on 
us." There is no doubt as to the meaning of their cry; 
altho they usually begged for money, they evidently 
now were seeking for healing from the great Physician. 

Hearing their voices Jesus turned compassionately 
toward them, and we can better imagine than describe 
the sympathy which he felt for them in their pitiable 
condition, and no doubt also his mind at the same time 



took in the thought of the great malady of sin, from 
which the whole world was suffering, and whose sufferings 
he had come to relieve, whose bonds he had come 
to break, by giving his own life a ransom price for 
theirs. Our Lord merely said to them, "Go show yourselves 
to the priests." This implied that the leprosy 
had ceased its ravages, and that they might expect to 
be pronounced free from contagion and permitted to 
return to their homes and families, even tho the maiming 
and marring occasioned by the ravages of the disease 
would still be with them. Thankful for such a release 
from their sufferings, the entire ten obediently hastened 
to comply with the injunction, but in the way they 
discovered that the blessing they had received from the 
Lord was not merely a staying of the disease, but a 
restoration to normal conditions. Their faith had 
brought them far more than they had expected. 

One of them turned back and prostrating himself 
before the Lord rendered homage and thanks to his 
deliverer. The other nine passed on to comply with 
our Lord's words, and to show themselves to the priests, 
not having a sufficiency of love, appreciation and thankfulness 
to return in their cleansed condition to, first of 
all, acknowledge the giver of the blessing they had received. 
Our Lord remarked this, and called attention 
also to the fact that the one who did return was a Samaritan, 
and not one of the Jewish household of faith; 
saying, "Were there none found that returned to give 
glory to God save this stranger?" And he said unto 
him, "Arise, and go thy way; thy faith hath made 
thee whole." 

Nothing is said in the record respecting any spiritual 
blessing or favor which came to the Samaritan whose 
thankfulness of heart led him to Jesus' feet in acknowledgement. 
We are not told that Jesus invited him to 
become one of his followers, nor that he received any 
spiritual blessing; indeed, we know that it was not 
possible that he could receive any spiritual blessing, 
because, being a "stranger," like all Gentiles, he was 
debarred from any share in divine favor until the full 
measure of favor was granted to the Israelites— Cornelius, 
three and a half years after our Lord's crucifixion, 
being the first Gentile to be received into favor, and 
that time being the earliest at which the favor might 
go to the Gentiles— the end of the "seventy weeks" of 
favor promised to Israel.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. 
IL, pp.69-71. 

Neither are we told that the nine who received the 
favor of God without being moved at heart to return 
and render thanks were, because of their unthankfulness, 
in any degree deprived of the blessing already received. 
We can readily imagine, however, that their 
condition of heart would not be favorable to them in 
connection with a hearty acceptance of the Lord and 
the Kingdom privileges he was offering. We may reasonably 
suppose that if they were unmoved by so great 



a manifestation of divine love toward them, experienced 
in their own persons, they would be equally unmoved 
by any preaching of the Gospel which they might hear 
at any future time, either from the lips of Jesus or the 
apostles. We may even surmise that those nine never 
came into the Church of Christ. On the contrary, we 
would have good reason to hope for the Samaritan, 
whose gratitude manifested itself;— that his condition 
of heart was nearer to the Kingdom requirement, and 
that when subsequently the gospel of Christ was preached 
to Gentiles and Samaritans, this one would be a ready 
hearer and have a ready heart to receive the good message 
and to be healed from the moral leprosy of sin, 
and to come into harmony with God by presenting 
himself before the great High Priest of our profession, 
who died for our sins and who accepts as clean all who 
come unto the Father through him. Tho we have no 
record of it, we believe that the Samaritan was of the 
kind the Lord is now drawing and calling to sacrifice 
with Christ, and that receiving that message of the 
Kingdom he would be ready to lay down his life and 
become dead with Christ— presenting his body a living 
sacrifice unto God.— 1 John 3:16; Rom. 5:1,2. 

Viewed from this standpoint, thankfulness of heart 
is a very sure sign of the character God is seeking,— 
especially in matters pertaining to our great salvation. 
And we find parallels to this illustration all about us. 
We find those who have suffered from the leprosy of 
sin, and who have appealed to Jesus for mercy and 
help, and who have been justified by faith— cleansed 
from their iniquities, covered with the righteousness of 
Christ; and yet amongst all these who have experienced 
such blessings and favors at our Lord's hands how 
few, comparatively, there are who return to him and 
prostrate themselves before him, to offer thanks for release 
from the bondage of sin and condemnation, and 
lay themselves at his feet, living sacrifices— making a 
full consecration of themselves to the Lord, their reasonable 
service. (Rom. 12:1.) Only the truly thankful 
are constrained thus to do,— only the truly appreciative. 
As the Apostle declares of himself and all 
such, it is true that "The love of Christ constraineth 
[draweth, impelleth] us; for we thus judge that if one 
died for all then were all dead [yea, worse than dead 
in trespasses and sins and condemnation], and that we 

R2723 : page 332 

who live [justified to life through faith in his blood] 
should not henceforth live unto ourselves but unto him 
who died for us."— 2 Cor. 5:14. 

Unthankfulness is unholiness, lack of that proper 
appreciation which would lead to a full consecration 
of life and every interest and affair to the Lord— regardless 
of what reward he may bestow. The "exceeding 
great and precious promises" of God's Word are 



not given to inspire thankfulness and consecration, for 

they are given only to the thankful and consecrated 

who already have presented themselves living sacrifices 

to God. "To you it is given to know the mysteries 

of the Kingdom," "God hath revealed them unto 

us by his Spirit," which is granted only to the consecrated. 

These promises are to strengthen and nerve 

us and to enable us to "overcome," in fulfilment of 

our covenant of consecration.— 2 Pet. 1:4; Matt. 13:11; 

1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

Let us each and all seek and cultivate more and 
more the spirit of thankfulness, the "reasonable" spirit 
or disposition. Thankfulness will make every trial 
and sacrifice on our part seem small, and proportionately 
easy to be offered, and it will make all of God's 
mercies and favors toward us proportionately grand and 
great and inspiring. 



R2722 : page 332 

PROPER CHRISTIAN DAILY LIVING. 

TITUS 2:l-15.-NOV. 25. 

"We should live soberly, righteously, 
godly, in this present world." 

THE APOSTLE PAUL penned the words of our 
lesson, instructing Titus, an overseer (bishop) 
of the Church— ministering to the believers in the 
island of Crete. The instructions are not intended for, 
nor applicable to others than consecrated believers, and 
refer specifically to six classes in the Church at Crete. 
(1) The elderly men— not merely the aged, but rather 
the advanced, the matured, who doubtless oftenest 
would be also advanced in years. (2) The aged women 
—advanced, matured. (3) The younger women. (4) 
The younger men. (5) Those who, tho freemen in 
Christ, were bondmen according to the flesh,— servants. 
(6) To Titus himself. (7) The lesson ends with an 
exhortation applicable to all classes in the Church. 
Titus, as a preacher, should have before his mind 
a certain standard or ideal in respect to each class in 
the Church, and should as a wise workman labor to the 
attainment of that ideal, which the Apostle here brings 
clearly to his attention,— intimating that instructions 
along the lines here laid down are in fullest accord with 
"sound doctrine." It has been claimed by some that 
the people of Crete were specially degraded and lacking 
of good character, and that this thought is necessary to 
the Apostle in giving such an exhortation to those who 
had left the world and joined themselves to the Lord 
as his Church. We shall see, however, that every word 
of the exhortation is quite applicable to the Lord's people 



today, even tho they live under the most enlightened 
conditions. 

The Elderly Men, the advanced, were to be sober, 
grave, temperate (moderate)— not light, frivolous and 
excitable. Not only their years of natural life, but also 
their years of experience in Christian life, should bring 
them to conditions of maturity and sobriety. These 
three qualities would belong to a large extent to their 
mortal bodies, exercised and influenced by their new 
minds; but in addition to these there should be three 
other graces, characteristic of their new natures; viz., 
soundness in the faith, and in love, and in patience. 
It is of intention that the Apostle here emphasized (in 
the Greek) the faith, the love and the patience, for there 
are various faiths, various loves and various kinds of 
patience, and he meant to be understood as inculcating 
the faith, the love and the patience which are of God, 
and respecting which he is instructing his people through 
his Word, as it is written, "They shall be all taught 
of God." 

It was not by accident that the Apostle placed 
"sound in the faith" before "sound in love," for since 
love is one of the fruits or graces of the spirit of truth, 
and since one cannot receive much more of the spirit 
of the truth than he receives of the truth itself, therefore 
the importance of the truth, in the having of the 
sound faith. 

Often we are told it matters not what a man believes, 
but matters all how he does; but to this we answer 
that a sound faith is all-important, not only in shaping 
conduct, but also in inspiring it. It is only in proportion 
as we have the truth that we have the sanctifying 
power: in proportion as we hold errors which vitiate 
or nullify the truths which we hold, in that same proportion 
we will be lacking and deficient in the sanctifying 
power; and hence deficient also in the sanctification 
itself. We should ever remember and cooperate 
with our dear Redeemer's prayer to the Father on our 
behalf, "Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is 
truth." 

Neither was it by accident that the Apostle placed 
love before patience; because, altho patience may be 
cultivated from a natural standpoint, as, for instance, 
in the interest of worldly aims and desires, nevertheless, 
such patience does not affect the heart, but is 
merely a forcing or curbing of the outside life, and when 
the force is removed there is a rebound as of a spring, 
to the original condition of impatience. The patience 
which will last and become an integral part of character 

R2722 : page 333 

must result from a change of heart: the mainspring 
of love must first replace the mainspring of 
selfishness. 
How grand the characters thus portrayed! We 



could not wish for more amongst the Lord's people of 
any place today than that the matured brethren should 
be sober-minded, dignified and moderate, with their 
new minds well stored with the sound faith of God's 
Word, and their hearts full of love, manifesting forth 
all of the various good qualities represented by this 
word,— kindness, meekness, gentleness, all of which 
might briefly be summed up in the word patience. We 
exhort all of the advanced brethren in the truth everywhere 
to note well this likeness of a matured man of 
God, well grown up into Christ, the living Head, and 
well conformed to his image; and we exhort that we 
all keep this image well before our minds, and make 
it our ideal in our Christian course. 

The Aged Women, matured, developed, have also a 
model set before them by the Apostle. They should 
be "reverent in demeanor" (Revised Version). They 
are supposed to have professed holiness, full consecration 
to the Lord, full desire to know and to do his will, 
and such consecration is to show out in their lives. 
The Apostle proceeds to mention a few of the ways in 
which it would be manifest. They will not be "slanderers" 
(Revised Version)— neither false accusers nor 
accusers in any slanderous sense of the word. On the 
contrary, as the Apostle shows further on, they will be 
examples in the matter of minding their own business. 
They will not be enslaved to much wine, but be teachers 
of that which is good, by precept as well as by example, 
to all with whom they have an influence. Naturally 
their influence will be greatest over the younger 
women, and it should be exercised as becometh women 
professing godliness, professing to be guided by the 
Word of the Lord, the spirit of the truth. 

The Younger Women should find ensamples in their 
elder saintly sisters, the influence of whom will not be 
in the direction of insubordination and a battle between 
the husband and wife in the home; and their advice 
will very rarely be, "Stand up for your rights;" "Give 
him a piece of your mind," etc. On the contrary, they 
will be peacemakers, and assist the younger women 
with such advice as will help to make home happy by 
obedience to the directions of the divine Word. Instead 
of helping to cultivate in the younger women the spirit 
of selfishness, which inheres naturally in every human 
being, through the fall, they will assist them, by both 
word and example, to cultivate the opposite spirit, the 
spirit of love— "to love their husbands and to love 
their children." 

If love were thus inculcated as the first law of every 
home, the chief of the Christian graces to be developed 
and practiced, it would indeed make a wide distinction 
between Christian homes and others; and thus, perhaps, 
better than in almost any other manner, the 
Christian mother can preach the glorious gospel of salvation, 
and illustrate in her own life and home its power 
to deliver from the bondage of sin and selfishness, even 



in this mortal state. 

They will learn from them also to be discreet, or 
sober-minded— not too emotional;— to do some sober 
thinking along sober lines, and thus to cultivate both 
heart and head, and to increase their own joys in the 
Lord as well as to prepare themselves the better for 
their family duties and privileges. Chastity, modesty, 
purity, should also be learned— an instruction deep and 
powerful in its influence for good; not only to the 
younger women themselves, but also in their families. 
They should learn to be "keepers at home," or "workers 
at home," as the Revised Version renders it, appreciating 
the fact that the duties of a wife and mother 

R2724 : page 333 

are chiefly home duties; that the home is her workshop 
and her pulpit, where her influence should be greatest 
and most valuable. 

They should also learn to be "obedient to their own 
husbands," or, as the Diaglott renders this, "submissive" 
—not attempting to usurp the place of the husband 
in the home, not keeping up a continual strife and battle 
about life's affairs, so that the husband will have 
one battle of life to win their daily bread and another 
battle while they eat it. By "obedience" and "submission" 
we do not understand the Apostle to mean 
blind obedience or dumb submission, nor in any sense 
of the word that the wife shall not enjoy fully all proper 
liberties and privileges; but that while enjoying these 
she shall use them with propriety, so as to make life a 
blessing and not a burden to her husband, with whom 
lie chiefly the responsibilities of the home, according to 
both divine and human law. 

As a Christian wife she should have a judgment 
respecting the Lord's will, as presented in the Lord's 
Word, respecting the affairs of the home, and all the 
interests of the family, and these views she should express, 
in love and moderation, and kindly, however 
emphatically; but having expressed her judgment respecting 
the Lord's will in the matter and the reasons 
therefor, she should be "submissive" to the decision 
of the husband (in all matters not involving her conscience); 
because, according to divine arrangement, the 
husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the Head of 
the Church— the final arbiter respecting family affairs. 

Should the Christian wife at times find that the 
pursuance of this Scriptural course had brought her 
disadvantages or were about to work ill to the general 
interests of the family, let her protest kindly, and point 
out to her husband, without "harping," what she foresees 
to be the results, and urge a change; pointing out 
(especially if the husband be not a Christian) that the 
responsibilities of the transaction lie wholly in his 
hands: and let her then console herself with the thought 
that she, at least, is following the divine direction, and 



that the ultimate result is sure to be a spiritual blessing, 
in harmony with the Lord's promise that all things 
shall work together for good to them that love him— 
and who demonstrate their love by obedience. Let her 
take the matter to the Lord in prayer, and "bear a song 
away." As the Apostle points out, this course is the 
one least likely to bring reproaches upon the cause we 
love and to which we have consecrated even life itself. 
To the Young Men of the Church the Apostle sends 

R2724 : page 334 

an exhortation that they be sober-minded— not rash, 
thoughtless, conceited— that they exercise self-control. 
And then, in view of the fact that Titus himself was 
a young man, he exhorts that he shall be a pattern to 
all the young men of the Church, and thus incidentally 
he exhorts all of the young men of the Church to note 
carefully and to be exercised by the qualities and considerations 
then urged upon Titus. 

Upon Titus the Apostle urges that he shall be a 
model man, a pattern of good works and soundness of 
doctrine; not permitting his teachings (doctrine) to be 
corrupted either with vain imaginations of his own or 
those of other people. He urges upon him, and thus 
incidentally upon all young men also, gravity, the opposite 
of frivolity, levity: as Christians we have something 
to occupy our minds that the world has not; and 
the greatness and grandeur of their hopes and ambitions, 
based upon the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the divine Word, should give to their lives 
and general conduct a weight which, like a good cargo 
in a vessel, would keep them from being top-heavy and 
prepare them to outride the storms and difficulties of 
life through which they must pass to reach the desired 
haven. 

Sound speech, with which no fault could be found, 
is another of the qualities that Titus and all of the 
Lord's people, especially the young men, are to strive 
for. Not merely sound speech in the sense of accurate 
and grammatical expression, but sound speech especially, 
in the sense of having their conversation and the 
influence which one exerts through conversation, of a 
truly helpful, strengthening kind— to mind and heart 
and character. Alas, how much of the conversation of 
even Christian young men is anything but sound, anything 
but helpful to themselves and their companions. 
Young men in Christ are to be copies of God's dear 
Son, so that by their common conversation as well as 
by their general demeanor they shall continually preach 
Christ and properly represent before the world his noble 
characteristics,— truth, righteousness, purity, gentleness, 
goodness, love. Sound speech cannot be condemned 
by anybody, friend or foe, heathen or Christian, 
saint or sinner; and, as the Apostle suggests, such a 
course will be a constant reproof to those enemies who 



must always be expected; in the face of such noble 
living they of the contrary part must surely be put to 
shame eventually. 

To Servants the Apostle sends a message also; and 
it was a very different message from what some of God's 
dear children, less wise than the Apostle in their understanding 
of the divine plan, would have given. 

Many of God's people of today, instead of being peace-makers 
are peace-disturbers, because of a failure to see 
properly the principles which underlie the Gospel, and 
their proper application in the present time. They exhort 
servants to "strike," to "stand up for their rights," 
to see that they are not "tramped upon," to "demand 
justice," and see that they get it. The Apostle, on the 
contrary, understanding God's plan, knew not to expect 
full justice, not to expect human rights or any 
others to have great consideration in the present time, 
because we are still in what he designates "this present 
evil world [dispensation];" because "the prince of this 
world [dispensation]" is Satan, and because his Kingdom 
of the present time is based upon neither love 
nor righteousness, but upon selfishness.— Gal. 1:4; 
John 14:30. 

The Apostle knew not to expect the wrongs to be 
righted and justice to be dispensed under Satan's administration, 
and hence in all of his teachings he points 
the believers to the coming time when the Lord, the 
righteous King, shall take possession of earth's governments, 
and fulfil that petition of our prayer, "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." Then justice may be expected, because 
justice is done in heaven; then all rights will be respected, 
as all rights are respected in heaven; but before 
that glorious condition shall obtain Emmanuel's 
Kingdom must be established and Satan, the prince of 
this world, must be bound, that he should deceive the 
nations no more, and that his rule of unrighteousness 
and selfishness shall be set aside, supplanted by the 
laws of him who shall lay justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. -Rev. 20:1-3; Dan. 2:44; 
Isa. 28:17. 

The Apostle's exhortation to servants is in harmony 
with this, that they be obedient to their masters, 
and seek to please them well. They were not to be 
shiftless, careless, indifferent as to the prosperity of 
their masters' interests and the care of their masters' 
goods. They were to take as much interest in those 
things as tho they were their own;— as the Apostle elsewhere 
expresses it, they were to do their work as tho 
they were doing it to the Lord himself, faithfully, well. 
(1 Cor. 10:31.) Such service rendered to an earthly 
master "as unto the Lord," and because of a desire to 
please the Lord, and because of the indwelling of his 
truth and its spirit, will undoubtedly be accepted of 
the Lord as tho it were some service done directly in 
the interest of his cause, should the conditions of the 



servant hinder him from doing any work more particularly 
in the Lord's service and the service of the truth. 

Not only were servants to endeavor to please their 
masters and to please them well, but this in all things 
—in the little things as well as in the great affairs; and 
thus Christian servants would be recognized, wherever 
they might be, as different, distinct from others, too 
many of whom are "eye-servants," faithful merely under 
the eye of their employer. Such Christian servants 
will come to be recognized as jewels even by those who 
have no sympathy with their religious convictions, and 
possibly would constitute the most weighty sermons 
these could deliver. They might obey their masters 
and yet continually protest and complain; hence the 
Apostle adds a word on this point, saying, "Not answering 
again"— not gainsaying nor quarreling with 
the master over his methods and ways and work; not 
complaining of sharing the common lot of other servants, 
whatever that might be; preferably, indeed, letting 
others complain, and holding their peace, rather 
than stirring up strife,— and rather than have the cause 
they love and seek to serve ill thought of. 

Not purloining— secretly appropriating to themselves 
the master's goods, etc., contrary to his known 
wishes. And it might be not inappropriate here for 
us to remember that if the master should desire the 
servant to engage in some work that would be dishonest, 
morally wrong, this would be a proper ground upon 
which the servant should object and protest. His 
conscience must be preserved in every matter that properly 

R2725 : page 335 

belongs to his conscience; but he may not busybody 
himself with the master's affairs in matters which belong 
to the master's conscience, and with which the 
servant has nothing to do. By his own strict integrity 
even in the smallest things he shall do his preaching 
and exercise his influence upon his master, "showing 
all fidelity," faithfulness to his master's interests. 

The effect of all knowledge is to render the intelligent 
restive under restraints, and as Christian knowledge 
is the highest form of knowledge, it more than any 
other tends to restlessness. It inculcates the thought 
that however widely different the conditions between 
the king and the peasant as respects men and earthly 
things, they really are on a par as respects morals,— 
on the same level from the standpoint of divine justice. 
This thought once received into the humblest mind 
destroys very much of the veneration which otherwise 
might be felt toward those in earthly authority. It is 
an uplifting thought to the poor, that before the great 
King of all the earth they stand on the same footing 
with the richest, the most learned and the most powerful 
of earth;— that whether rich or poor "A man is a 
man for all that." It causes them to realize that a 



man has a man's rights, and that these are more than 
animal rights, that they include liberty of mind and 
conscience and certain liberties of conduct. 

It is this very enlightenment which Christianity 
has brought to the world which is about to cause it the 
great convulsion and revolution which shall overthrow 
all present institutions in anarchy. The Christian servant 
is to be more than merely an enlightened man: 
he is a man consecrated to God as well; one who has 
surrendered his "rights" to the will of God, and who, 
having placed himself in the Lord's hands to be taught 
of God, and to be fitted and prepared for the heavenly 
Kingdom, is full of faith that the Lord is both able and 
willing to keep the trust, to safeguard his interests, and 
to permit nothing to come upon him that shall not be 
overruled for his spiritual development and welfare. 

The true Christian servant (and all Christians must 
be servants if like their Master— Phil. 2:7) thus consecrated, 
realizes that under divine providence he is 
not to expect his rights in the present time, nor to strive 
for them; but that, on the contrary, he sacrifices them 
to the will of God— to the doing of the Lord's will so 
far as he may have opportunity, and to the having of 
the Lord's will done in him according to the Lord's 
wisdom and providence. If oppressed and dealt with 
unjustly, he will look to the Lord for deliverance, and 
whatever way it shall come will accept it as of divine 
arrangement; and whatever God does not provide in 
the way of deliverance along reasonable and just lines 
he will accept as the rulings of his providence, and render 
to the Lord thanks for his watch-care and seek to 
learn the lessons of patience and experience and long-suffering, 
which these trials may inculcate; recognizing 
in such a case that these trials, from whomsoever they 
come, are permitted of the Lord if not ordered by him, 
and intended for his welfare and spiritual development. 

Such Christian servants, and such Christians in 
any walk of life, are the only ones who know what contentment 
really is. Others are striving for the attainment 
of rights and for the correction of wrongs, and 
are only cultivating more and more the spirit of selfishness 
in their own hearts, and generally causing themselves 
the more trouble and discontent. Only the Christian 
can say, 

"Content, whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis God's hand that leadeth me," 
and he can only take this position by the exercise of a 
living faith, and can only exercise such a living faith 
in life's affairs after he has made a consecration of himself 
to the Lord, and can only make such a consecration 
of himself after he has come to some knowledge of the 
divine character and plan. Such servants, the Apostle 
assures us, adorn the doctrine of God our Savior. They 
show that it is not a doctrine of strife, but of peace and 
of good-will toward men, not a doctrine merely of personal 
rights and of selfish strife for their attainment, 



but a doctrine of love, joy and peace in the holy spirit. 

WHY THE CHRISTIAN SHOULD LIVE SEPARATE FROM 
THE WORLD. 

After recounting to us as above the proper course 
for the various classes in the Church, the Apostle proceeds 
to give the logical reason for the above advice, 
saying: "For [because] the grace of God hath appeared, 
bringing salvation to all men."— Revised Version. 

When did God's grace appear thus? We answer, not 
until the Gospel began to be preached after our Redeemer's 
death and resurrection. For four thousand 
years the grace of God did not appear, was not manifest 
in any sense of the word. The Law Covenant was 
to the Jew only, and it was not of grace but the reverse 
—of law and of justice. At very most this "grace of 
God" was prophesied of, that it would appear later, 
and that blessings would follow upon all the families 
of the earth. It has not yet appeared to all men, but 
more properly this would be rendered "for all men," 
since God's grace is intended to apply to every man- 
as widely as did the curse apply. 

In the present time the majority of mankind do 
not see the grace of God,— it does not appear to them. 
More than four-fifths of the human family are totally 
blind to this grace, in heathen darkness, today, and of 
the one-fifth who have seen something of this grace 
divine, the vast majority have seen it so obscurely, so 
dimly, as not to be able to discern its beauties or appreciate 
its value. Blessed are our eyes if they have seen. 
In the Apostle's day, and still in our day, this grace of 
God has appeared "to all men," in the sense that it is 
no longer in any sense of the word confined to the Jew, 
but is now open to Jew and to Gentile alike, the middle 
wall of partition having been broken down, as the 
Apostle explains. 

In what does this grace of God consist? We answer 
with the Apostle, It is God's favor that has been announced 
and manifested as the basis of reconciliation 
—not man's righteousness. God tells us through his 
Word that he himself has provided the great sacrifice 
for sins, demanded by his own law, that Jesus has met 
the penalty in full on our behalf; and that as a result 
we may be reconciled to God now, and he can justly 
and without violence to his laws receive us whom he 
had previously condemned to death. And this receiving 
of us signifies a restoration of his favor; and the 
restoration of his favor, if rightly received by us, will, 
under his providence, bring us to such conditions as 
will effect our salvation, our full delivery from sin and 

R2725 : page 336 

death, and imperfection, into the full life and perfection 
and liberty of the sons of God. 



This applies to the Church being elected from the 
world during this Gospel age, and the same will apply 
to the world of mankind in general as they shall be 
blessed of God through the elect Church in the Millennial 
age. God's grace in the present time is manifested 
in connection with the "high calling" to the divine 
nature and the life immortal connected therewith. His 
grace in the Millennial age will be manifested in connection 
with the "restitution" blessings which will be 
offered to all mankind, and the earthly life-everlasting 
which will be granted to all those who then come into 
harmony with the terms of that grace. 

What has the grace of God to do with us? And why 
should it lead to such a revolution in our conduct and 
character as the Apostle has just intimated? Because, 
says the Apostle, this grace of God, by which we are 
called to salvation, teaches us something: it teaches us 
that the way of reconciliation back to God's favor is a 
way of self-denial,— denying everything that is ungodliness, 
everything that is contrary to our highest conception 
of the divine character and will; the denying 
also of every worldly love or desire or ambition— ambition 
for worldly influence, for the riches of this world; 
and that instead of aiming and striving for these things, 
we who desire the salvation which God promises are to 
live to the contrary of these, "soberly, righteously, 
godly [God-like], in this present world"— not expecting 
worldly honors and advantages under the reign of 
"the prince of this world," who not only had no interest 
in our Master, but likewise no friendly interest in 
any who follow in his footsteps. 

But if we are thus to live self denyingly in this 
world (age) that we may attain to the grace of God in 
the next world (age)— "the world to come"— what are 
we to have before our minds in the nature of a prospect 
or hope toward which we are to look with longing and 
interest and comfort of heart? Ah! the Apostle tells 
us what. He holds up before us the grand consideration 
toward which all of our ambitions are to turn, in 
which all of our hopes are to centre, and in which our 
hearts are to find their treasure, outweighing and outvaluing 
every earthly consideration. He thus describes 
this hope,— 

LOOKING FOR THAT BLESSED HOPE AND THE APPEARING 
OF THE GLORY OF OUR GREAT GOD AND SAVIOR 
JESUS CHRIST.-Revised Version. 

This is to be the centre of our expectations. We 
are not to hope for blessing this side of the manifestation 
of God's Kingdom. We are to note that this Kingdom 
must come before God's will can be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven. We are to know that this Kingdom 
must bind Satan and overthrow his institutions, 
based upon selfishness, before it can supplant these 
with new institutions of justice and truth based upon 



the grand principle of love. Whoever, therefore, has 
been blessed with the grace of God, and has had the eyes 
of his understanding opened by the Word of truth, and 
its spirit, finds its teachings to be that these blessings 
of salvation are to be "brought unto us at the revelation 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ" (1 Pet. 1:13), and 
that our chief object in the present life is to fight a good 
fight against self and against sin, and in defence of 
righteousness and in the assistance of the household of 
faith; and not to fight for earthly rights nor to strive 
for earthly honors and riches,— the warfare and strife 
in which the whole world, except ourselves, is almost 
exclusively engaged. If the Lord's saints possess talents 
or influence or wealth, these are not their treasures, 
but merely their servants, and they are not the possessors 

R2726 : page 336 

of these, but merely the stewards, whose privilege 
it is to use them as best they may know how, in the 
Master's service, and to the forwarding of the interests 
of righteousness in the preparation of themselves and 
others for his appearing and Kingdom. 

The Apostle speaks of our Lord Jesus as "our great 
God and Savior," and this is in full accord with the 
general teachings of the Scriptures. Our Lord Jesus is 
a mighty one, a great one amongst the mighty ones, 
and as our Lord himself declares, all should "honor the 
Son even as they honor the Father."— John 1:1; 5:22. 

The Apostle presents in another consideration why 
we should be exercised by this blessed hope of the 
Lord's second coming and our gathering together to him 
as his elect Church. It is not merely that we should 
think of life everlasting and glory in which we might 
share; but that we should think also that this One coming 
in glory, and to whom we hope to be joined everlastingly, 
as members of the Bride, to the Bridegroom, 
—is no other than he who gave himself for us, who sacrificed 
his own life in our redemption. We are to remember, 
too, that he not only redeemed us from the 
penalty of sin, death, but that the redemption which 
he purposes and provides is more than a redemption 
from iniquity, from sin. We are to remember also 
that this purging away of sin and the instruction and 
cleansing which the Word of truth is to do for us, as 
the Apostle has foregoing set forth, is to the intent that 
by these means the Lord may "purify unto himself a 
peculiar people"— a people different from others, possessed 
of a special love for that which is just, that which 
is pure, that which is noble, that which is good; and 
who, despite the imperfections of their mortal bodies, 
are striving to cultivate these graces more and more in 
their hearts, and to keep their bodies in subjection. 
Moreover, says the Apostle, these peculiar people will 
be "zealous of good works," earnestly desirous and 
striving to do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 



physically, mentally, morally,— and especially 
to do good to the household of faith. 

The Apostle's exhortation, in conclusion, is that 
Titus shall speak and exhort the Church along these 
lines which he has laid down, reproving them, whenever 
necessary (in love and gentleness, and yet with 
full authority, not doubting as to the meaning of the 
divine instruction). He was to let no man despise 
him, in the sense that he was to declare these principles 
of righteousness governing the Lord's people in a plain, 
positive and authoritative manner. He was to speak 
with authority and not as with uncertainty and questioning. 
And so let us speak, each and all, to ourselves 
and to others, setting forth the principles of the 
salvation which has appeared to us, with no uncertain 
sound, that thus we may minister grace to the hearers 
and glorify our Father in heaven and our Redeemer 
and Deliverer. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. NOVEMBER 15, 1900. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 339 

Is Nature Cruel? 339 

Roman Catholicism in Politics 340 

Make Sure of Winning in God's 

Election 341 

Different Standpoint, Different View 342 

Ignorance Respecting God's Election 342 

Sorrowful, For He Had Great 

Possessions 346 

The Grace of All Graces 347 

"Trust Not in Uncertain Riches" 348 

Entreaty Answered.— Blind Eyes 

Opened 349 

Ill-gotten Wealth Restored 351 

Christian Home Embellishments 352 

About Pilgrim Arrangements 338 

page 338 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2731 : page 338 
"PILGRIM" ARRANGEMENTS STILL MISUNDERSTOOD. 



We find that quite a number of our readers did not respond 
to our queries respecting "Pilgrim" visits because they thought 
themselves too far from Allegheny to ask or expect a visit. 
Others who did respond have wondered that a "Pilgrim" was 
not started to them at once. For these reasons we explain 
again, as follows:— 

The Society sends forth a number of these Pilgrims— according 
as the Society's funds will permit and the interests of 
the flock seem to demand. These are sent out on long tours- 
three to twelve months, according to circumstances;— and sometimes 
reach very out-of-the-way places where we know that 
the interest and arrangements will justify the expense and time. 
We rarely give more than two days to any place unless more is 
specially requested and good reasons given. 

We will be making up new routes for 1901 and therefore 
requested replies to our questions from all who desire to be remembered 
and visited. See TOWER Aug. 1, 1900. 

page 338 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 



We have now a goodly supply of the Marked New Testaments. 
The markings are in red ink, making prominent verses 
which are specially forceful as respects various features of the 
divine plan for our salvation. The ransom, justification, sanctification, 
the second coming of our Lord and the resurrection are 
made quite prominent in these markings. Price postpaid two 
for 25 cents or $1.10 per dozen by express at your charges. 

The publication, markings, etc. are not our work. 



MONEY OR STAMPS SHOULD BE SENT "REGISTERED" 



R2726 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



IS NATURE CRUEL? 



THIS QUESTION has already been answered by 
some eminent authorities in the affirmative, and 
the belief that such an answer is the correct one is 
widespread. Sir Samuel Baker declares that nature 
"is a system of terrorism from the beginning to the 
end," and John Stuart Mill asserts that if there are 
marks of design in creation, "one of the things most 
evidently designed is that a large proportion of all 
animals should pass their existence in tormenting and 
devouring other animals." If we assume nature to 
be the work of a Being of infinite power, he concludes 
that "the most atrocious enormities of the worst men 
will be more than justified by the apparent intention 
of Providence that throughout all animated nature 
the strong should prey on the weak." These radical 
assertions are controverted by J. C. Hirst, of Liverpool, 
England, in a book whose title is the same as 
the head of this article (London, 1900). After examining 
the experiences of hunters of big game, he 
concludes in the first place that Sir Samuel Baker's 
dictum is untrue. We quote from a review in Our 
Animal Friends (October) the following abstract of 
his argument:— 

"Where there is terrorism there must be terror, 
and terror is one of the most horrible of sufferings. 
Is it true, then, that the animals most exposed to the 
attacks of the carnivora suffer greatly from terror? 
We believe that it is almost entirely untrue. Terror in 
human beings is largely due to the imagination.... 
Have we any reason to believe that the lower animals 
have a similar terror of imagination? We have 
good reason to believe the contrary. Mr. J. D. Inverarity 
tells the following incident: A poor donkey 
was 'tied-out'; that is, as a bait for a lion. The lion 
approached, but the hunter, looking through his peephole, 
saw the donkey standing unharmed, while the 
lion went on growling. It was afterward discovered 
that the lion had actually tried to throw the donkey 
over with his paw and had failed, altho it had scratched 
the donkey on the inner side of the leg. But 'within 
a few minutes of the donkey being attacked, it was 



calmly eating which showed its nerves were not 
affected.' 

"Mr. Wallace maintains that 'the constant effort 
to escape enemies, the ever-recurring struggle against 
the forces of nature,' are 'the very means by which 
much of the beauty and harmony and enjoyment of 
nature are produced.' To what else is it that the 
fleetness of the horse and of the many species of deer 
and antelopes is due? To what else, indeed, but the 
perpetual stimulus to exert their utmost speed, which 
is caused by the fear of enemies? But is not this fear 
the very terror which Sir Samuel Baker affirms? By 
no means. Mr. Francis Galton not only agrees with 
Mr. Wallace, but maintains that the peril in which 
they live is a source of pleasure.... 

"Prince Kropotkin points out the enormous exaggeration 
of the 'tooth and claw' view of nature. 

The Prince refers to the families of elephants, rhinoceroses, 
and the numberless societies of monkeys to be 
found in the lower latitudes of Asia and Africa; the 
numberless herds of reindeer in the far North, the 
herds of musk-oxen and the innumerable bands of 
polar foxes still farther north; the flocks of seals and 
morses and sociable cetaceans which inhabit the ocean; 
the herds of wild horses, donkeys, camels and sheep 
which range the steppes of Central Asia. He says: 

'"How trifling, in comparison with them, are 
the numbers of carnivora! And how false, therefore, is 
the view of those who speak of the animal world as 
if nothing were to be seen in it but lions and hyenas 
plunging their bleeding teeth into the flesh of the victims ! 
One might as well imagine that the whole of 
human life is nothing but a succession of Tel-el-Kebir 
and Geoktepe massacres.' 

"Unless, then, death is an inexcusable incident 
in animal life, it would seem that the terror of death 
to be inflicted by the carnivora is really a figment of 
the imagination; and one might reasonably adopt the 
language of Mr. Wallace, that 'the supposed torments 

R2726 : page 340 

and miseries of animals have little real existence, but 

are the reflection of the imagined sensations of cultivated 

men and women in similar circumstances, and 

that the amount of actual suffering caused by the struggle 

for existence among animals is altogether 

insignificant.'" 

Mr. Hirst does not, of course, deny that there is 
a good deal of eating and being eaten in the animal 
kingdom. This, however, he says, is not cruelty, 
and he devotes much space to showing that in their 
attacks wild creatures cause their victims little pain, 
altho he does not go so far as to say that the mangled 
ones enjoy it, as Wallace maintained of the fleeing 
antelope. The familiar case of Dr. Livingstone, on 



whom a lion's jaw crunching through his shoulder 
acted as an anesthetic, is of course cited, and supported 
by much evidence along the same line. The reviewer 
regards the case as having been made out, and concludes 
as follows: 

"So then, as the result of this most interesting 
investigation, we may reasonably come to the conclusion 
that nature is by no means the system of terrorism 
that Sir Samuel Baker makes it out to be; that 
it does not justify the pessimistic and almost atheistic 
conclusions of Mr. J. S. Mill, and that it is not the 
horrible commingling of devourers and devoured that 
a superexcited imagination is predisposed to paint it. 
On the contrary, we may believe that the various carnivorous 
enemies of the gentler races of animals are 
much more serviceable in training them to the finest 
exercise of skill and fleetness than they are destructive 
of their numbers or oppressively noxious to their happiness 
of animal life, and that in a world in which 
death is necessary, death by the assault of carnivorous 
enemies is no more dreadful, but is, in fact, much 
less painful, than many other methods by which life 
may be extinguished."— Literary Digest. 

The above is in full accord with our presentations 
on the subject in our issue of June 1, page 165; which 
please note again. 

R2727 : page 340 

ROMAN CATHOLICISM IN POLITICS. 



"At the annual meeting of the Catholic Young 
Men's National Union in Brooklyn, September 26, a 
resolution was adopted to form a great federation of 
all the societies of the Roman Catholic Church in the 
United States for political purposes. Last spring 
Bishop McFaul of Trenton, N.J., told the Ancient 
Order of Hibernians that the Roman Catholics of 
America were fools not to organize into one solid 
mass and make their power felt in the politics of this 
country; there were 2,000,000 Roman Catholic voters, 
and if they were united for political action they could 
make this country a Roman Catholic nation. 

"This federation has now been formed by the following 
societies: The Knights of Columbus, the 
Knights of St. John, the Catholic Benevolent Legion, 
the Ancient Order of Hibernians, the Irish Catholic 
Benevolent Union, the Irish-American Societies, the 
German-American Societies, the Catholic Knights of 
America, the Catholic Total Abstinence Union of 
America; and, as the Brooklyn Eagle of Sept. 26, 1900 
(from which we quote), says: 'Besides these organizations 
there are scores of others of less prominence.' 

"The federation is formed, says the Eagle, 'for the 



avowed purpose of influencing legislation and securing 
what the Catholics claim are their rights.' 

"The convention, which met in the Park Theatre, 
Brooklyn, was the largest gathering in the history of 
the Young Men's National Union, and it was addressed 
by leading priests and laymen from all parts of the 
country. Father Lavelle, rector of St. Patrick's Cathedral 
in this city, Monsignor Doane of Newark, N.J., 
Sheriff Buttling of Brooklyn, Congressman Fitzgerald, 
of Boston, and Father Wall of Holy Rosary 
Church, this city, made stirring addresses. The latter 
was elected president of the union. 

'"The convention,' continues the Eagle, which 
is one of the foremost metropolitan daily journals, 
'unanimously approved the plan of federation and appointed 
committees to carry it into effect. By this 
means tens of thousands of men of the Catholic faith 
will be brought under one national head, and this 
stalwart body of men will have a strong influence 
on national legislation.' The New York Herald and 
other papers had similar reports. This is the most 
important step ever taken by the Roman Catholics in 
the United States. They now have New York City 
in their possession, and many of the other large cities 
of our republic are under their control; all, like Tammany 
Hall, 'worked for all their worth,' in the interests 
of the Roman Catholic Church, and incidentally 
for the benefit of the workers. In politics I work 
for my own pocket all the time,' said Richard Croker, 
the 'Boss' of Tammany. He might have added that 
a large share of the municipal plunder goes to Roman 
Catholic institutions. 

"Having possession of the cities, the Romanists 
now reach out to gain control in national affairs. 
'We must make America Catholic,' said Archbishop 
Ireland at the hundredth anniversary of the establishment 
of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the United 
States, which was held in Baltimore, Nov. 10, 1889. 
'We must make America Catholic. As we love our 
church, it suffices to mention the work and our cry 
shall be, God wills it, and our hearts shall leap towards 
it with Crusader enthusiasm.' He was wildly applauded 
by the eighty bishops, one thousand priests 
and five thousand laymen present. 

'"Why should we fear or hesitate?' he continued, 
with glowing fervor and proud boasting. 'We number 
ten millions— a powerful army if the forces be well 
marshaled and their latent strength be brought into 
action. Catholics in America are loyal to their church 
and devoted to her leaders. Their labors and their 
victories in the first century of their history show 
what they are capable of in the coming century, when 
they are conscious of their power and are under complete 
hierarchical organization.' 

"And so, even before the century has begun, they 
are preparing by a complete organization to conquer 



this country and turn it over to the pope! What have 
the Protestants of America to say to this? says The 
Converted Catholic of New York." 

R2727 : page 341 

SOCIALISM GROWING IN GERMANY. 



The election of a member of the Reichstag for 
Brandenburg has caused considerable political excitement 
throughout Germany, as it has resulted in a 
signal victory for the Socialist candidate, Herr Peus, 
by a majority of 648 votes. This constituency has 
had a varied history, having returned within the past 
twenty years Conservatives, Radicals and National 
Liberals; but throughout all its fluctuations one fact 
was prominent; namely, the growth of Socialism there. 

The number of Socialist members now in the 
Reichstag is fifty-eight; in 1885 there were only twenty -three; 
in 1890 the number rose to thirty-five. At 
the general election of 1893 there were forty-four Socialists 
returned. At the last general election in 1898 
the number was fifty-six. Subsequent byeelections 
have added two members. 

If we turn to the number of recorded votes we 
find that in 1885 over half a million Socialist votes 
were given; in 1887 three-quarters of a million; in 
1890 nearly one million and a half; in 1893 one million 
and three-quarters; and at the last general election 
two and a quarter millions. The calculation which 
places the strength of the Socialist party at the next 
election at three million votes, and 100 seats in the 
Reichstag out of a total of 397 seats, would not appear 
excessive.— London Daily Chronicle, Oct. 29. 



R2727 : page 341 
MAKE SURE OF WINNING IN GOD'S ELECTION. 



"Brethren, give diligence to make your 
calling and election sure."— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

INTEREST in the recent election of a President of 

the United States has been general throughout 

the whole world, and especially amongst English-speaking 

peoples: in fact, the exercise of the franchise 

by the public, whenever and wherever, is generally a 

matter of absorbing interest to "the children of this 

world"— whether the office be a high one, as that of 

President of the United States, or Member of Congress, 



or Member of Parliament, or whether it be 
a lower one, for some petty office of ward magistrate 
or constable. The candidates for these offices 
and their friends, in proportion to the dignity of the 
office, do not hesitate to spend money for printing, 
brass bands, banners, flags, banquets, traveling speakers, 
etc. And this is looked upon as thoroughly reasonable, 
and engaged in by the reputedly more intelligent 
and sane of all nations. But there is another 
election in progress— an election of a hundred and 
forty-four thousand, to a higher position than that of 
any earthly magistrate or potentate; and for not a few 
years merely, for the elect are promised this highest 
of all honors for all eternity. 

Does the world know about this election? We 
answer, No. True, many have heard something about 
an election— that God is "taking out of the nations a 
people for his name," a "little flock," who, as joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, will be given the 
Kingdom which God hath promised to them that love 
him,— the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." But tho they have heard of this Kingdom 
and the election now in progress, to make up the foreordained 
number of its kings and priests they do 
not really believe it, but regard it as a fantasy, "as a 
tale that is told," a fairy story which none but the 
simple-minded and children would take seriously. Ah 
yes! and so the Redeemer-King informed us it would 
be; and so he prayed to the Father, saying, "I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent 
and revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for 
so it seemed good in thy sight."— Matt. 11:25,26. 

If the wise and prudent, the keen and the shrewd, 
the learned and the great, really comprehended the 
situation,— if they really believed in this election 
which is in progress under divine direction, according 
to the divine Word, what haste there would be amongst 
them to "make their calling and election sure," as 
the Apostle exhorts. It is not that people are not 
appreciative of such honors and dignities of power 
and influence as this Kingdom offers, that they pass 
by God's election, and treat it with indifference; for 
their love of power, their love of influence, their love 
of position and prestige, is abundantly in evidence in 
connection, not only with the governments of this 
world, but also in connection with even the trifling 
offices in the nominal churches. The spirit of "Which 
shall be greatest?" has apparently not died out. 

But while those who seek for earthly offices of a 
brief tenure and comparatively small dignity are willing 
to sacrifice time, energy, money, etc., to attain 
these petty offices and honors, and while they can 
arouse enthusiasm amongst their friends and neighbors, 
leading to expenditures of time, money and 



energy to an astounding degree, and tho they think 
it strange that we "ran not with them to the same 
excess of riot, speaking evil of us" (1 Pet. 4:4), 
nevertheless, they affect to think it remarkable that 
we who are candidates for the superlatively high office 
for which God has nominated us should spend time, 

R2727 : page 342 

influence and means in making our calling and election 
sure, and in assisting "brethren" in their election 
work: they consider our time wasted. Altho they 
spend millions of dollars in speeches, brass bands, 
editorials, parades, etc., to determine which of two 
men should hold the most honorable office of this 
nation for four years, they consider it remarkably 
strange that we should spend a fragment of the amount, 
or make the one-thousandth part of the commotion 
to secure for ourselves and to all of the "elect" the 
great "prize of our high calling." 

DIFFERENT STANDPOINT-DIFFERENT VIEW. 



All this only illustrates the two very different 
standpoints from which matters may be viewed. From 
the world's standpoint the Lord's consecrated people 
who seek to make their calling and election sure to 
the heavenly Kingdom are counted fools, because to 
attain that they are willing to sacrifice present temporal 
interests; and this sentiment of the public is the 
same today that it was in the Apostle's time, when 
he wrote, "If any man among you seemeth to be wise, 
in this world, let him become a fool that he may be 
wise." (1 Cor. 3:18; 4:10.) From our standpoint, 
seeing the eternal things and the glories attaching to 
them, we cannot avoid the feeling that it is "the children 
of this world" who are foolish, in that they expend 
so much breath and energy upon things which, 
if attained, last but a short time, and bring with them 
large measures of perplexity and trouble and criticism 
of opponents to their election: and sometimes untenable 
injury to themselves, the ruled. 

But why this difference of opinion? Which party is 
sane, and which is lacking in sanity? We answer, that 
the difference is that the one class sees what the other 
class does not see, and that because God has specially 
revealed it unto the one. As it is written, "Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into 
the heart of man [the natural man, unilluminated by 
the holy spirit] the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him; but God hath revealed 
them unto us by his spirit,... which searcheth all 
things, yea, the deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The fact, then, is that the Lord's consecrated people, 



through faith and by God's holy spirit, have inside 
information respecting "the things not seen as 
yet." Hence we see that the two parties— the one 
seeking earthly honors and advantages, for themselves 
and each other, the other seeking the heavenly advantages, 
or election for themselves and each other- 
are both laboring for what they see; for what they 
consider to be the most valuable thing they see and 
may attain. O how precious, then, is this eye of 
faith, which the Lord's consecrated people have! No 
wonder our Lord said to some of his disciples, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they 
hear"— other eyes do not see and other ears do not 
hear these heavenly things. And in that sense of the 
word comparatively few even in civilized lands have 
been called or nominated of the Lord for his election 
—comparatively few know anything about it or the 
terms which must be understood and obeyed in order 
to make the calling and election sure. 

IGNORANCE RESPECTING GOD'S ELECTION. 



Even amongst professing Protestant Christians 
the majority do not know that there is an election. 
The leading denomination, Methodists, positively deny 
that there is an election; and even the large denominations 
which hold that an election is in progress 
(Presbyterians and Baptists, etc.) have totally false 
conceptions of its character: they regard God's call 
or nomination as being the election itself, and hence 
the words of the Apostle in our text confuse rather 
than help them. They think of the matter from the 
standpoint of divine foreknowledge and predestination: 
they consider the election as something done by 
the Almighty wholly regardless of the character and 
works of the elect, saying in their Confessions of Faith, 
that it takes place without consideration of any worthiness 
or merit on the part of the elect, but solely of 
divine grace. They thus make void the Word of God, 
and the election inducements which it holds out,— 
confusing their own minds, and in the end traducing 
the character of the divine ruler and his law. 

Would that they could see what is so plainly set 
forth in the divine Word; viz., (1) that the predestination 
on God's part was that he would choose a 
Church,— from amongst those whom his grace would 
redeem from the curse of death through the precious 
blood of Christ. (2) That he predestinated that this 
Church should be of a fixed, positive, limited number; 
—we believe literally 144,000— of whom the nucleus 
was found in the remnant of Israel which accepted of 
Christ at and after Pentecost: the number being constantly 
added to throughout the Gospel age, and to 
be fully completed with the end of this age. (3) That 



he predestinated what must be the fixed character of 
each one whom he would recognize as a member of 
this elect Church, the body of Christ— as the Apostle 
says, he "predestinated that we should be conformed 
to the likeness of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) Consequently 
the predestination meant that none could be 
of the elect Kingdom class (however plainly they 
heard the call or nomination), unless they made their 
calling and election sure by cultivating the graces of 
the spirit and thus coming into heart-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ— copies of him who set us an example, 
that we should walk in his steps.— 1 Pet. 2:21. 

R2727 : page 343 

Here we have an election which accords with every 
definition of the Scriptures and all the Scriptural facts 
relating to the divine plan of the ages. It is this election 
which we feel justified in securing at any cost, at 
any self-denial, any self-sacrifice; and these self-denials 
and self-sacrifices are works which must be performed 
if we would be of the elect; as the Apostle says, we 
must "work out our own salvation with fear and 
trembling." (Phil. 2:12; Jas. 2:22.) Yet these works 
are not ours (as men) but as "new creatures," members 
of the body of Christ. And they are God's works 
in the sense that they are incited by his Word and 
Spirit: for "it is God that worketh in you to will and 
to do. "-Phil. 2:13; Eph. 3:20. 

Let us not be misunderstood, however. Our justification, 
the basis of our call or nomination to this 
high position in the Kingdom was secured, not by 
works, but by simple faith without works. We were 
justified by faith, and had peace with God, before it 
was possible for us to do any works which would be 
acceptable in his sight. But when we were accepted 
in the Beloved, having made full consecration of our 
mortal bodies, and every interest pertaining thereto, 
—then the works began, the sacrificing began, the 
self-denials began, the overcoming of the world began, 
the battle with the world, the flesh and the devil began. 
This battle must be won in our hearts (even 
tho we will not attain perfection in the flesh) else we 
will not make our election sure and receive the crown 
of glory, the symbol of our joint-heirship with him 
who bought us with his own precious blood. 

So then we see (a) that only those who have 
heard something, at least, of the grace of God in Christ 
have been in the remotest sense in contact with the 
privileges of this election,— because "faith cometh by 
hearing." And (b) faith the result of hearing, rightly 
received, brings justification from the sins that are 
past, and peace with God. And (c) only those who 
are at peace with God (being justified by faith) are 
called to joint-heirship with Christ in his sacrifice, 
walking in his footsteps and thus attaining to joint-heirship 



with him in his Kingdom. And (d) only 

those thus called or nominated by God have the remotest 

opportunity of becoming the elect. And then 

mark, (e) the Lord's own declaration, "Many are 

called; few are chosen [elected— from the same Greek 

word]. "-Matt. 22:14. 

Let us not only assure ourselves of the fact that 
there is an elect class being selected during the Gospel 
age, to a special position of honor and service with 
the Lord, but let us at the same time note the lessons 
enjoined upon this class of called or nominated ones 
—the instructions given them of the Lord whereby 
they may make their calling and election sure. 

OTHER SCRIPTURE REFERENCES TO THE ELECT. 



"I endure all things for the elect's sake," writes 
the Apostle Paul. (2 Tim. 2:10.) The Apostle's 
sufferings whereby, as he said, he sought to "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ [were] 
for his body's sake, which is the Church" (Col. 1:24) 
—not for the world. The reason for this is evident: 
The Apostle knew the Lord's plan to be to call and 
to elect during this Gospel age a little flock of overcomers 
of the world, faithful even unto death, as a 
Royal Priesthood, to share with the Lord Jesus in the 
Millennial Kingdom. He knew, therefore, that labor 
on behalf of the world before the world's day of trial 
or judgment would come, would be to a large extent 
at least love's labor lost; and hence he was not of 
those who would "beat the air" in the service of the 
Lord, accomplishing nothing; he would work according 
to the divine direction and thus be a co-worker 
together with God, that in due time as a member of 
the elect company, faithful to the Lord's call, he 
would be granted a share in the Kingdom, which is to 
bless all the families of the earth. 

"Even so, at this present time there is an election 
according to grace. ...Israel hath not obtained 
that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained 
it and the rest were blinded." (Rom. 11:5,7.) 
Here the Apostle is speaking of this same elect 
Church, and is referring to the Jewish remnant out 
of all the tribes with which this elect Church was 
started, and to which, after Israel's national rejection 
of the Lord, the special invitation went forth to the 
Gentiles, to "take out of them a people for his name 
[to bear the name of Christ]" to complete the predestinated 
number of the elect 144,000 (twelve 
thousand accredited to each of the twelve tribes of 
Israel). Thus we who are being called from amongst 
the Gentiles are invited to fill up the deficiency in the 
elect number of Israel, and will be, so to speak, divided 
amongst the twelve tribes, tho according to what 



rule of distinction the Scriptures do not show. 

"Put on, therefore, as God's elect, holy and beloved, 
a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, 
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another and 
forgiving one another." (Col. 3:12,13.) Here we 
have an intimation of the character-likeness to God's 
dear Son which the same writer tells us God has predestinated 
respecting everyone who will make his 
calling and election sure. (Rom. 8:29.) God has 
called us with his high calling, and from the time we 
accept the call and make the requisite full consecration 
of ourselves to him he gives us the earnest of our 
inheritance, viz., the spirit of adoption, the spirit of 
sonship: it remains, however, for us to be tested,— to 

R2727 : page 344 

prove the depth of our consecration, the sincerity of 
our professed love. If we love the Lord with all our 
hearts we will seek to do those things which are pleasing 
to him, and these the Apostle is specifying in this 
Scripture, showing us that God's requirements are 
all in harmony with his holy spirit of love; that "Love 
is the fulfilling of the Law," and that we must attain 
to this condition of perfect love in our hearts if we 
desire to finish our course with joy, and make our 
calling and election sure— making sure a share in the 
inheritance to the spiritual body and the Kingdom 
glories of which our spirit of begetting is but the 
earnest or foretaste. 

"Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the faith of God's elect." (Titus 1:1.) 
Here the Apostle not only reiterates that there 
is an elect class, but he specifically points out that this 
class has a special faith, a peculiar faith, that is not 
shared by others, neither can others know it, for "it 
is spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

"Shall not God avenge his own elect, tho they 
cry day and night unto him?" (Luke 18:7.) Here 
our Lord himself testifies respecting this elect class. 
He gave a parable of an unjust judge, who, tho careless 
respecting the doing of justice to a poor widow, 
nevertheless was so careful of his own convenience 
that he would give her justice, lest by her continual 
coming she would annoy him. And our Lord's inquiry 
is, if an unjust judge would thus render justice 
from a selfish motive, could we expect less from the 
all-wise, all-loving and all -just Heavenly Father? 
Verily, God shall avenge the cause of his elect, altho 
he has permitted them to be maligned, slandered, misrepresented, 
for over eighteen centuries; the time will 
come when he will give them justice, when he will 
exalt them; and when those who have wilfully and 
maliciously injured them shall certainly be punished 
—in the great time of retribution in which every such 
evil deed of mankind shall be rendered a recompense, 



and every good deed receive its reward— in the Millennial 
day. 

"He shall send forth his angels [messengers] and 
shall gather together his elect from the four winds of 
heaven." (Matt. 24:31.) Here our Lord not only 
testifies to the fact that there is an elect class, but he 
assures us that he himself will gather this elect class 
in due time; in the end of this age when he is ready to 
establish his Kingdom, in which, as the overcomers, 
the elect of God, they will be joint heirs and sharers, 
as in the present life they have been sharers in the 
sufferings of Christ.— Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 
Matt. 13:43. 

For the elect's sake those days shall be shortened." 
(Matt. 24:22.) Our Lord here refers to the great 
time of trouble with which this age shall end, "the 
day of vengeance," the time of retribution, the day of 
avenging his elect; and he assures us that the trouble 
then coming upon the world, and which will largely, 
we see, be brought about by the world's own course, 
would, if not interrupted by the Kingdom and its intervention 
with power from on high, mean the utter 
obliteration of the race at the hand of its own selfishness. 
But for the elect's sake those days should be 
shortened, and the time of trouble will not be permitted 
to run the length which otherwise it would 
run. As at first, "He shall speak to them in his wrath 
and vex them in his sore displeasure," so afterward 
he shall not permit their utter destruction: his Kingdom 
will stay the trouble, for "He shall speak peace 
to the heathen [peoples];" he shall say unto them, 
"Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted 
among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth."— 
Psa. 46:10. 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect?" (Rom. 8:33.) The Apostle is here pointing 
out that altho this called class accepted of God to be 
his elect, and to run with patience the race set before 
them, and make their calling and election sure, have 
weaknesses of the flesh, in the overcoming of which 
they, as new creatures, are not always wholly successful, 
nevertheless, God looks upon the heart, and their 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, the will. Lest such should fear failure 
after all, he points out that in the great heavenly 
court there would be none to condemn them;— because 
God the Judge who once condemned us in Adam has 
himself justified us in Christ,— accepting on behalf 
of the Adamic sin and the resultant weaknesses the 
sacrifice of Christ. And then he points out that 
Satan, our Adversary, will have no hearing before the 
heavenly Court, and that there will be none to appear 
against us, and that on the contrary our Lord and 
Master, who redeemed us with his precious blood, 
will be our Advocate. Who then could lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect?— those whom God has 



justified, whom God has called, whom God has accepted, 

and who, according to the divine arrangement, 

make their calling and election sure. Who 

would they be who could find fault with these whom 

God accepts on his own terms? Surely none! "Yea, 

we are more than conquerors, through him who loved 

us and bought us with his own precious blood!" 

"Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the 
Father... through sanctification of the spirit unto 
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." 
(1 Pet. 1:2.) The Apostle here marks out the terms 
of our election; none can remain in this elect company, 
nor make his calling and election sure, without 

R2727 : page 345 

being under the sprinkling of the blood— justification 
through faith in the great sacrifice; nor can any attain 
it without sanctification, a setting apart to God; and 
such a sanctification as will lead to obedience to 
God— to the full submission of his will to the will of 
the Father in heaven. Such must be the character of 
those who will be of the elect, and this class of which 
we are seeking to become members was predetermined, 
foreordained by God; it was not a new thing, but the 
carrying out of the original divine purpose, in which 
also our Lord Jesus shared. This the same Apostle 
shows (1 Pet. 2:4-6), declaring that our Lord Jesus 
himself was the elect of God, and that we who are 
now being chosen from amongst men to be "members 
of the body of Christ," members of the elect class, are 
chosen in him, chosen as members of his body, and as 
such must be conformed to the likeness of his character. 
He says: "To whom coming, as unto a living 
stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen [elect] of 
God and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built 
up, a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up 
sacrifices* acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, 
Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, 
and he that believeth in him shall not be confounded." 
Thus the whole Church of Christ, the 

elect little flock, are now being shaped, fitted and prepared 
for positions in the Temple of God, of which 
the dear Redeemer himself is the chief cornerstone, 
the foundation. 

"They that are with him are called and chosen [elect 
—the same word in the Greek] and faithful." (Rev. 17:14.) 
Here in symbol our Lord Jesus tells John, 
and us through him, of the glorious exaltation of the 
elect in the Kingdom, when they shall be with him 
and share his glory as the Apostle declares, and with 
him judge the world;— granting trial, with gracious 
opportunities to every member of Adam's race to return 
to full harmony with God through the merit and 
by the assistance of him who redeemed the race. 



"Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, 
in whom my soul delighteth: I have put my spirit 
upon him. He shall bring forth judgment to the 
Gentiles." "I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob 
and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountain: and 
mine elect shall inherit it." "They shall not build 
and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another 
eat; for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, 
and mine elect shall make them continue long." 
— Isa. 42:1; 65:9,22, margin. 

Here our Lord Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
"members in particular of the body of Christ," are 
unitedly declared to be God's elect, in whom he is 
well pleased. The Father was well pleased in the 
Son, who came not to do his own will but the will of 
him that sent him, and by his obedience won all the 
gracious things promised under the Law Covenant, 
and redeemed Adam and his race; and the Father is 
well pleased also in us, whom, tho "we were children 
of wrath even as others," he has accepted in Christ, 
justified and sanctified by his Word and spirit, and 
who, if we abide in Christ, faithful unto death, will 
be fitted and prepared for his promised Kingdom. 

In these statements of the Prophet reference evidently 
is made to the work of the Lord's anointed 
(Head and body) in conferring restitution blessings 
upon the world of mankind during the Millennial age; 
and this is in full accord with all the New Testament 
declarations respecting the work of the elect. 

"Brethren, give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure." This our text is one of the most 
forceful of the many references to God's elect, and is 
particularly clear in marking out the conditions upon 
which election may be surely attained by each one 
whom the Lord our God shall call or nominate to this 
grand office— the Royal Priesthood. The Apostle has 
been mentioning the various graces of the Lord's spirit 
which those who are seeking to be of this royal and 
priestly class must develop in their characters. He 
shows us that there is more or less of an addition 
in the matter: we put on one grace and add to it another, 
and to that another, and so on; and do this repeatedly 
in respect to all the graces, which keep growing, 
developing in us and rounding out and deepening 
and broadening us as spiritual new creatures. And 
he shows that those who do not have such experiences 
of growth in grace and in knowledge are deficient, 
and cannot hope to make their calling and election 
sure. 

But seeming to understand that some would question 
the possibility of their gaining so great a prize, 
the holy spirit, through the Apostle, gives to this 
called and chosen class a word of special encouragement, 
saying, "For if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall." There may be more or less stumbling on the 
part of the elect, not through weakness of the spirit, 



the heart, the new mind, but "through manifold temptations" 

of the flesh, the earthen vessel, in which 

temporarily resides the new creature, begotten of the 

spirit, the elect. The Apostle proceeds to give further 

assurances, saying, "For so an entrance shall be ministered 

unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom 

of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." The elect 

will not be received of the Lord with chidings and upbraidings 

for the imperfections of the flesh, which 

were unwillingly theirs, but on the contrary all the 



*The word "spiritual" is omitted in this verse as spurious, 
by old MSS. It is the flesh that is sacrificed, not the new creature. 

R2727 : page 346 

weaknesses of the flesh will be ignored, and the intents 
of the heart alone will be judged, and the heart-character 
formed will alone be tested and approved; and 
this will determine whether or not we shall stand the 
Lord's approval and be granted the glorious things 
which he has promised to them that love him— "glory, 
honor and immortality" and a share in the Kingdom 
and its work of blessing. 

"He that hath this [election] hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure." But 
how is it with those who have not this hope, and who 
are totally ignorant of this election,— even tho they 
be Christians, in the sense of believing in the Lord 
Jesus Christ as their Redeemer? Surely they are at a 
great disadvantage, lacking as they do the proper conception 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
which are the channel of the power of God working 
in the elect both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 

If we have seen that there is an elect class, it follows 
that there must be a non-elect class— those who 
are not making their calling and election sure, and it 
is proper in this connection that we see something respecting 
this class, and what provision God has made 
for them. This phase of the subject we reserve for 
our next issue. 



R2727 : page 346 

"SORROWFUL, FOR HE HAD GREAT POSSESSIONS. 

-MATT. 19:16-26.-DEC. 2.- 

"Children, how hard it is for them that trust in riches 
to enter into the Kingdom of God!"— Mark 10:24. 

OUR LESSON relates to what for centuries has 



been called "The Great Refusal." The rich 

young ruler, whose name is not given, altho possessed 

of an abundance of the things of this life longed for 

an assurance of everlasting life. As a Jew he knew the 

Law; he understood that God had made with this nation, 

and with no other, through Moses the mediator, 

a covenant, under which everlasting life might be attained. 

He perceived, however, that even the best men 

of his nation had failed to gain eternal life under this 

covenant— that all had died. He had heard of Jesus, 

and that "never man spake like this man," and he 

knew that in many respects his teachings were of a 

very positive character, and that his manner and instruction 

were not like those of the scribes and Pharisees, 

uncertain and equivocal;— that he taught as one 

having authority, and knowing what he taught to be 

true. He hesitated to go to this Teacher, but finally, 

seeing him leaving a house in his own neighborhood, 

he ran out hastily and point-blank put the question: 

"Good master, what good thing shall I do that I may 

have eternal [everlasting] life?" 

Instead of answering his question directly our Lord 
inquired why he thus addressed him as "good." Jesus' 
words do not imply, as some have surmised, a denial 
of being good. Rather, he would impress upon the 
young ruler the import of his own language, that when 
he got his answer he might appreciate it the more. 
Our Lord's words might be paraphrased thus: Are you 
addressing me as Good Master from the heart, or only 
as a complimentary salutation? If you really believe 
me to be good, you must believe in me as a teacher 
sent of God— the All-Good. More than this, you must 
believe my testimony, that I proceeded forth and came 
from God, that I am the Son of God. If my testimony 
is untrue in any particular I am not good at all, but a 
falsifier, a hypocrite, a blasphemer. If, then, you call 
me Good Master from the heart, and believe that I am 
the "sent of God," the Messiah, you will be the better 
prepared to receive my reply as the divine answer to 
that question. 

Without waiting to require that the young man 
should commit himself definitely on the point involved, 
but content with merely raising the issue in his mind, 
our Lord proceeded to answer the question. 

We are not to understand our Lord's answer to 
this young Jew, at a time when the Law Covenant was 
still in force, to be the same that he would give, or 
that we should give in his name, today, in reply to a 
similar inquiry. The young man was living under a 
covenant of works, of which the Apostle declares, quoting 
from the Law itself, "He that doeth these things 
shall live by them." (Lev. 18:5; Rom. 10:5.) The 
New Covenant had not yet been sealed with our Lord's 

R2728 : page 346 



precious blood, and hence it was not operative toward 
this young ruler or anybody else at this time. Our 
Lord could not properly direct the young man's attention 
to any other procedure than the keeping of the 
conditions of the Law Covenant which was still in force. 
Anyway, this was what the young man inquired: 
"What good thing must I do that I may have everlasting 
life?" It was for this reason that our Lord did not 
say, as we should say today in answer to such a question: 
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ— believe that he 
died for your sins, and arose for your justification, and 
accepting him as your Savior, as the Mediator of the 
New Covenant, present your life in full consecration of 
all its talents, powers and opportunities to the Lord's 
service. 

Our Lord did point out to the young man the only 
way to life everlasting then open— the keeping of the 
Law. He well knew that the young man could not 
keep this Law perfectly, and hence could not obtain 
everlasting life through it; but he would bring the matter 

R2728 : page 347 

before his attention in the most favorable form to 

be comprehended— without preaching the New Covenant 

or any other feature of the divine plan not yet due 

to be announced. Hence the form of his reply. 

The Law was divided into two parts or tables, the 
first relating to Jehovah and the second to the neighbor. 
Our Lord ignored the first of these, realizing that 
the young man, so far from desiring to make or worship 
idols or another god, was seeking to know and 
to do the will of the true God. Our Lord would bring 
the answer down to the simplest possible proposition, 
and hence referred merely to the commandments respecting 
duty toward his fellow-creatures, and got the 
response that so far as the young man had discerned 
the matter he had kept the Law; but altho he kept its 
outward form he realized that something was still lacking. 
He had no evidence that he had received any 
special blessing of eternal life, and wished to know of 
the Master what hindered, what he lacked of being a 
perfect man, keeping the Law and meriting the reward 
of that Law, life everlasting. No wonder Jesus, looking 
upon him, loved him; everybody who loves righteousness 
loves those who are righteous, or who are 
striving to the best of their ability to come up to the 
mark of righteousness,— perfection. 

THE GRACE OF ALL GRACES. 



Then Jesus told him plainly, "One thing thou 
lackest." You have been endeavoring to keep God's 
Law, and have done well, so far as the outward is concerned; 



but the spirit of the Law you have not apprehended 

at all— the spirit of the Law is Love. "The 

whole Law is comprehended briefly in one word." 

"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 13:9,10.) 

You have been getting the outside, or shell of the divine 

command, but have entirely overlooked the precious 

thing in it, the kernel, the essence,— love to God supremely 

and love toward your fellowman as toward 

yourself. Let me prove this to you, by suggesting that 

you demonstrate your love for your neighbors by disposing 

of your property for the assistance of poorer 

ones. Then consecrate your life in loving devotion to 

God's service, and come with me as my disciple, taking 

up the cross of self-denial thus involved. 

The test was a crucial one, and manifested clearly 
the distinction between the letter and the spirit of the 
Law. The cross was too heavy for the rich young ruler. 
He had gotten the answer to his question, but oh! it 
was so different from what he had anticipated. He 
had felt comparatively well satisfied with himself, altho 
realizing that something must still be lacking. He had 
rather expected Messiah's commendation, and perhaps 
some further advice, but nothing so radical. It was 
too much for him; he went away exceeding sorrowful, 
says Luke; his countenance fell, says Mark; it was 
a sore disappointment. For the time being he could 
not think of accepting the Master's prescription, the 
dose was too bitter, and he must at least think the 
matter over well. 

Whatever course this young ruler may have subsequently 
taken we are not informed; but of one thing 
we may be sure; he had learned a great lesson respecting 
the scope and significance of the Law. He had 
ascertained the impossibility of his attaining eternal 
life under the Law Covenant. 

It will be seen that we totally disagree with those 
who claim that the condition of this young man and our 
Lord's words to him apply to all young men or to those 
possessing wealth— tho the spirit of the matter is applicable 
to all, under the different conditions of the New 
Covenant. The New Covenant says to us, rich and poor, 
"Christ died for us, according to the Scriptures." He not 
only met the requirements of the Law, and fulfilled that 
Covenant and annulled it, but additionally he sealed 
and ratified the New Covenant under which he, its 
Mediator, can apply to all who come under its provisions 
through faith whatever share of his merit is necessary 
to make good the weaknesses and imperfections 
of our flesh to which our hearts, our minds, do not assent. 
Accordingly, even if when some come to Jesus 
to inquire the way of eternal life, they should be unable 
to say, as did this young ruler, "All these things 
have I done from my youth up,"— if it should be even 
necessary for such to confess with shame, "All these 
commandments have I violated," nevertheless, the provisions 
of the New Covenant are such that even the 



vilest sinner who has turned from sin and who at heart 
desires henceforth to walk in the way of righteousness, 
and who, repenting of the sins of the past, gladly makes 
such restitution as is within his power— all such are 
accepted in the Beloved One, and reckoned as justified 
freely from all things, from which the Law could not 
justify them. 

Then such are invited, as was the young ruler, to 
come, take up their cross, and follow Jesus— come, 
prove, demonstrate, their love for righteousness, their 
devotion to God and every feature of his will; come, 
crucify self and selfishness, and receive into their hearts 
instead the spirit of God, the spirit of holiness, the 
spirit of love. Not merely to love their neighbors in 
word, but in deed and in truth, so that so far from wishing 
to steal from them, or to kill them, or bear false witness 
against them, or to do any other evil toward them, 
their hearts' desire would be the reverse of these, to do 
them good, to bless them. God is Love; the spirit of 
his Law is Love; and the spirit of his faithful Son, Jesus, 
is Love. Love is the holy spirit, of which the Apostle 
declares, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ 

R2728 : page 348 

[love, in some measure] he is none of his." Under 

the New Covenant, if the heart be full of love, it is acceptable 

with God even tho the heart may not be able 

at all times to control the flesh in respect to every 

thought and word and act, and to show forth through 

it this holy spirit of love which rules paramount in 

the heart. 

The New Covenant is God's agreement, under which 
he accepts, through Christ, the intentions of our hearts 
as tho the same were actually and fully demonstrated 
in our lives; and certainly our hearts' desires will find 
expression through the flesh in large measure, tho not 
always perfectly. Thus our hearts may to some extent 
be read by our fellowmen, tho not perfectly, while to 
our heavenly Father they are an open book. Moreover, 
the love which enters and fills our hearts expands them 
and crowds out more and more of the natural and selfish 
propensities, crossing this natural, or earthly will 
with the heavenly one, the new mind. Thus gradually 
making progress in the new way, the Lord's saints are 
growing in knowledge and in grace, and more and more 
are having the love of God shed abroad in their hearts. 

"TRUST NOT IN UNCERTAIN RICHES." 



Our Lord took advantage of this episode to impart 
a lesson to his disciples, showing them the danger of 
riches— any kind of riches, honor of men, political influence, 
many and large talents or abilities, social standing, 



fine education and material wealth— for one may 
be rich in any of these senses. "It is hard for a rich 
man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven." (Revised 
Version.) Our Lord does not here undertake to explain 
why there would be greater difficulties for those possessing 
riches to enter into his Kingdom, but from other 
scriptures we learn the reasons, and why it is that the 
heirs of the Kingdom will be chiefly found amongst 
the poorer classes. "Ye see your calling, brethren, 
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many 
mighty, not many noble are called; but God hath 
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the 
mighty." (1 Cor. 1:26,27; Jas. 2:5.) The rich are 
"called," in one sense of the word, but not in another; 
they are equally invited but they are much less likely 
(than others who are poorer) to accept the Lord's invitation 
and to present themselves according to the 
terms of the Kingdom call. In this sense of the word 
"called" only those who accept the call are meant; and 
they then divide themselves into two classes— those 
who make their calling and election sure, and obtain 
the Kingdom, obtain a part in the first resurrection to 
glory, honor and immortality, obtain a place with Messiah 
in his throne, to share with him in his Millennial 
Kingdom; and others who do not make their calling 
and election sure, either by becoming reprobates, and 
subjects of the Second Death, or by a failure to manifest 
a sufficiency of zeal in the race for the prize, and 
on this account being remanded to the class known as 
the "great company," who must come through great 
tribulation, washing their robes in the blood of the 
Lamb.-Rev. 7:9-15. 

It is well that we note carefully what are the hindrances 
of these "rich," preventing them from having 
so favorable an opportunity as their (in earthly respects) 
less favored brethren. (1) The possession of 

R2729 : page 348 

earthly good things, "riches," is less favorable to the 
development of faith, without which it is impossible 
to be pleasing to God. (2) These earthly advantages 
are more likely to develop pride, a serious barrier to 
every grace, and an impossible barrier as respects the 
Kingdom, which can be attained only through humility. 
(3) Riches of any kind bring with them friends 
and associates of the earth, whose hearts being generally 
out of sympathy with the Lord and the Kingdom 
will constitute them adversaries to the new mind, from 
whose influence it will be the more difficult to break 
completely away. (4) And summing up all of the 
foregoing, those possessed of such earthly riches have 
proportionately more to sacrifice than those who are 
poorer in these respects; and the greater the things 
sacrificed the greater the difficulty in performing the 
sacrifice. 



However, on the other hand, it may be said that 
whenever one who is rich in this world's goods (talents, 
etc.) does present himself a living sacrifice to the Lord 
and his service it witnesses to a deeper heart-loyalty 
than if he were poorer. It implies a greater sacrifice, 
and it implies also the exercise of greater opportunities 
in the Lord's service. The servant who has five talents 
and who uses them faithfully, and doubles them, 
accomplishes a greater work than the servant who, having 
one talent, uses it faithfully and doubles it, and 
our Lord's understanding of this matter is shown in 
the fact that according to the parable the one will have 
granted to him authority over ten cities, and the other 
authority over two, altho both will be commended— 
"Well done, good, faithful servant. "-Matt. 25:14-30. 

If we would look for illustrations showing wherein 
the rich (in talents, etc.) have been faithful, we would 
find at the head of the list our Lord himself, "who was 
rich, but for our sakes became poor." As he was richer 
than all others in every sense of the word, so proportionately 
his sacrifice was greater than that of all others 
in every sense of the word, and his honor, glory and 
power are greater. "He is Lord of all." "Him hath 
God highly exalted and given a name that is above 
every name." Similarly the Apostle Paul was rich— 
if not in money and property, he was at least rich in 
education, in social advantages and privileges, and in 

R2729 : page 349 

life's opportunities; and we may say that since the 
Apostle so faithfully sacrificed all these earthly riches 
for the sake of the privilege of preaching the Gospel of 
Christ, his must have been a much larger sacrifice than 
that of the majority of men: and proportionately we 
anticipate that his reward in the Kingdom will be great 
because he counted these earthly "riches" but "loss and 
dross that he might win Christ and be found in him [a 
member of the Anointed One]."— Phil. 3:8,9. 

So then, while we call attention to the fact that 
few will be in the Kingdom who have had great opportunities, 
privileges, property or other "riches" of this 
world, we nevertheless encourage those who possess 
this world's goods of any kind, to consider that they 
thus hold within their grasp grand opportunities which 
rightly used will yield riches of grace, not only in the 
life that now is but also in the life that is to come; 
working out for them a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, proportionate to their sacrifices and 
faithfulness in their stewardship. 

We cannot wonder that the disciples were astonished 
to learn that few of the rich would enter the Kingdom, 
for did they not see on every hand that the rich 
had the more important places in the synagogues and 
in the offices of the Jewish system? Did they not see 
that comparatively few of the poor in this world's goods 



were rated amongst the saints? No wonder they inquired, 
where would the Kingdom class be found, if 
the rich were excluded? How, then, could the salvation 
which God had promised should come through his 
Kingdom ever be attained? 

The time for explaining these features of the divine 
plan having not yet come, our Lord contented himself 
with merely assuring the disciples that they must leave 
such a question to the Father; that the truth of his 
statement did not imply that no Kingdom could be 
formed, but that with God the matter was possible, and 
that his original promise to Abraham would be fulfilled, 
a Kingdom class be selected, and the blessing of salvation 
be communicated through it. To have told them 
of the rejection of the Jewish nation, all except the 
"remnant" of believers, mainly the poor, and to have 
explained to them that the elect Church, the elect Seed 
of Abraham, would be completed from amongst the 
Gentiles, of a similarly poor class as respects this world's 
advantages, would have been going beyond what was 
then due to be explained,— beyond what the disciples 
would have been able to comprehend at that time; and 
hence our Lord, using the true wisdom from above, 
refrained from saying more than would be to their advantage 
to know— leaving such information, as he explained 
to them subsequently, for unfoldment to them 
by the Comforter— the holy spirit which would come 
upon them at Pentecost— John 14:26. 



R2729 : page 349 

ENTREATY ANSWERED-BLIND EYES OPENED. 

MARK 10:46-52.-DEC. 9. 

"Lord, that I might receive my sight." 

WHILE PASSING along a road in the vicinity of 
Jericho, possibly going from the old city to 
the newer one of the same name, a great multitude 
following him, our Lord passed by two blind men, 
sitting begging by the wayside. (Mark mentions only 
one, the chief subject of the lesson, but Matthew mentions 
a companion.) Bartimeus, one of the two, as 
he heard the multitude passing and learned from some 
of them that they accompanied Jesus, the reputed 
Messiah, of whom he had no doubt heard before, was 
struck with the fact that his opportunity for a blessing 
was near at hand and rapidly passing from him. He 
began to cry out, his voice rising above the din of the 
multitude, saying, "Jesus, thou Son of David, have 
mercy on me!" 

Our Lord paid no heed at first, but passed on. The 
multitude rebuked the blind man, so to speak, saying, 



"You, poor beggar, should not thus cry out and annoy 
and seek to take the attention of so great a one as this, 
whom we verily believe to be the Messiah, and whose 
mission is the establishment of God's Kingdom; keep 
quiet!" But so much the more did he cry out for 
mercy. He longed for sight, and had faith to believe 
that the great Messiah might be prevailed upon to 
rescue him from darkness. Jesus stopped and gave 
the word to the multitude to bring the blind man to 
him. He might have gone to the blind man, or he 
might have lifted up his voice and spoken to the blind 
man, bidding him to come; but instead he chose to use 
instrumentalities— to give those about him an opportunity 
of sharing in the work of blessing. So the word 
was passed from one to another, and the blind man was 
helped forward and thus greater attention was brought 
to the whole miracle and to the divine power which it 
manifested. Those who had but a moment before upbraided 
the blind man for his temerity in expecting a 
blessing from the Messiah, now gladly bore the message 
of hope to him, saying, "Be of good cheer! arise; he 
calleth thee." And he sprang up, casting away his 
outer robe that he might go the more quickly to Jesus 
for the blessing. 

Everything connected with the case shows us that 
Bartimeus possessed a large amount of faith, and that 
he was very earnestly desirous of the blessing which 

R2729 : page 350 

he received. When he came to Jesus, altho the latter 
knew well his desire, he inquired respecting it. He 
would have the blind man express himself respecting 
his hopes and desires. He answered, "Rabboni, that 
I may receive my sight!" The word "lord" here is 
"rabboni," the most reverential term of four titles 
used amongst the Jews at that time (rab, rabbi, rabban, 
rabboni). Then Jesus touched his eyes (Matt. 20:34), 
saying, "Go thy way; thy faith hath made 
thee whole." Sight came immediately, and Bartimeus 
became one of the followers of Jesus. 

The lesson itself is a very beautiful one in demonstration 
of the Lord's tender compassion and divine 
power; and from its incidents we might draw other 
lessons, parallels, as it were. For instance, sin brought 
alienation from God, and moral blindness, which prevails 
today in every land and on every hand. The 
Apostle thus pictures some of the heathen, desirous of 
having the light of truth, as blind men groping after 
things desired. He speaks of such as crying out to 
the Lord in prayer, and "feeling after God, if haply 
they might find him;" just as Bartimeus had cried out 
to the Lord and then went to him. And as Bartimeus 
cast away his outer robe that he might go to the Lord 
the more speedily, so the sinner should cast away 
everything found to be a hindrance— he should make 



acknowledgement and repentance of sins, and he should 
make restitution also as far as possible, and thus approach 
the Lord. 

And such, when their eyes are opened to see the 
blessings of God bestowed upon them, should look, 

R2730 : page 350 

as Bartimeus looked, first into the face of the Savior 

with gratitude and appreciation, and look unto the 

Father through him. Indeed, their eyes being opened 

by the word of truth, they will gradually come to see 

everything in a new light, and be able to say, "Old 

things [of darkness and sin] are passed away; all things 

are become new"— lighted by the knowledge of God; 

for we have been "translated out of darkness into marvelous 

light." It is unnecessary to add that such 

transformed sinners should thenceforth follow Jesus as 

his disciples, seeking to walk in his steps. 

Another lesson might profitably be drawn from 
this narrative. Bartimeus was not a sinner, in the 
sense of being an alien, stranger, foreigner and outcast 
from the divine favor. He was a member of the household 
of faith, an Israelite, to whom belonged the promises 
and the covenants, etc. (Rom. 9:4); yet he was 
blind. And so there are today in spiritual Israel many 
who are not sinners, strangers, aliens from God, but 
members of the household of faith and heirs of the 
promises, who are mentally, spiritually, blind. They 
are blind to the goodness of God as it shines in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord: they do not appreciate 
the love of God, having been blinded thereto by false 
theories and traditions of men. Because of their blindness 
they are unable to "comprehend with all saints 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths and 
to know the love of Christ," as they should do. Perhaps 
some of them are accountable to some extent for 
their own blindness, and quite possibly others are in 
no measure responsible. 

We notice that in the case of Bartimeus Jesus did 
not inquire respecting his responsibility for his condition. 
It was sufficient that he realized that he was 
blind, and that he earnestly desired from the heart to 
receive his sight, and that he demonstrated this by his 
prayers and his efforts to obtain sight. So today, to 
those spiritual Israelites who are blind to the beauties 
and harmonies of the divine character and plan, if they 
are willing to admit their blindness, and so anxious 
for the light that they will cry aloud and not be dissuaded 
from their good desires, they will undoubtedly 
get the blessing they crave, the opening of their eyes 
of understanding, that they may be able to understand 
"the deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:10-12. 

We see many blind people of this latter sort today. 
Nearly all of the nominal churches are full of 
them. But alas! the vast majority are unlike Bartimeus 



—they do not realize their condition nor hunger 
and thirst for the light, nor come to the Master in the 
humble attitude necessary to receive it. Their pitiable 
condition is described by the Lord himself (Rev. 3:17) 
under the name Laodicea. He tells why they do not 
receive their sight— why they cannot comprehend the 
lengths and breadths and depths of divine love: "Because 
thou sayest, I am rich and increased in goods, 
and have need of nothing, and knowest not that thou 
art wretched and miserable and poor and blind and 
naked." 

As it was not within the power of the multitude 
to give Bartimeus his sight, neither is it within our 
power to give sight to the spiritually blind. All we 
can do is to let the blind ones know that Jesus of Nazareth 
passeth by— that the great Physician is able and 
willing to grant them the opening of the eyes of their 
understanding. Those who long for sight, who love 
the truth, who hate darkness and error, and none 
others, will be attracted by the information, and lift 
up their voices in supplication for assistance. But, 
alas! when they do cry aloud for help there are sure 
to be some, even amongst the Lord's friends, to rebuke 
them for their earnestness, instead of encouraging it. 
However, such oppositions only serve to demonstrate 
the amount of faith and the measure of love for the 
light, and the Lord evidently intends that only those 
who seek for truth "as men search for silver" shall find 
the knowledge of God.— Prov. 2:4. 

R2730 : page 351 

When the faith and earnestness of the seeker for 
light have been sufficiently demonstrated the Master 
will grant him the opportunities he desires. Nevertheless 
he will require that even in their blindness all 
shall manifest and exercise faith, and come to him 
through evil report as well as through good report, to 
receive the enlightenment sought. And when they 
obey thus they surely receive a good reward in their 
appreciation of the Lord's character and plan. From 
this new standpoint they can sing with the spirit and 
with the understanding also,— 

"How happy and blessed the hours, 
Since Jesus I always can see; 

Sweet prospects, sweet birds and sweet flowers 
Have all gained new sweetness for me." 
They will surely acknowledge that whatever their joys 
in the Lord previously they are multiplied by the 
opening of the eyes of their understanding. And is it 
surprising that such will follow the Lord? Nay, verily! 
How could we do otherwise than "show forth the 
praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light"?— 1 Pet. 2:9. 



R2730 : page 351 

ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH RESTORED. 

--LUKE 19:1-10.-DEC. 16.- 

"The Son of Man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost." 

ZACCHAEUS was a Jew and a chief publican, 
which signifies that he was in the employ of 
the Roman government as a tax-gatherer, a very lucrative 
office, but one greatly despised amongst the Jews, 
because (1) their views of patriotism led them to resent 
the service of their conquerors; (2) their tax-gatherers 
collected for a per centage of the tax, and were at the 
same time assessors of the amount of the tax, and 
charged (probably generally with good reason), with 
gross violations of justice— taking advantage of their 
position and of the necessities of their neighbors to reap 
large usury by advancing them money for the tax and 
requiring superabundant security for both tax and 
usury. Publicans, then, it will be seen, were a disreputable 
class amongst their own people, esteemed as 
financially immoral, and unworthy the confidence and 
honor of faithful Jews. Zacchaeus as a "chief" probably 
employed under-collectors to assist him in his contract, 
and for this reason was designated chief publican. 

He had heard of Jesus evidently, and curiosity and 
possibly other nobler sentiments operated in his heart 
and led him to desire to see the great Teacher. Possibly 
indeed he had qualms of conscience respecting his business 
and business methods, and a longing for peace 
with God, which his riches could not take the place of. 
These nobler and better thoughts and aspirations were 
quickened as he found himself in the presence of the 
celebrated Nazarene, of whose holiness and exalted 
teachings he had heard. Quite probably, too, he had 
heard that, unlike the Pharisees, this great Teacher did 
not spurn publicans and sinners, but, on the contrary, 
treated them kindly. Zacchaeus sought a glimpse of 
the Master's face, but there being a throng in the way, 
and he being of small stature, could not discern him. 
There was a throng anyway at this season, going up to 
the Passover, and so notable a person as Jesus would 
always be an attraction. 

Zacchaeus soon resolved what to do, for he was a 
resourceful man; he would run ahead and climb into 
a tree, and thus get a good view of the Master. We 
cannot help admiring the courage of this little rich 
man, ordinarily probably dignified enough in his bearing, 
but now his heart swelling with feelings of interest 
in righteousness and a desire for reconciliation with 
God, and ran along like a boy and climbed the tree. 
When Jesus and the multitude came to the place the 



Lord addressed Zacchaeus by name, possibly by that 
power of knowledge which is beyond our comprehension; 
or possibly by reason of hearing the crowd jeer 
and laugh at the little rich publican in his lugubrious 
position. 

How astonished he must have been when the Master 
said, "Zacchaeus, come down, for I must lodge at 
thy house!" So great an honor as this Zacchaeus had 
not dreamed of, and the multitude of Jews were likewise 
surprised. The latter murmured against Jesus 
because he, as a holy man, should have nothing whatever 
to do with this publican. Perhaps it was in part 
to give the Pharisees a lesson, as well as to provide for 
his own entertainment or to put himself in the way of 
Zacchaeus, that our Lord proposed this visit to the 
publican's house. In any event, nothing could have 
pleased the serious thinking little man more. He came 
down from the tree immediately, and joyfully took Jesus 
(and the disciples also we may presume) to his 
home for entertainment. Thus does the Lord look for 
and care for and assist those who are of a contrite heart 
—those who are feeling after God, and longing, as prodigals, 
to return to the Father's house. Had Zacchaeus 
been of other condition of heart we may reasonably 
presume that our Lord would have paid no attention 
to him whatever. 

What a surging of sentiment took place in the 
heart of little Zacchaeus! His name in the Hebrew 
comes from a root signifying pure, and the inference is 
not unreasonable that his ancestors had been noble and 
holy people, and that back of his love for money and 
dishonest practices lay good principles, which now, 
under favorable conditions, were asserting themselves 
and clamoring for a change of life,— worrying his conscience 
and embittering all his pleasures and causing 

R2731 : page 352 

him to long for righteousness in his own heart and life. 

In no other way can we account for his sudden determination 

to reform. Nor was he content merely to determine 

upon reform in his heart; he would seal the 

matter by a public confession. As we read, he stood 

forth in the presence of his own family, in the presence 

of Jesus and his disciples, and probably numerous 

friends and neighbors who had gone along, and publicly 

acknowledged that he had gained part of his 

wealth by unjust exactions, and pledged himself to restore 

all such wrongfully obtained money, to the extent 

of his ability, fourfold. More than this, realizing that 

there were probably many cases of small injustices 

which it would be impossible for him to ever correct in 

detail, he publicly pledged one-half of all his possessions 

to the poor in off-set of these. 

Noble Zacchaeus! Well did his conduct show that 
the Master knew what he was doing when he went to 



lodge with this little man, so much despised by some 
of the Pharisees. Jesus knew that notwithstanding his 
wrong course of life he was much nearer to the right 
attitude of heart than some of the self-righteous who 
denounced him— altho outwardly they were living a 
cleaner life and a more moral one— making clean the 
outside of the cup while inwardly it was full of vile 
affections and selfishness, abominations in God's sight. 

Our Lord's reply is striking: "This day is salvation 
come to this house; forasmuch as he also is a son 
of Abraham." While it is true that "salvation is to be 
brought unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ"— at his second advent— it is nevertheless 
true also that this salvation begins in the present life 
to all who are of the spiritual house of Israel, who, repenting 
of their sins, come into harmony with the Lord, 
and seek to walk according to his ways. It is a salvation 
of the heart, reclaiming it from sin and selfishness 
and meanness— filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit." 
-2 Cor. 7:1. 

This salvation means reformation and transformation; 
and while the Lord can read the heart and see 
there more than men can see respecting the change, 
yet, as Brother D.L. Moody suggests, the change, the 
conversion, the transformation of life, must have been 
appreciable even by the most unsympathetic of Zacchaeus' 
neighbors when, the next morning after this event, 
Zacchaeus' servant presented himself to the neighbor 
with a purse of money, and when asked what it was 
for replied, "My master says that he extorted from you 
a sum of money years ago, and now returns it fourfold." 
The conversion that includes recompense— and 
that not merely in a skimped manner but abundantly 
—four-fold— undoubtedly signifies a true conversion, 
one that is not likely soon to be forgotten or ignored. 

We might find parallels to this incident, which 
belonged to the end of the Jewish age and to fleshly 
Israel, in the end of this age and to spiritual Israel. 
We find today some backsliders from the Lord's Covenant 
of Grace, as Zacchaeus was a backslider from the 
Lord's Covenant of the Law. We may perhaps find 
them living in a measure of sin, in business which they 
admit is unjust and in violation of their consciences. 
We are not, therefore, to pass by them with the Gospel 
message, the good tidings of great joy; but if any such 
manifest an interest in the present truth we are to seek 
to assist them as our Lord and Head assisted Zacchaeus. 
And there is an encouragement to this class in Zacchaeus' 
case, for tho they may feel themselves sadly short 
of the stature of a man in Christ, if they have in their 
hearts a longing desire for righteousness and to behold 
the Lord's face, they will find opportunity to do so, if 
they will but humble themselves to take the necessary 
steps. And sincere reformation today must be like 
that of Zacchaeus; it must make some outward manifestation 
expressive of contrition and of a desire to 



make reparation to the extent of ability. Some one 
has said, and quite truly, we think:— 

"No religious profession amounts to anything if it 
does not include a readiness to put one's property at 
the service of the Lord. It has been well said that 
'a personal consecration' should be spelled 'a purse-and-all 
consecration.' And the full restitution of all 
that had been taken wrongfully must be made by a 
Christian disciple— even to the stripping of himself of 
all his earthly goods." 



R2731 : page 352 

CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



We have a choice assortment of Scripture and Motto Text 
Cards of our own importation from London. Some are of dark 
red and dark green color, assorted shapes and sizes, embossed 
with silver lettering and with hanging cords; others on light 
tinted cards with flowers or other illumination, etc. The mottoes 
are too numerous to specify but all good. The prices range 
from five cents to twenty cents each: and these prices are considerably 
less than the usual. 

Another drawback has been the difficulty in preparing 
small quantities for mail, so as to prevent their getting damaged. 
We believe we can best surmount all these difficulties by putting 
them up in $1.00 packages as follows:— 

2 mottoes dark, 5c each 10 

2 " light, 5c " 10 

2 " dark, 10c " 20 

3 " " 20c" 60 

2 "To Us the Scriptures Teach" 10 

2 Text Easels, 2c each 04 

4 Text Cards 08 

Total 1.22 

Postage and packing free. 

We will put these up in four different 
-A,B,C,D,- 
assortments, so that persons ordering more than one package 
need not get duplicates except the fifth item. If you order 
more than one package and want variety, say so. 

Importing these ourselves and saving jobbers' profits and 
saving time, etc., by packing them in this way, we can afford to 
supply these bundles for the price named, one dollar. We 
would not offer them were we not sure that our readers will 
appreciate them and thank us for bringing them to their attention. 
The card marked above, "To Us the Scriptures Clearly 
Teach," is our own get up, of rose pink color printed in maroon 
ink, size 1 1x14 inches, with silk cord hanger. On one 
side is the statement which appears at top of page 2 of each 
WATCH TOWER in good sized type. It is a statement of Bible 
faith which none need feel ashamed of; and which should be 



seen in the homes of all WATCH TOWER readers. We have gotten 
out a large quantity and can therefore supply them very 
cheaply,— at five cents each (plus five cents for tube and postage). 
In lots of 20 for $1.00 postage free. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. DECEMBER 1, 1900. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 

What Hope for the Innumerable 

Non-Elect? 355 

No Condemnation Possible Until 

After Trial 357 

The Ultimate End of the Commandment 

is Love 358 

Claiming, Receiving and Administering 

a Kingdom 361 

"Thou Crownest the Year with Thy 

Goodness" 364 

"No Weapon Formed Against Thee 

Shall Prosper" 365 

Questions and Answers 368 

Items: About Tower Subscriptions, etc 354 

page 354 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



TAKE HEED HOW YOU SEND. 

This is the season at which our mails are largest and when 
money enclosed in letters not "registered" is apt to greatly 
tempt Post Office employees to dishonesty. Remember therefore 



that if you cannot procure a Money Order or Express Order 
or Bank draft, money sent should be registered. 

ABOUT RENEWING YOUR Z.W.T. SUBSCRIPTION. 

We hope to have our lists grow larger and larger each year. 
We are anxious that the names of all interested in "present 
truth" should be on our lists, and that thus they may share 
with us the spiritual food now being dispensed by our present 
Lord. We do not urge you to renew, tho we will be glad to have 
you continue with us to the very close of this warfare. All we 
feel it proper to do is to make our terms so reasonable as to leave 
no valid excuse for any to go without this spiritual food if he 
has an appetite for it. For instance, If you cannot conveniently 
send the cash in advance let us know of your desire to have it 
on credit— and pay when you can: remembering that should 
you never be able to pay you can have the debt canceled at 
any time upon request, stating your inability. 

"THE LORD'S POOR" SHOULD ALSO RENEW. 

Send us a postal card this month informing us that you desire 
the visits of the WATCH TOWER continued, and that you are 
still unable to pay for it; and it will go to you as freely, gladly, 
as to those who pay. Indeed all such subscriptions are paid 
out of a fund specially provided for the purpose. Do not fear 
to accept this portion of the Lord's provision for your spiritual 
nourishment. We much prefer that so far as possible renewals 
reach us in DECEMBER. 



R2732 : page 355 
WHAT HOPE FOR THE INNUMERABLE NON-ELECT? 



[Continued from our last issue, "Make 
Sure of Winning in God's Election."] 

IN OUR LAST ISSUE we found abundant Scripture 
evidence that God is selecting a little flock 
from amongst mankind to be joint heirs with our Lord 
Jesus in the Millennial Kingdom. That fact being 
proven, it cannot be questioned that all the remainder 
of mankind are non-elect. The question now is, What 
provision has the great Creator made for this class- 
numbering at least fifty thousands of millions of all the 
families of the earth? Is this condition hopeless or not? 

According to orthodoxy it is hopeless— the theory 
being that all the non-elect of mankind were predestinated 
by God to be sufferers of eternal torment; but 
we find no Scripture whatever in support of such a 
theory. So surely as God did elect or predestinate 
an elect class he must equally have predestinated and 



foreordained that there would be a non-elect class. 
And to suppose that he foreordained that this non-elect 
class should suffer eternal torment would be to suppose 
God a monster, devoid of every sentiment of justice, 
not to mention love. And if God did not foreordain 
the non-elect to eternal torment, neither could he have 
authorized any to use eternal torment as a threat 
against the non-elect— neither to intimidate them nor 
for any other purpose. Indeed, what object could 
there be on God's part in endeavoring to scare the 
world of mankind into striving to be of the elect little 
flock, when he had already predestinated that only a 
small number comparatively could be of this elect 
flock? The whole matter, viewed from any such 
standpoint, is unreasonable. 

Let us notice, on the contrary, that this eternal 
torment theory may properly be charged with nearly 
every deflection from the doctrine of the necessity for 
holiness of life on the part of God's people. Everyone 
who has read with care the Scriptures already 
cited which refer to the elect class must realize that 
the standard which God has set "for the very elect" 
is a very high standard; and that comparatively few- 
saints only— ever attain to that high standard. All 
will acknowledge that very few of their friends and 
neighbors, parents and children, brothers and sisters, 
husbands and wives, who have died, could have any 
hope of being in the "elect class," according to the 
high standard for that class set in the Scriptures: and 
yet the awfulness of the theory they hold respecting 
the non-elect has driven them to so modify the standard 
of Christian living that would be acceptable to 
God as to include these dear friends. Thus day by 
day, and century by century, as deaths occur in 
every family connection, the tendency, under the influence 
of the popular error of eternal torment, is to 
lower in the minds of all Christian people the standard 
of true holiness,— "What manner of persons ought 
we to be." The funeral discourses in nearly every 
case help forward this work of undermining the Christian 
standard, and dropping it to a worldly level of 
morality— and scarcely even that; because even persons 
who are notoriously immoral, unjust, extortionists, 
etc., and who have very little indeed to commend 
them, are felt to be not sufficiently bad to be eternally 
tormented; and under the theory that they must go 
either to a heaven of eternal bliss or to a hell of eternal 
torment, they are, in their neighbors' minds, admitted 
generously to the former rather than consigned 
to the latter. 

What incalculable harm has been introduced into 
the faith and hopes of Christendom through this God 
dishonoring doctrine of eternal torment, which implicates 

R2732 : page 356 



the great Jehovah as the chiefest coadjutor of 
Satan,— the planner, the designer of all his accredited 
devilishness, the one without whose cooperation Satan 
could not have done all that he, as ordinarily pictured, 
has done and is doing,— dominating a host of fireproof 
and pain-proof devils, pitchforks in hand, tormenting 
millions of humanity, delivered into their 
power by the Almighty, and by some inscrutable power 
rendered fire-proof but not pain-proof. 

THE GENEROSITY COMMENDABLE BUT THE THEORY 
WRONG. 

We cannot but sympathize with the greater generosity 
of our day which is gradually coming to disown 
such a theory, and we must also sympathize with 
that sentiment which has sought to rescue from such 
an awful future the loved ones of the present life, 
however evil and injurious they may have been. But 
while this increase of benevolence is commendable it is 
bringing the remedy from the wrong quarter. It is 
bringing a remedy which, while it is to some extent 
consoling to the heart momentarily, nevertheless leaves 
a terrible fear, lest peradventure the high standards 
of the Scripture may be required, and that all not 
coming up to them will suffer excruciatingly. In others 
it leads to doubts, not only respecting the eternal torment, 
but also respecting the eternal bliss: and additionally 
it casts serious doubt upon the Book of 
divine revelation which is the only foundation for 
heavenly hopes, because they believe it to be also the 
authority for their "hellish fears." 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES RESPECTING THE 
NON-ELECT? 

In the Scriptures the non-elect are of two classes: 
First: Those who in the present life were (1) enlightened, 
(2) justified through faith, (3) called, and 
accepting the call were sanctified and begotten of the 
holy spirit, and started on the course with a view to 
making their calling and election sure— but who have 
not made it sure, but on the contrary have failed, by 
not coming fully up to the requirements. 

This class in turn is Scripturally divided into two 
parties:— 

(a) Those who sin wilfully after that they have 
received a knowledge of the truth, and been made 
partakers of the holy spirit, etc. For those there remaineth 
no more a share in the sacrifice of Christ- 
no further mercy, opportunity or hope. To them the 
result is the Second Death— nonentity.— Heb. 6:4-6; 
10:26,27. 

(b) The other class consists of those who, while 

at heart preferring righteousness and truth, and loving 
the Lord, have not become copies of God's dear 



Son, in that they fail to attain to his Spirit of full 
devotion of heart to the doing of the Father's will- 
rather they permit themselves to become overcharged 
with the cares of this life and the deceitfulness of 
riches, and thus fail to complete that sacrifice according 
to their covenant, and hence fail to make their 
calling and their election sure. For these the Lord 
has a gracious provision, as suggested in Rev. 7:13-15. 
They will not be utterly confounded, because they have 
trusted in him (Psa. 22:5), and he will surely carry them 
through. Yet the Lord's intervention on their behalf 
must be strictly along the lines of his covenant and 
general plan— he cannot interfere with their free moral 
agency; he will not coerce their wills, but he can and 
will bring them to such a place of experience as will 
test them and compel them either to renounce their 
loyalty to him or to seal that loyalty with their lives. 
Those who renounce the Lord will, of course, in so doing 
bring upon themselves the penalty of the Second 
Death, but those who, under such compulsory circumstances, 
are faithful, cannot be counted as of the same 
likeness with God's dear Son, who, without compulsion, 
voluntarily gave up his life in the Father's service. 
The little flock of the elect Church will contain 
all of this class, and to them will be granted the Kingdom, 
and to sit with Christ in his throne, and to be 
the Temple of God and to have the crowns. (Rev. 3:21; 
1 Pet. 5:4.) But the others, who will "come up 
out of great tribulation," having washed their robes 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, altho 
they will have suffered equally as much as the elect 
(more indeed, if the mental conditions are taken into 
consideration) will not get a crown of victory, but a 
palm of victory; will not get a seat in the throne with 
their Lord, as his Bride, but nevertheless an honorable 
place before the throne as servants. They will 
not become pillars and stones in the living Temple of 
God, but they will have the honorable privilege of 
serving God in his Temple, the Church. 

This class is not prominently referred to in the 
Scriptures, nor in the types and symbols even; because 
none were called to this position, but, as the 
Apostle declares, "Ye were all called in one hope of 
your calling"— to the highest place of joint heirship. 
(Eph. 4:4.) The position attained by these is an unpromised 
one, of the Lord's abundant mercy. 

Second: The second class of non-elect from the 
Scriptural viewpoint is the world of mankind, including 
three classes:— 

(a) It includes those who have never had any 
knowledge of God's provision of grace in Christ, and 
who consequently could not have gone on further to 
be of the called elect class of this age. 

(b) It includes those who have heard of the 

R2733 : page 357 



grace of God, but in that indistinct, indefinite manner 
which does not bring conviction— those who have 
seen in Jesus something wonderful and great and admirable, 
but who have never seen him from the Lord's 
standpoint of Redeemer and Savior— their eyes being 
blinded to the manifold evil influences of "the god of 
this world," business or pleasure or love of money or 
distracting religious dogmas. These, not having seen 
and not having accepted Christ as the Redeemer, could 
go no further and by no possibility could they have 
been amongst those called to the election of this Gospel 
age. 

(c) It includes those who have heard of Christ 
as the Redeemer, and have appreciated him as 
such, and have accepted him as their Savior; but 
who like the nine of the ten lepers cleansed by 
our Lord at his first advent, thought not to return to 
give glory to God— thought not to present their bodies 
living sacrifices in his service. These having 
reached the point of justification were, undoubtedly, 
amongst the ones called; but they failed to 
make their calling and election sure, not caring to respond 
to the call. Of this class, apparently, are the 
thousands, the masses of church members of the various 
sects. They are glad for what they see, but not 
anxious to see any more, as, intuitively, they realize 
that further knowledge would bring greater responsibilities, 
which they desire to avoid and not even to 
think much about. 

These last mentioned "receive the grace of God 
[the privilege of justification] in vain." (2 Cor. 6:1.) 
The intention of this reckoned or faith justification 
of the present time is to enable the justified ones to 
present their "bodies living sacrifices, holy, and acceptable 
to God," their reasonable service; because 
they could not be acceptable to God as sacrifices, nor 
in any sense of the word come to his altar, while still 
they were sinners. Since to permit this sanctification 
and sacrifice is the only object of the giving of this 
grace in the present time, they have received it in 
vain, in that they have not used it as God designed it 
to be used by those who are appreciative. 

Amongst this second class of non-elect, we may 
say that the vilest are too good to be turned over to 
devils for an eternity of torment, either mental or 
physical, and God their Creator was too wise to have 
ever made them in such a condition as to necessitate 
such an abominable result, so inharmonious with his 
character and with every sense of right and justice, 
and necessitating the everlasting perpetuation of evil, 
upheld, and therefore sanctioned, by divine power. 
And God's Word, rightly understood, teaches no such 
thing. It is only where the false theory has corrupted 
and perverted the judgment that it is able and willing 
to construe such a theory from the parables, symbols 



and "dark sayings" of our Savior, instead of understanding 
and construing them much more reasonably 
and in full accord with the divine character of justice, 
wisdom and love.* 

NO CONDEMNATION POSSIBLE UNTIL AFTER TRIAL. 



If the worst class of non-elect do not deserve 
eternal torment, the less degraded certainly would not 
deserve it; and indeed we are to remember that none 
of them can deserve any punishment until first of all 
they have had their trial. True, the whole race had 
a trial in father Adam, in Eden, and when he lost in 
that trial the whole race lost life and came under the 
sentence of death. But in harmony with the divine 
plan, our Lord Jesus redeemed Adam and all his race 
by giving himself as the ransom-price for Adam and 
thus incidentally for all. We are to remember that 
Jesus was not only the Redeemer of the Church, but 
also the Redeemer of the world, as it is written: "He 
is a propitiation for our sins, and not for ours [the 
Church's] only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world."— 1 John 2:2. 

If then all these non-elect have been redeemed from 
the first trial and its sentence with the same precious 
blood which redeemed the elect Church; and if the 
Church, by the grace of God, has had her trial in advance 
of the world in general, and if the Church's 
trial was the result of the redemption, and without 
that redemption she could have no further trial for 
eternal life, is it not manifest that the same redemption 
has provided a trial for the whole world of mankind, 
as well as for the Church of this Gospel age? 
And what matters it that the trial of the world did 
not take place at the same time as the trial of the 
Church? Has not the great God, our Savior, the full 
right to arrange this matter of salvation according to 
his own wisdom? Who amongst fallen men is competent 
to direct him? 

And yet this is what Christian people have been 
doing; they have been attempting to arrange the divine 
plan, instead of hearkening to God's own revelation 
respecting the same. They have said, but he has not 
said, that the present life is the only opportunity for 
trial, and that this trial-time will end with the end of 
the Gospel age. He, on the contrary, has foreseen 
their misrepresentations of his plan, and has caused 
it to be written aforetime through the prophet: "My 
thoughts [plans] are not your thoughts [plans], neither 
are your ways my ways, saith the Lord; for as 
the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Hell?— sample sent free 
on postal card request. 

R2733 : page 358 

higher than your ways and my thoughts [plans] than 
your thoughts [plans]."— Isa. 55:8,9. 

The Scriptures tell us specifically respecting the 
Lord's plan for these non-elect. We will give it first 
in our own phraseology and then we will give the 
Scriptural language. They tell us that the Church 
is being selected from the world in advance, in order 
that this little flock, thoroughly trained in the school 
of experience, thoroughly polished and in full conformity 
to the Head, Christ Jesus, is, with their Head 
and Lord, to constitute the Royal Priesthood, whose 
work will only begin after its election has been completed 
and it has been received into glory; and that 
its work will be the judging of the world of mankind, 
not in the sense of pronouncing condemnation upon 
them, but in the sense of granting to each member of 
the non-elect a trial (judgment) for eternal life. That 
trial of the non-elect is guaranteed, based upon the 
great ransom-sacrifice wherewith all mankind were 
purchased from the death-sentence that came upon 
all through Adam. And that this trial-time, or day 
of the world's judgment, will be the Millennial day (a 
thousand years long), in the which full opportunity 
shall come to all, full knowledge of the Lord shall fill 
the whole earth, as the waters cover the great deep, 
and a full blessing of eternal life may be attained by 
whoever wills and obeys, of those then on trial; and 
that the remainder (the unwilling and disobedient) 
will be destroyed in the Second Death. 

Among the many Scriptures supporting this presentation 
we cite two which are very pointed and 
should be fully satisfactory if there were no others. 
"God hath appointed a day in the which he will judge 
the world [future] in righteousness, by that man whom 
he hath ordained"— the Christ, Head and body.— 
Acts 17:31. 

"Know ye not that the saints shall judge the 
world?"- 1 Cor. 6:2. 



R2733 : page 358 

THE ULTIMATE END OF THE COMMANDMENT IS LOVE FROM A PURE 
HEART AND A GOOD CONSCIENCE. 



"Now the end [ultimate object] of the commandment is love from a 
pure heart and a good conscience, and an undissembled faith— which 
some, having failed [to discern] have turned 



aside to foolish talking."— 1 Tim. 1:5,6. 

NOT ONLY in the Apostle's day did many fail 
to get the true idea of religion— the Lord's 
commandments to his people, etc.— but many, probably 
an increasing number, have since similarly failed. 
We may suppose that the method of the great Adversary 
is to confuse the minds of those who are feeling 
after God and righteousness. It is thus, as the Scriptures 
declare, that he deceives the whole world— putting 
forms, ceremonies, theories and confessions instead 
of heart religion. 

Those who teach the monstrous false doctrine 
that the present life decides the fate of every human 
being, either for eternal misery or for eternal joy, consider 
this doctrine the very bulwark of pure Christianity 
and of holiness; consequently many who really 
do not believe it tacitly give it their consent and approval, 
believing that in so doing they are forwarding 
the cause of holiness. But this is a great mistake; 
this is one of the great Adversary's delusions, by 
which he would make the piety of God's people serve 
his cause, (1) because this doctrine dims the divine 
glory as respects love and justice, and (2) because the 
doctrine, instead of cultivating or promoting holiness, 
cultivates and promotes the reverse of this, as we 
shall show. 

The theory that the present life is merely to decide 
who are worthy of eternal joy, and who are worthy 
of eternal torments, resolves itself finally in the general 
thought as signifying that all fiendish characters 
may perhaps be worthy of some kind of ill-treatment 
to all eternity, provided they shall not breathe a prayer 
of penitence at some time before they expire; but that 
all half-way decent people are too respectable or too 
good to justly merit an eternity of torture, and hence 
must be of the kind who will receive an eternity of 
bliss. Thus this hell-fire doctrine, instead of promoting 
holiness, purity of heart, promotes the reverses- 
carelessness as respects anything except out and out 
murder and general devilishness. 

On the contrary, the Scriptural doctrine makes 
no threat of eternal torment, and promises a full opportunity 
for every human creature to come to a 
knowledge of the truth, either in the present life or 
in the next life, and thus, under the terms of the New 
Covenant, to avail themselves of the opportunity for 
eternal life through the great atonement sacrifice finished 
at Calvary. This Scriptural doctrine is replete 
with the highest incentives to holiness, purity of heart 
and of life; because, instead of holding forth a general 
penalty of torture, it holds forth "a just recompense 
of reward," a reward of blessing or of stripes 
which will be proportionate to the individual efforts of 
each to come into harmony with God and his holiness. 

First we have the call of the Gospel Church to 



become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 

R2734 : page 359 

in the Millennial Kingdom, upon the condition of holiness 
of heart, and subsequently will come the offer of 
restitution and everlasting life in human perfection, 
to those of the world who similarly return to heart-harmony 
with the Lord. The Scriptures hold out no 
suggestion anywhere that eternal life will ever be given 
to any creature on any plane of existence, except 
upon this condition of full, complete heart-harmony 
with the Lord. Anything contrary to, or even short 
of, this perfect harmony with the Lord, will, from the 
Scriptural standpoint, mean the Second Death. Here, 
then, in the divine offer, we have the highest inducement 
to strive for our closest possible attainment to 
perfection; and we are assured that such striving will 
ultimately, according to divine favor, be rewarded 
with perfect conditions (in which absolute perfection 
will be possible)— in the resurrection. 

Many there are who have very erroneous views 
of what is signified by the expression, "pure in heart;" 
one class considers this impossible of attainment in 
the present life; another class, no less mistakenly, 
considers this to mean absolute perfection in every 
thought, word and deed; and in believing that they 
fulfil these conditions, and in teaching others similarly, 
they are making a grave mistake. 

Answering the last error first, we remark that it 
is possible for one to deceive himself respecting his 
own heart and his own condition, as for instance, apparently, 
the Pharisees of our Lord's day: claiming 
that they were perfect, and that they kept the whole 
law, they were merely deceiving themselves, but not 
the Lord; by their self-deception, a form of hypocrisy, 
which blinding them to their own need of the robe of 
Christ's righteousness, left them in the filthy rags of 
their own righteousness, unfit for the Kingdom. And 
so with some today, who claim perfection of thought, 
word and deed. They have blinded themselves to 
their own weaknesses, imperfections and errors, and 
are in a far worse condition than he who, tho outwardly 
less moral, is at heart better in the Lord's sight, 
because honest in confessing his unworthiness, because 
for such the Lord has provided forgiveness of sins,— 
covering with the robe of Christ's righteousness. 

Nevertheless, those who think that purity of heart 
is an impossibility in the present life are likewise mistaken. 
Their mistake arises from not seeing a wide 
distinction between a purity of heart and a perfection 
or righteousness of all the words and deeds of life. 
The heart, as used in this text, refers to the mind, the 
will, the actuating intentions or motives of the man. 
With this thought before the mind, it is easy to see 
that one might be pure of heart, that is of pure intentions, 



and yet confess himself unable to do and to be 
all that his good intentions desire and endeavor. He 
whose heart is pure toward the Lord in Christ is the 
same one whose eye is single, the same one who is 
not double-minded but single-minded, whose mind, 
will, heart, seeks first, last and always the will of God. 
Hence the exhortation of the Apostle, "Purify your 
hearts, ye double-minded."— Jas. 4:8. 

But how can this condition of purity of heart be 
attained? Is this to be our message to sinners— "purify 
your hearts"? No, the Gospel does not call sinners 
to purify their hearts: on the contrary it declares it 
to be an impossible thing for the sinner to purify his 
heart; a fuller's soap, which the sinner does not possess, 
is needed to cleanse the heart and bring it into 
that attitude of relationship with God and his will 
which will be pure and acceptable in his sight. On 
the contrary, sinners are called to repentance— called 
upon to confess that not only their outward lives are 
imperfect, short of the glory of God, but that their 
hearts also are rebellious, impure and in sympathy 
with impurity. After the sinner is repentant for sin, 
desiring to come into harmony with the Lord and his 
righteousness, he is pointed to the great atonement 
for sin, and is drawn to the great Redeemer, through 
a desire to be made free from sin and to come into 
harmony with God. When this step has been taken 
—when the sinner having repented of his sins, and 
having made restitution so far as possible, accepts 
Christ and the pardon he offers, and seeks to walk in 
the way of righteousness, then he is justified,— justified 
freely from all things, from which the Law could 
not justify him— "justified by faith through the 
blood of Christ"— brought nigh to God, into relationship 
with him, and caused to know the joy and peace 
of his forgiving love. 

When this is accomplished, when justification by 
faith has been established, when the sinner is reckoned 
and treated as no longer a sinner, but as reconciled 
to the Father, then his heart may be said to be pure, 
cleansed from "the sins that are past, through the 
forbearance of God." But now arises a new question 
with the reformed one: while past sins are graciously 
covered, weaknesses of the flesh are present, and temptations 
of the adversary are on every hand. He starts 
to walk forward, but finds himself beset by the world, 
the flesh and the devil: what shall he do? A heart 
searching probably begins there: finding himself incapable 
of guiding himself, or of keeping himself, his 
proper course is to accept another offer of divine grace, 
namely, the second step in our great salvation. He 
hears the voice of the Lord, through the Apostle, saying, 
"I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies 
of God [manifested in the covering of your sins], 
that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service." 



R2734 : page 360 

The reformed one, if rightly instructed, realizes 
his inability to stand in his own strength, realizes that 
his only hope of maintaining justification granted to 
him lies in getting the Lord to take charge of him. 
At first he may think to go into partnership with the 
Lord, and to say, "Some of self and some of thee," 
some of my own will and some of the Lord's will; but 
rightly instructed he finds that this will not be satisfactory 
to the Lord; that the Lord will accept him, 
and become responsible for him, and guarantee him 
glorious victory and eternal reward, only upon this 
one condition, namely, a full self-surrender, a full 
consecration of heart. 

It is after the sinner has come through all this 
process and has made a full consecration of his heart 
to the Lord, that he is of the class described in our 
text, one of the pure in heart, under the law of love, 
the law of the New Covenant. But notwithstanding 
the purity of his heart, his motives, his intentions, 
his will, to fulfil the Lord's great commandment, 
which is briefly comprehended in one word, Love,— 
he will find that he has a battle to wage, that the law 
of his members, depraved through heredity in sin, is 
a strong law of selfishness, in opposition to the new 
law, to which he has pledged himself, the law of his 
pure heart or new heart or will,— the law of Love. 

Hence, as the Apostle suggests in our text, we 
must learn that the ultimate end or object of the divine 
commandment or law, means LOVE,— even tho we do 
not find ourselves thoroughly able to live up to every 
minute particular and requirement of that law. Yet 
our inability to live up to the requirements of that 
law must be through no lack of the will, or intentions 
of the loyal and pure heart toward the law, and toward 
the Lord whose law it is: whatever failure we make, 
however short we may come of the grand ultimate 
object before us, it must be solely because of weaknesses 
of the flesh, and besetments of the adversary, 
which our pure hearts, or wills failed to resist. 

And here the Lord's promises are helpful, assuring 
us that he knows our weaknesses and frailties, 
and the wiles of our great adversary, the devil, and 
the influence of the spirit of the world, which is contrary 
to the spirit of love: he tells us that we may go 
freely to the throne of the heavenly grace, and obtain 
mercy in respect to our failures to live up to the grand 
standards which our hearts acknowledge, and seek to 
conform to; and that we may also find grace to help 
us in every time of need. And, availing ourselves of 
these mercies and privileges provided through our 
great High Priest, we are enabled to fight a good fight 
against sin, to repulse its attacks upon our hearts, 
and to drive it off if it shall succeed in invading our 



flesh. Thus, and thus only, may the Christian keep 
himself pure in heart, preserving his stand as one of 
the fighters of the good fight, one of the overcomers 
of the world and its spirit. 

There will be a tendency on the part of the flesh, 
and the mind of the flesh, to deceive us in respect to 
this commandment of Love. The mind of the flesh 
will seek to go into partnership with the new mind, 
and will be very ready to recognize love as the rule 
and law of life, under certain conditions. The mind of 
the flesh would recognize love in words, in profession, 
in manners— a form of godliness, without its power. 
Gentle manners, such as love would demand, may be 
exercised by a selfish heart deceiving itself, and seeking 
to deceive others; on the lip may be the smile, 
the word of praise, of kindness, of gentleness, while 
in the heart may be feelings of selfishness, of grudge, 

R2735 : page 360 

of bitterness, of animosity, which, under favorable 
conditions, may manifest themselves in more or less 
carefully worded slander, or backbiting, or reproaches. 
Or these, continuing in the heart and rankling, may, 
under favorable conditions, bring forth anger, hatred, 
malice, strife and other wicked works of the flesh and 
of the devil, wholly contrary to the proper course 
of a pure heart, and at utter variance with the commandment 
of the law of the New Covenant— Love. 

We are, therefore, to have clearly before our 
minds the fact that the ultimate object of all the divine 
dealings for us and with us, and the ultimate significance 
of all the divine promises made to us, is the development 
of love, which is god-likeness, for God is 
love. And to have this love developed in us, in the 
sense and to the degree intended by the Lord, it is 
necessary that it shall come from a pure heart, in full 
accord with the Lord, and his law of love, and wholly 
antagonistic to the Adversary and his law of selfishness. 
To have this kind of love in its proper development 
requires also a good conscience: for be it remembered 
that there are bad consciences,— our consciences 
require regulating, as do all the other features 
of our fallen nature. If our consciences are to be 
regulated we must have some standard by which to 
set and regulate them. The conscience is like a watch 
whose dial is properly marked with the hours, but 
whose correctness as a time-keeper depends upon the 
proper regulating of its mainspring, so that it may 
point out the hours truthfully: so our consciences are 
ready to indicate right and wrong to us, but they can 
only be relied upon to tell us truly what is right and 
what is wrong after being regulated in connection with 
the new mainspring, the new heart, the pure will, 
brought into full harmony with the law of love, as 
presented to us in the Word of God. 



Our text also points out the necessity for an undissembled 
faith. And here, we believe, is one of the 

R2735 : page 361 

important difficulties besetting many who are in the 
nominal churches: they are not honest; they are not 
conscientious in respect to their faith. If they believe 
differently from the denomination they have been connected 
with, they are willing to dissemble their faith, 
to misrepresent it, because they fear a disturbance in 
the church; they fear to be thought peculiar; they 
fear to lose the esteem of fellow-Christians ("wheat") 
who might understand them, and of fellow-associates 
("tares") who would be sure to misunderstand them, 
and speak evil of them. They love the praise of men 
more than they love the praise of God, else they would 
not risk the disfavor of God through a violation of 
conscience, and a dissembling of their faith, in order 
to maintain the friendship of the world and of the 
nominal church. 

We urge that all our readers consider carefully, 
studiously, the words of our text, remembering it is 
those who miss this true thought who are not only 
missing the opportunity of the present time to be overcomers 
of the world, and the opportunity of the 
future, to be "joint-heirs with Christ" in his Kingdom, 
but who, additionally, are lending influence now 
in the wrong direction, and are likely to be turned 
aside to foolish talking, preaching and teaching and 
discussing matters which are illogical, irrational, nonsensical; 
because their hearts have become darkened 
through neglect of the principles which the Lord has 
set forth for the government of those who are new 
creatures in Christ Jesus. And sometimes the matter 
goes beyond foolish talking, and the heart becomes 
embittered and corrupted: love is cast out of the heart, 
and selfishness takes its place, and from it flows words 
of bitterness, anger and evil, instead of words of love, 
kindness, gentleness, mercy and goodness. 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it 
are the issues of life"— life or death. "Blessed are 
the pure in heart, for they shall see God." 



R2735 : page 361 

CLAIMING, RECEIVING AND ADMINISTERING A KINGDOM. 

-LUKE 19:ll-27.-DEC. 23.- 

"Every one of us shall give account 
of himself to God."— Rom. 14:12. 

NATURALLY enough the fact that Jesus was on 



his way to Jerusalem, the city of the great 

King, and that he had definitely acknowledged himself 

as the Messiah, and that he was exercising a great 

influence amongst the people, and that under this influence 

the rich Zacchaeus had been soundly converted, 

led the disciples to believe that when they reached Jerusalem, 

then only fifteen or twenty miles distant, they 

would immediately see tangible evidences of the establishment 

of God's Kingdom— that they would see Jesus 

assume regal robes, power and authority, and that they 

themselves would be associated with him in the throne 

of power, and that speedily Israel would arise from the 

dust to be the dominant nation of the world, and through 

its laws, at the mouth of Messiah, supported by his 

divine powers, would bring blessing to every nation, 

people, kindred and tongue. 

It was in view of this erroneous expectation that 
our Lord gave the parable of this lesson— to point out 
to the disciples, and vaguely to others, that kingdom 
glories were yet a considerable distance in the future, 
and that before they could be expected he must leave 
them and go to the central seat of government and receive 
his commission from Jehovah, the Father, and 
return; and that meantime he would give to some of 
his servants a work to do in his name which would 
prove their loyalty, their love, by their faithfulness. 

The figure used as the basis of the parable was one 
with which the people of Jericho were quite familiar. 
They had in their city the palace of Herod, and knew 
that when his father, Herod the Great, died, Herod 
Archelaus, then king, set out on a mission to Rome, to 
the court of the Caesars, the rulers of the world;— the 
object of the mission being to obtain Caesar's authority 
and investiture of government as the king of Judea instead 
of his deceased father. They knew that Herod 
returned, fully equipped with authority, and was in 
consequence the ruler. They knew also that when he 
went to Rome a deputation of citizens of Judea was 
sent after him to make complaint against him, and to 
urge that he be not appointed;— and to inform Caesar 
that the government of the Herods was no longer desired 
by the people of Judea. Josephus says that this 
deputation of opponents who went to Rome numbered 
500. The people probably also remembered that when 
Herod Archelaus returned with kingly power he first 
of all rewarded his faithful retainers with various offices 
throughout the kingdom, and subsequently dealt harshly 
with those who had manifested their opposition. Thus 
we see that those who heard this parable were much 
more likely to be appreciative of its significance than 
the majority of the people of today would be, because 
customs of the present time are so different. 

It was understood by those who heard the parable 
that the Lord referred to himself as the nobleman, that 
heaven was the far country, that Jehovah himself was 
the great King, whose commission was essential to the 



establishment of the Messianic Kingdom, and that Jesus' 

R2735 : page 362 

disciples were the servants to be entrusted with 

the "Pounds," and that those who would not have 

him rule over them were more or less in love and in 

league with the darkness of sin. Everyone who opposes 

righteousness, or who loves and serves unrighteousness, 

is thereby declaring his opposition to the reign of righteousness, 

which the Lord proposes to establish in the 

earth in due time,— when his Kingdom shall come and 

his will shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 

There is in this lesson a severe rebuke (which alas! 
is not often recognized) to those who claim that the 
Kingdom of God was set up at Pentecost. They must 
see, unless they with more or less wilfulness close the 
eyes of their understanding, that this parable is against 
their theory, and teaches that the Kingdom is not to 
be expected to be set up until the return of Messiah at 
his Second Advent. It is also a rebuke to those who 
claim that in some manner, incomprehensible to themselves 
or anybody else, the second advent took place 
1800 years ago, at the time of Israel's overthrow, about 
A.D. 70. They must see, unless with a certain amount 
of wilfulness they close their eyes of understanding 
against it, that nothing at all corresponding to a second 
advent of Christ took place at that time— nothing corresponding 
to the setting up of his Kingdom occurred 
there; nothing corresponding to the calling of those of 
his servants and reckoning with them and rewarding 
them with places in the Kingdom took place there; 
nothing corresponding to the calling of his enemies 
who would not have him rule over them, and the punishment 
of them, took place there— in A.D. 70. 

Indeed, the parable is opposed to every theory respecting 
the Kingdom except the right theory, and it 
is in full accord with it; because the right theory is 
not a human wish or whim or conjecture to help substantiate 
some human program of events, but is the 
sum and substance of all the teachings of the divine 
Word brought into harmonious unison and interpreted 
thus, Scripture throwing light upon Scripture, by the 
holy spirit. 

R2736 : page 362 

Those who heard the parable might have conjectured 
that it required months, or possibly years for its 
fulfilment; but probably none of them expected that 
it would require more than eighteen centuries— because, 
as natural men, they would be disposed to look at matters 
from the natural standpoint, from the standpoint of 
seventy to a hundred years as being the limit of human 
life. Nor did the disciples even know how to view 
matters from the divine standpoint until after they had 



received the holy spirit. Under its enlightenment, 
however, the Apostle tells us plainly that "A day with 
the Lord is as a thousand years."— 2 Pet. 3:8. 

As the Revised Version points out, the ten servants 
to whom the pounds were given, were only a part of 
all the nobleman's servants; they would seem to represent 
the consecrated class who have professed full devotion 
to the Lord, and to each of whom is given a 
special gift or blessing, not given to others of the servants 
of the household of faith. This special gift or 
blessing seems to be referred to by the Apostle, when 
he says, "A measure of the spirit is given to every man 
[in the true, consecrated Church] to profit withal." 
(1 Cor. 12:7.) It is the same gift to all, the same spirit 
amongst all, working in all of this class; and the duty 
of each one is to use this gift of the Lord for its increase; 
and the more his devotion and the more his 
faithfulness the larger may be the results. 

We are to notice a difference between this parable 
of the "Pounds" and a somewhat similar one of the 
"Talents." The latter represented the natural abilities 
of the individual— "to every man according to his several 
ability," some one, some two, some five talents or 
opportunities. But this parable of the pounds ignores 
the individual abilities of the servants, and shows them 
each as receiving the same thing and for the same purpose. 
Possibly the differences of opportunities are to 
be understood as implied, because the Lord expressed 
as hearty approval of the one who gained four pounds 
as he did the one who gained nine. Both did well, 
both were good, both were faithful. The one with 
greater talents, in order to be equally faithful with the 
one of fewer talents, should be able to and should show 
larger results: and the rewards given would seem to 
imply the same thing— that greater sacrifices in the 
present time "work out a far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory," And this emphasizes the instructions 
of a previous lesson, showing that those who 
are rich in talents, opportunities and privileges, if faithful, 
achieve a larger victory and a still grander reward 
than those who are poorer and who therefore sacrifice 
less, tho the sacrificing be done in both cases with the 
same spirit, which in both is thoroughly acceptable to 
God, pronounced well done, and the servant faithful 
and good. 

The servant who hid his talent and returned it, 
and whose loss of all opportunity to share in the Kingdom 
is shown, would seem to represent a class not 
merely justified but sanctified— consecrated fully to the 
Lord, and made the recipients of the holy spirit, even 
as the other members of the body. He is called a 
"wicked" servant; not because he had committed murder 
or robbery of any kind, but because, having assumed 
an obligation by which he was entrusted with certain 
of the Master's goods not given to others, he failed of 
his covenant and obligation. Such a servant could not 



be trusted, and properly was considered unfit for any 
share in the Kingdom; and the blessings which had 
been entrusted to him were given to the one who had 

R2736 : page 363 

already most, but whose faithfulness had been so abundantly 
attested by zeal. So to everyone who uses present 
blessings and opportunities well, zealously, further 
blessings, privileges and opportunities shall be granted, 
and from those who do not so use them they will be 
taken away. 

To our understanding we are now living in the 
very time represented by this feature of the parable— 
the time when our Lord, invested with the authority 
of the Father, is about to take to himself his great power 
and reign; and when preparatory to that reign, he is 
reckoning with his servants now living, with a view to 
their appointment to places in the Kingdom he is about 
to inaugurate. It is from this standpoint that we interpret 
the testings and sittings now in progress amongst 
the consecrated ones in and out of all the sects of 
Christendom. "The Lord your God proveth you, 
whether ye do love the Lord your God or no." Present 
truth and present conditions are testing and showing 
to what extent those who have received the Lord's 
favor are faithful. This does not imply that others of 
this class who have died in the past of this age are ignored: 
on the contrary the Scriptures assure us that 
they would be dealt with first, and that those accounted 
worthy have a share in the first resurrection preceding 
those who are alive and remain at the present time.— 
1 Thess. 4:1-17. 

But the living ones pass through an experience of 
testing (the ending of their trial) before they die; they 
must give an account; judgment must pass respecting 
them; they must either be gathered, as "wheat" into 
the barn or be left in the field where the "tares" are 
shortly to be burned. Fortunately for us, the reckoning 
is not one of an instant, but time is granted to us 
to make up our accounts; and blessed is he who, finding 
that he has not been as faithful as he might have 
been in the past, is now putting forth redoubled energies 
—"redeeming the time" (grasping opportunities— 
Eph. 5:16), in order to make as favorable an account as 
possible while our King is waiting to receive them and 
willing to show us all the favor that could be desired. 

Ten servants were chosen as a general number to 
represent all of the consecrated, but only three of these 
are mentioned as illustrations of faithfulness and unfaithfulness. 
Thus the Lord avoids even intimating 
how many of the whole number of consecrated will 
prove faithful to their consecration and enter into the 
joys of the Lord— into the Kingdom, and to share with 
him in the throne; and how many of them will fail to 
be accounted worthy of these honors and blessings; 



and how many of the latter may be counted worthy of 
the Second Death; and how many of them will come, 
through faithfulness in tribulation, to be honored servants 
in the Kingdom.— Rev. 7:9-15. 

The enemies of the King are all to be slain, after 
he takes to himself his great power and begins his reign; 
"The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death." 
Some would suggest that this slaying will be with the 
sword of the spirit, and imply a universal salvation; 
but to our understanding such an interpretation would 
be utterly at variance with the spirit of the parable, 
and hence sophistical, and unworthy of any one claiming 
either honesty or ability as a teacher in Israel. 
There ought to be a reasonable relationship between 
the figure of the parable and the reality, as it will be 
fulfilled. To our understanding the slaying of the 
enemies represents clearly and distinctly the punishment 
which the Lord prescribes for the enemies of righteousness, 
viz., the Second Death. However, this by 
no means signifies that all the people (aside from the 
specially trusted servants) are enemies. It was not so 
in the parable, which rather implies four classes: (1) 
The king's servants; (2) those specially granted the 
pounds for use in his service; (3) the citizens; (4) the 
class of the latter opposed to the king, his laws, etc. 

After the Kingdom has been established under the 
King, and his then exalted servants, we may be sure 
that all in harmony with him will have cause to rejoice 
in his favor and the blessings of the Kingdom; and if 
some of the citizens had misunderstood the King's character, 
having heard him traduced and slandered, they 
will soon perceive, under the blessed conditions of the 
Millennial Day, how grossly the "Prince of this World" 
had misrepresented the character of the Prince of Peace, 
telling them that he (the latter) had a place of eternal 
torment prepared for them, into which he would surely 
cast nine-tenths of their number, etc., etc. When these 
begin to have the eyes of their understanding opened, 
so that "the light of the knowledge of the goodness of 
God," shining in the face of the new King, will bring 
them enlightenment and joyful privileges hitherto undreamed 
of, many of them, unquestionably, instead of 
longer being enemies and hating the King and hating 
his rule, will become staunch friends and supporters, 
and will rejoice greatly that they are freed from the 
yoke of the former prince, Satan, and will rejoice in his 
binding, which makes possible their liberation from the 
bondage of ignorance, superstition, fear and calumny. 

It will require all of the thousand years to demonstrate 
who are the friends of truth and righteousness, 
and who their enemies. The "enemies" of righteousness 
are enemies of God and of Christ, and of all who are in 
harmony with righteousness; and this separation from 
the King's friends is Scripturally represented as the 
separating of the "goats" from the "sheep," which will 
progress throughout that Millennial period, and eventuate 



in the gathering of all the "sheep" to the right-hand 
of the King's favor, and the gathering of all the 
"goats," of contrary disposition, to the left-hand of his 
disfavor,— where, because of their wilful and intelligent 
rejection of the principles of righteousness (the laws of 
his Kingdom), they will be counted not his servants 
or messengers, but the servants or messengers of Satan, 
and as such they will meet their destruction in the 
symbolical lake of fire, "which is the Second Death." 
-Rev. 20:14; Matt. 25:31-46.* 



*See our issue of March 15 and April 1, 1900, page 101. 



R2737 : page 364 

"THOU CROWNEST THE YEAR WITH THY GOODNESS. 

-PSALM 65: 11. -DEC. 30.- 

WHAT MORE appropriate lesson could have been 
chosen for the close of the year! It is fitting 
that the Lord's people should continually keep trace 
of the mercies and blessings they enjoy— otherwise the 
pressure of the cares of this life and the deceitfulness 
of riches would so crowd in upon our minds and hearts 
as to cover from our observation and ultimately choke 
up completely the springs of divine grace, which, kept 
open, minister continually to our joy and refreshment 
in the holy spirit. 

To this end it is appropriate that we have a daily 
review of the blessings we enjoy— that every evening 
we call to mind the privileges enjoyed, the providences 
which have guided our way, and the blessings, both 
temporal and spiritual, which have come to us; some 
of them in common with the world in general and others 
of a special kind, known too and appreciated by those 
only who know the Shepherd and are known of him; 
—who hear his voice and to whom the rod and staff, 
his chastenings and guidance, are continually a comfort 
and a joy. 

It is appropriate, too, that we take weekly reviews, 
looking at the same mercies and blessings from a still 
broader standpoint of observation, reminding us of the 
rest into which we have entered through faith in the 
precious blood, and also of the rest that remains for the 
people of God, whereof God has given us assurance in 
that on the first day of the week he raised up Jesus 
from the dead.-Heb. 4:3,9. 

But it is with special appropriateness that at the 
close of the still larger cycle of a year we should take a 
still broader and more comprehensive view of our experiences, 
looking circumspectly at the way we have 



traveled and considering well which have been the steps 
which hindered progress, and which have been proper 
steps in the footprints of Jesus, bringing us nearer 
to the goal— the "mark" which we must surely attain 
if we would be accounted worthy of a share in the 
promised Kingdom. 

A year may seem a longer or a shorter period, according 
to the circumstances. To the mind of childhood 
it is a very long period, while to more developed minds, 
filled with the activities of life, it seems much shorter- 
speeding all too rapidly to permit the accomplishment 
of all the things desired to be achieved. Then again, 
the year will seem proportionately long as it has contained 
draughts of bitter experience or sufferings, mental 
or physical;— proportionately short, as it has contained 
joys and pleasures which seem to slip away all 
too quickly. To a certain extent such experiences are 
common to all mankind; yet the Christian, especially 
if he have been for some time in the school of Christ 
and is somewhat developed both in knowledge and in 
grace, has a larger capacity than others for grasping 
and appreciating life; because, no matter how unsound 
his natural mind may have been, he has now "the 
mind of Christ," "the spirit of a sound mind," which 
is far better able than the natural mind to estimate 
matters at their true worth. 

Such an advanced Christian looks back through 
the year and recalls life's storms as well as its sunshine, 
its sorrows as well as its joys, its tears as well as its 
smiles, and sorrows not as others who have no hope 
(but who, instead, have more or less of vague fear and 
dread of the future, both of present life and that which 
is to come). His troubles have been divested of their 
hobgoblin features, and minimized by the spirit of a 
sound mind, and the instructions of God's Word, which 
assures all such that the trials, difficulties and adversities 
of life, rightly accepted as lessons, are blessings 
in disguise,— which will work out "a far more exceeding 
and an eternal weight of glory" in the life to come. 
-2 Cor. 4:16,17. 

He will perceive too, that his joys have been of a 
purer and a more solid kind than any he ever knew 
before he was begotten of the holy spirit. They have 
not had commingled with them the bitterness of envy, 
malice and hatred, but have been unalloyed; because 
they have not been rejoicings in iniquity, but rejoicings 
in the truth. Moreover, they have been much more 
numerous than ever before; because he not only is able 
to joy in the Lord, joy in his Word, joy in the holy 
spirit, joy in fellowship with brethren of like precious 
faith, but by the grace of God he has been enabled additionally 
to joy in tribulation also;— not because he 
loved tribulation, but because he loved the patience, 
the experience, the character, which God assures us 
are a fruitage which all tribulations must yield us under 
his providence, if we are rightly exercised thereby.— 



James 1:3,4; Rom. 5:3. 

Of whom are all these things true? Not of every 
man, surely, for alas! we know many who have no such 
experience— the world that lieth in darkness knows not 
God. Nor are these experiences true of all people of 
intelligence,— nominally Christians. Surely but comparatively 
few of those who profess the name of Christ 
enjoy these precious experiences, or will be able to look 
back upon the year with satisfaction of this kind, realizing 
that God has crowned the year with his goodness! 
Many who cannot rejoice in the goodnesses which we 
have enumerated foregoing, will nevertheless return 
thanks for temporal good things and mercies, and strive 
to peer into the darkness with which an insufficient 
knowledge and an insufficient faith enshrouds the trials 
and difficulties of life, which to them are incomprehensible 
and sources of no joy, and generally of little 
advantage; because they have not taken the necessary 
step of full consecration to the Lord, to bring them 
under his protecting care and under the enlightening 
influence of his Word through his spirit: or, having 
taken the step of consecration, they have not been performing 
their vows, but seeking to serve both God and 
Mammon, without pleasing either, and without receiving 
satisfactory blessings from either. 

R2737 : page 365 

The class which can and does look back through 
the year from the standpoint that we have described— 
the class which looking back can see that God's goodness 
has crowned every feature of life throughout the 
year, is the "little flock," the true Church, whose names 
are written in heaven,— the Body of Christ, the Bride 
class. They are described by the Prophet in preceding 
verses of this Psalm. They are the true Zion, which 
shall shortly be set up, filled with divine glory, the joy 
of the whole earth, and the divine channel of blessing 
to all the families of mankind; "For out of Zion shall 
go the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." 
Hear the Prophet:— 

"Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Zion: 

And unto thee shall the vow be performed. 
O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come! 

Iniquities prevail against me: as for my transgressions, 
thou shalt purge them away. 
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to 
approach unto thee, 

That he may dwell in thy courts. 
We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, 

The holy place of thy temple." 

Here we have a description of the elect Church, of 
which Christ is the Head, and all the faithful royal 
priests who, now fulfilling their vows of sacrifice, are 



companions in the sufferings of Christ, as by and by 
they shall be his companions also in the glory that 
shall be revealed. (Rom. 8:17,18.) They are God's 
choice, or his "elect," for, as the Apostle informs us, 
God has predestinated that this class whom he will 
choose shall all be copies of his Son. (Rom. 8:29.) 
They shall dwell in his house— they will be members 
of the great Temple which the Lord God is building of 
spiritual stones, in and through which he will bless the 
world with a knowledge of himself and his grace.— 
1 Pet. 2:4-8. 

Is it any wonder that these can rejoice in spirit, 
saying, "Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not 
all his benefits"? "He hath put a new song into my 
mouth, even the loving-kindness of our God." Is it 
any wonder that these looking back can see in the year 
that is past that that which has blessed and rejoiced them 
in every sense of the word has been of divine goodness, 
and that thus God has crowned the whole year with his 
favor toward them? These can say with faithful Joshua, 
"Not one thing hath failed of all the good things which 
the Lord your God spake."— Joshua 23:14. 

These are assured by their Lord that in the Father's 
house are many mansions, many conditions, suitable 
to the many kinds of his intelligent creatures; nevertheless 
there was no mansion for them, because they 
were to be of a new nature, "partakers of the divine 
nature," and hence it would be necessary for him to go 
away and "prepare a place for them"— a heavenly condition. 
These, knowing that they must be prepared 
for the place, as well as the place be prepared for them, 
are enabled to rejoice under every blow of the hammer 
of discipline, because they realize that it is a part of 
the Master's work in their preparation to fill the place 
to which they have been called in the Father's house 
—which will be the place of God's Temple, in which 
they are to be living stones.— Eph. 2:10. 

And if the experiences and sentiments of this "little 
flock" are beyond the ken of the natural man, his 
neighbors and friends, is it any wonder? Despised and 
rejected of men, they are nevertheless God's royal 
priesthood; "as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, 
and yet well known; as dying, and behold they live"— 
a life more abundant. In all these things they have 
cause to rejoice, realizing that the path in which they 

R2738 : page 365 

tread has in it the footprints of him who redeemed them 
and became the leader and forerunner of this priesthood. 
The world knows us not, even as it knew him not. 

As we thus review the leadings of divine providence 
during the year that is past, let God's goodness and 
mercy stimulate our faith and confidence in him as respects 
the New Year coming in. A proper retrospect 
on the part of a proper child of God will enable him not 



only to render thanks for the past, but to look up and 
lift up his head, realizing that our deliverance is nearer 
than when we first believed; and that he that began a 
good work in us is both able and willing to complete 
it, if we will but continue to submit our wills, our lives, 
our all, to his wisdom and loving care.— Rom. 13:11; 
Phil. 1:6; 1 Pet. 5:5,6. 



R2738 : page 365 

"NO WEAPON FORMED AGAINST THEE SHALL PROSPER." 

-ISAIAH 54:17.- 

OUR PUBLICATIONS have many able enemies, 
yet one and all they are powerless in their opposition. 
As in the harvest of the Jewish age the 
Scribes, Pharisees and Doctors of the Law, when they 
could not resist the truths then due, "gnashed upon 
him with their teeth," but "could not answer him," 
so it is now in the harvest of the Gospel age. Their 
rage is impotent except as it resorts to misrepresentation 
and sophistical trickery which the Lord assures 
us cannot "deceive the very elect." 

About ten years ago a certain Professor Morehead 
(himself tabooed by many as a "heretic" because of 
his advocacy of pre-millennarian views) wrote an article 
for the United Presbyterian in which he did his 
worst to defame MILLENNIAL DAWN. The article was 
reprinted as a tract in various quarters by persons laboring 

R2738 : page 366 

under similar misconceptions of divine and 
human justice. These are published by some three 
or four parties— none of whom, probably, ever read 
the books he seeks to defame. 

We did not consider Prof. Morehead's tirade worthy 
an answer, believing, as we still do, that honest people 
(of whom alone we need expect to find the "saints" 
whom we seek) would be quite able to discern the 
professor's sophistry. The below correspondence will 
be interesting to our readers as showing the correctness 
of our supposition that honest children of God 
are not misled by the Adversary and his agents. 

CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN TWO MINISTERS RE MILLENNIAL 
DAWN AND THE MOREHEAD "SMOKE." 



(Bro. Sedden, as we understand it, was at the 
time Recording Secretary of the Southern Chautauqua 
Assembly of Atlanta, Ga., and Bro. Worrell a visiting 



speaker at its Evangelical Alliance prayer service. 
The matter has been held over for some time now in 
order to permit Bro. Worrell to find time for a reply 
justifying his position, but all in vain.) 

ATLANTA, GA., Aug. 11, 1899. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will probably be 
interested in the enclosed, which will explain itself. 
Kindly return to me the letter to Bro. Worrell re the 
Morehead tract. Keep the latter, however, if you can 
use it in any way. [The letters follow in their order.] 
Yours fraternally, A. E. SEDDON. 

ATLANTA, GA., Aug. 2, 1899. 
REV. A. S. WORRELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:— I was in the Alliance prayer-meeting 
this afternoon when, in the close of your address, 
you denounced as unscriptural the teachings of 
C.T. Russell of Allegheny City, Pa. I regret that the necessity 
of your having immediately to catch a train deprived 
me of an opportunity I greatly desired to ask 
you in what particulars in your opinion the teachings 
of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series of books are unscriptural. 
I have read four volumes of that series, and 
other writings of Bro. Russell's, and am not only interested 
but also impressed by his presentation of God's 
Word. If there are some points in which he is at variance 
with God's Word, I should esteem it a great kindness 
and an act of extreme brotherly service to have 
them pointed out. Hoping you will kindly reply, 
I am, Yours fraternally, A. E. SEDDON. 

LOUISVILLE, KY., Aug. 12, 1899. 
MR. A. E. SEDDON, 

DEAR SIR:— Yours of the 2nd inst. has been received 
and noted, in reply to which I enclose a tract 
touching on some of the evils of the MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
Much more could be said, but my time is taken up in 
other work that falls to my lot in my regular business. 

It amazes me that anyone who really knows the 
Christ of the Bible should have ever been ensnared by 
the writings of Mr. Russell. The Christ of Mr. Russell 
is altogether a different character from the Christ of the 
Bible. See Isa. 9:6; John 1:1,2, etc., etc. 

I trust that his writings do not truly represent 
him. May you, my dear sir, not be ruined by the errors 
of Mr. Russell. Respectfully, 

A. S. WORRELL. 

ATLANTA, GA., Aug. 14, 1899. 
REV. A. S. WORRELL, 

DEAR SIR:— On receiving today yours of the 12th 
inst., in reply to my request of an earlier date, that you 
should specify charges that you make against the writings 
of Bro. Chas. T. Russell (in justification of your 
denunciation of those writings at the Evangelical Alliance 



prayer meeting), I regret I cannot accept it as a 
satisfactory reply. 

I cannot resist the impression either that you ranked 
my intelligence very low in supposing I could accept 
such a reply as having any weight at all, or that, giving 
me credit for average intelligence, you trifled with 
my sincere and even anxious inquiries by sending an 
answer which would not have satisfied you, had our 
positions been reversed. 

The only charge you made against the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN doctrines in your address was that you had 
known cases where Christian character had 'wilted' 
under their influence. But you surely cannot use that 
as a proof that the doctrines are unscriptural, since such 
'wilting' is possible and frequently happened under 
Apostolic teaching. See Heb. 6:4-6; 10:28-31; 1 John 5:16. 
I wrote you in all sincerity asking for a specification 
of charges. I understood from your own statement 
that you were wholly given up to the Lord's 
work. It was as a sincerely inquiring disciple who 
supposed it possible that you could clearly see some 
aspect of truth that had escaped my notice that I felt 
such an inquiry was rightly made of the Lord's servant, 
and that in the Lord's name I had a right to expect 
a candid statement of specific charges. 

What do you send me? A statement that your 
time is taken up in other work that falls to your lot in 
the course of your regular business; but you find time 
to express amazement that any one who really knows 
the Christ of the Bible should ever have been ensnared 
by the writings of Mr. Russell. You make the assertion, 
"The Christ of Mr. Russell is altogether a different 
character from the Christ of the Bible;" but you 
do not specify one single item of the alleged difference. 
You express a hope that his writings do not truly represent 
him and that I may not be ruined by his errors, 
but you do not pen one sentence calculated to avert 
that ruin, nor do you suggest any explanation of your 
extraordinary hope that Mr. Russell may think one 
way and write another. Is that something to be hoped 
for? If a man teach errors, it surely were better for 
him that he believe that he is teaching the truth, 
than that, knowing the truth, he nevertheless teaches 
error with seeming sincerity in writings that do not 
truly represent him. It seems to me that could your 
"hope" for Bro. Russell be realized, it would place 
him in a very low plane of moral obliquity. 

In addition to this you enclose two tracts, one an 
excellent homily on Luke 2: 10,1 1, in which, after carefully 
reading it twice, I cannot discern the remotest 
connection with my inquiries. Personally I would say 
"Amen" to every sentence of that tract— and I believe 
that Brother Russell would do the same. You also enclose 

R2738 : page 367 



a tract which is a direct attack upon the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN books. To this I will now refer. 

You express a hope that Bro. Russell's writings 
do not truly represent him. I think it will be the kindest 
thing I can say to you that I trust this attack on 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN books by Prof. W.G. Morehead 
does not truly represent what you as a Christian brother, 
would say about those books if your "regular business" 
allowed you sufficient leisure to read them— and you 
certainly ought to read them before you attack them 
again. Your first attack may be excused on the ground 
of misinformation, but that excuse should never avail 
you again. 

Can you as a fair minded man approve an attack 
which cites the price of a book as an argument against 
it; that cites the missionary zeal displayed in advocating 
its teachings as argument against it; that calls 

R2739 : page 367 

names— "nocturnal hallucinations," "hydrophobic," 
"packed full of fundamental error," "product of insanity," 
compared with "the infidel Renan"? This 
is not honest Christian controversy! I think too well 
of you to suppose that you really endorse this kind of 
attack; yet my charitable estimate of you is sorely tried 
when I reflect that you evidently thought this kind of 
argument good enough for me. 

As regards the teachings of the MILLENNIAL DAWN 
books on the human and divine in the nature of Christ, 
can you state a presentation of Scripture teaching on 
that important subject that more satisfactorily answers 
to all the Scriptural statements than Bro. Russell's? 
If you can, then for Christ's sake I earnestly and reverently 
ask you to do it; and I am convinced that Bro. 
Russell will receive it no less gratefully than I. 

I was recommended to write to you as a scholar and 
a Scriptural exegete: Can you find fault with Bro. Russell's 
exegesis of kelusma ["shout"]? If you can, what 
is the error? If you cannot, why do you make use of 
the Morehead attack? If Prof. Morehead himself could 
assail the MILLENNIAL DAWN teachings on the two points 
above referred to, why did he not do it? If he cannot 
assail them, is he not guilty of shameful insincerity in 
making believe that he can? 

With regard to Bro. Russell's opinions respecting 
the dates 1874 and 1914, time, of course, will alone 
prove how far he is right. But surely you do not endorse 
Prof. Morehead in suggesting these opinions are 
in the nature of deadly heresy. I have read a vast 
quantity of Millennial literature, "pre" and "post," 
have listened to a great deal of platform and pulpit 
talk on the same subject, and am utterly unable to conjecture 
what, out of all the bewildering mass, has a 
right to the name of "orthodox premiilenarianism" 
by the side of which all other opinions are to be denounced 



as "nocturnal hallucination." Your own recent 

exposition of 2 Tim. 3 led me to infer that you 

regard these as the closing days of this present dispensation. 

Has your study of prophecy led you to detect 

deadly heresy in Brother Russell's conclusions? If so, 

what is it? 

I understand the Morehead attack to assert that 
Bro. Russell teaches that the resurrection will be simultaneous 
for all the dead. My simple answer is that in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL., IV., pp.640,641, Prof. Morehead 
can find conclusive proof that he is incorrect. If 
the bracketed words ("simultaneous for all the dead") 
are not intended to indicate the writer's understanding 
of Brother Russell's teachings, but his own conception 
of Scripture teaching, he had better consult his New 
Testament before he attacks a Christian brother again. 
The emphasis placed on a "first resurrection" of necessity 
implies subsequent resurrection. "All that are in 
the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and 
shall come forth"; but not all of these will have part 
in the first resurrection. 

Prof. Morehead, in section 7 of his attack, ignores, 
possibly does not know enough Greek to distinguish 
between, the parousia and the epiphania. I was referred 
to you as a Greek scholar. As such I cannot imagine 
that you can endorse the Morehead attack or apparent 
attack. Are you, as a student of the Greek New Testament, 
prepared to deny and disprove from Scripture 
that the Lord's second coming will at first be discerned 
by only a comparatively few faithful watchers? Do 
you regard the word "coming" in our English version 
as adequate to embrace the ideas embodied by both 
parousia and epiphania? 

I have detained you so long in criticism of the 
Morehead attack because I am inclined to believe that 
you made use of it hastily. I want you to read it carefully, 
to discern its dishonesty, its innuendo, its crafty 
appeal to the odium theologicum, its essential weakness, 
its unchristian vituperation. Lay it aside, Bro. Worrell. 
Don't fight for the Lord with the devil's weapons. 
If Bro. Russell errs there is Scripture to show it. If 
Scripture is on his side then I am convinced that after 
you have shaken off the theological prejudice with 
which you are apparently possessed, you will have grace 
enough to admit that Bro. Russell has a right to 
speak and to be judged by the Word; and that denunciation 
about "ensnaring souls," "ruin," expressions 
of amazement, etc., have really more of bluff about 
them than of the spirit of Christ. 

Your statement about "wilting" of character under 
the influence of Bro. Russell's teaching proves that 
your opportunities of observation have not been wide 
enough to qualify you to form an accurate estimate; 
certainly not wide enough to justify you in assuming 
the office of public censor as you did on the 2nd inst. 
The humble and persistent zeal of the "Pilgrims," engaged 



in teaching the views advocated by Bro. Russell, 
comes nearer to apostolic zeal and self-abnegation than 
most Christian work now-a-days. I have known many 
who, like you, seem to be afraid of Bro. Russell's teachings, 
yet who pay well deserved tribute of admiration to 
the devotion and consecration of those who accept it. 

As for Bro. Russell himself, I do not know him 
personally, have never met him, never seen his portrait 
even; yet I cannot help admiring the absence of 
the "ego" in his ministry. I have several times written 
to him concerning difficulties I have encountered in 
reading his works. He always replies personally; he 
presents reasons lucidly and never indulges in denunciation 
or exclamations of amazement. He never uses 
the trickery practiced by Prof. Morehead, nor resorts 
to innuendo. I am, dear Brother Worrell, 

Yours in the love and pursuit of the truth as it is 
in Christ Jesus, ALFRED E. SEDDON. 



R2739 : page 368 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



THE BEGINNING AND ENDING OF THE MILLENNIUM. 



Question.— I understand from Rev. 20:4-6, that 
Christ will reign one thousand years, and from verses 
2 and 7 that Satan will be bound during that period. 
If Christ began to reign in 1878, and Satan will not be 
bound until 1915, the two periods do not seem to synchronize; 
and furthermore, both extend beyond the 
seventh-thousand year period which, according to our 
Bible chronology, began in the Autumn of 1872. How 
is this? Can you assist me? 

Answer.— The Lord has evidently arranged for the 
gradual closing of the Gospel age and opening of the 
Millennial age, in such a manner that the one laps 
upon the other, with some particular purpose in view; 
but just what his purposes are he has not been pleased 
to inform us: and since this extends into the future we 
may reasonably suppose that it is not now "meat in 
due season for the household of faith." When the end 
has been reached and accomplished, we have no doubt 
whatever that it will be manifested to all of the Lord's 
people that his Word has been accurately fulfilled. Until 
then a certain amount of faith is required and expected 
from those who have so many evidences of the 
Lord's wisdom and exactness in the features of his plan 
already accomplished. "We can trust him where we 
cannot trace him." Apparently this matter of when 



the thousand-year period should be reckoned as fully 

beginning and fully ending will be an open question 

until the close of the Millennial age. It is our expectation, 

from Rev. 20:8,9, that the obscurity of this 

question will have something to do with the final test 

of loyalty and obedience to God, which will come 

upon the whole world of mankind who will have enjoyed 

the blessings of restitution throughout the Millennial 

age, and have attained perfection at its close. 

The indefiniteness of the end of the period would appear 

to be an important feature of their testing. Apparently 

they will think the period of Christ's mediatorial 

reign ended before the Lord's time; and some of 

them, impatient of delay, will make a demonstration, 

and demand of the earthly representatives of the Kingdom 

that full dominion be at once restored to perfect 

man, according to their understanding of the divine plan 

and its times and seasons. 

In so doing these will be demonstrating their own 
unworthiness to enter the age of perfection which will 
follow the Millennium, and will be destroyed in the 
Second Death. For, while such an attitude of mind 
may be forgivable in imperfect men of today, those 
perfect beings who shall have had a full restitution and 
large experience will be required to exercise a full faith, 
an unwavering confidence in the wisdom, love and 
promises of the Creator. And their failure to manifest 
implicit faith and obedience to the divine program after 
all their experience will be proof sufficient that they 
are unworthy of the eternal state. If permitted to go 
beyond into the full liberties of sons of God they would 
always be liable to sin and its consequences; and God's 
promise is that there shall be no more sighing, no more 
dying, no more crying, no more pain there, the equivalent 
of a promise that there shall be no more sin. Hence 
all who shall not have developed characters in full accord 
with, and fully submitted to the divine will, will be 
esteemed as having enjoyed all the blessings and privileges 
divine mercy has to offer. The fire, the judgment 
from heaven, will destroy such from among the people, 
in the Second Death, as unworthy of Life-eternal. 

The Scripture declaration respecting the saints, 
the "overcomers" is, "They lived and reigned a thousand 
years." The reign of the saints cannot be properly said 

R2740 : page 368 

to begin before all the "jewels" have been gathered, 

nor before "the times of the Gentiles" end, in 1914. 

Nor is it said that their reign will be no longer than a 

thousand years. After the thousand years' reign Satan 

shall be loosed and the above trial shall ensue; but 

the reign of Christ and the Church will evidently continue 

long enough after the thousand years to destroy 

all found unworthy in that final test, and to thus complete 

the work for which this reign is instituted;— for, 



as expressed by the Apostle, "He must reign till he 

hath put all enemies under his feet.... And when 

all things shall be subdued unto him [some by conversion 

and some by destruction], then shall the Son 

also himself be subject unto him [the Father]."— 

1 Cor. 15:24-28. 

WHO CONSTITUTE "THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH" 



Question.— Our Lord commands us to do good, 
"especially to the household of faith." Who constitute 
this household— only the consecrated saints? Or 
does it include also the justified class, some of whom 
have not yet reached the position of sanctification or 
entire consecration? 

Answer.— We understand that the Church of Christ, 
as viewed from the divine standpoint, and as addressed 
in the Scriptures, includes only "the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus;"— those who have taken the step of justification 
through faith and, additionally, the second 
step of consecration to the Lord. 

But "the household of faith" takes in a much larger 
number,— all who have faith in the Lord as their 
Redeemer from sin and its penalty,— all who are trusting 
in the precious blood of Christ, and seeking in any 
degree to be in harmony with the Lord and his rules 
of righteousness. The loving interest and care of all 
the "saints" (the consecrated) is to be exercised, not 
only toward each other, but also especially toward 
these members of the household of faith who are supposed 
to be under "instruction in righteousness," helping 
them forward to take the position of full consecration 
and become reckonedly dead to the world, and 
new creatures in Christ Jesus, risen with him, to walk 
in newness of life and to become his joint-heirs in the 
promised Kingdom. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 



VOL. XXI. DECEMBER 15, 1900. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's 



Yearly Report 371 

A Perfume of Sweet Odor 376 

Opposition from Selfish Hearts 378 

Hosanna! Blessed is He that Cometh 380 

Questions and Answers 382 

Duty to the Heavenly and to the 

Earthly Husband 382 

"Who Only Hath Immortality?" 383 

Items: Watch Tower Visits, etc 370 

page 370 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2750 : page 370 

NO DATE TAGS ON TOWER WRAPPERS. 



Last year we adopted a new method of addressing the 
WATCH TOWERS which does not show date when subscription 
expires. Instead we now send a postal card receipt at once on 
receipt of the money. 

DO YOU INVITE A CONTINUANCE OF THE 
WATCH TOWER VISITS? 

Samples of the WATCH TOWER are sometimes sent unintentionally 
to those who do not welcome them; but we certainly 
do not wish to intrude it regularly upon anyone. Hence we 
desire some expression from every one on our lists once each 
year: either the subscription price, or a request for its continuance 
with a suggestion as to when it will be more convenient 
to send the money, or a request to have it as one of the Lord's 
poor. Or, if you please, say that you dislike it and don't want 



to see it again. 

We think it not unreasonable to ask at least a post-card expression 
yearly, from each one on our list. And if you will 
send this sometime in December it will convenience us greatly. 

Do not misunderstand us: we have no desire to drop a single 
name— the poor who cannot pay, but who relish the spiritual 
food dispensed through these columns, are just as welcome 
to it as those who pay. Indeed they do pay: for we have a 
fund provided for this very purpose. Make known to all the 
interested that we desire their names on our lists. But they must 
ask for themselves— unless the person writing for them is a 
Tract Fund contributor, and at same time requests that these be 
charged to his donation— which we will be very pleased to do. 



R2740 : page 371 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S YEARLY REPORT. 

-DECEMBER 1, 1899, TO DECEMBER 1, 1900.- 

MANY OF the Lord's dear people, deeply interested 
in present truth, are quite isolated, 
and have comparatively little opportunity for learning 
of the general progress of the cause, except as they 
may infer it from occasional remarks in these columns. 
These, and we trust all of the WATCH TOWER readers, 
will be looking with expectancy for this report, that 
they may thus have accurate information respecting 
the work which interests us more than all else in the 
world besides— the work in which each, according to 
his love, zeal and ability, has contributed either financially 
or through the circulation of literature, or 
otherwise. 

We are glad to think of you as looking for and 
interested in this report, and give thanks to our Lord 
that by his grace so favorable a showing can be made; 
indeed, the grand totals for the year astonish us, for 
altho we have been aware that greater efforts than 
ever were put forth, we were not aware, until the calculations 
were footed up, to what extent the year past 
had transcended every previous year of this harvest-time 
in our mutual service of the truth and in the 
evidences of good results attained. We are sure that 
our friends will be astonished as they read the reports 
we have to offer: astonished, first of all, that a company 
of the Lord's people so poor in this world's 
goods, as those who embrace present truth generally 
are, should contribute to the extent our Report shows; 
and that without being "dunned," urged, or even requested 
to give;— merely upon the information that 
an opportunity for thus engaging in the Lord's service 
is open to such as are able and willing to serve in this 
manner. The astonishment will be doubled when it 
is seen how great a work, under the Lord's blessing, 



has been accomplished with this comparatively small 
sum of money, which, amongst the nominal churches, 
would be considered only sufficient to pay the salaries 
of a few officers, and practically accomplish nothing 
in the way of propaganda. 

And our astonishment still increases as we reflect 
that the circulation of this amount of literature, accompanied 
by this amount of "Pilgrim" preaching, 
etc., supporting the most glorious message that could 
possibly be heralded to mankind, shows so meagre results; 
that so few have ears to hear and eyes to see 
these things which enrapture our hearts. Let us, however, 
reflect that our Lord informs us that his "elect" 
will be but a "little flock"— and in it not many great, 
mighty or wise; but chiefly the poor of this world, rich 
in faith. The comparatively small results of our efforts 
to reach the ripe "wheat" in Babylon convince us, all 
the more, that the "wheat" is very scarce in comparison 
with the "tares;" that we are living in the time of 
which the Apostle declares that the church nominal 
will have itching ears, and be turned away from the 
truth, turned to fables, and respecting which our Lord 
said, "When the Son of Man cometh shall he find the 
faith on the earth?" implying that it would be difficult 
to find. -2 Tim. 4:3; Luke 18:8. 

True, the results may be more than we can at 
present discern; for we can estimate the widening influences 
of the truth chiefly by the growth of the 

WATCH TOWER subscription lists. These show considerable 
growth for the year,— but not nearly so much 
as we had hoped for: and our offer of credit, and of 
special terms to the poor, should bring to our lists the 
names of all who have "tasted that the Lord is gracious" 
and are hungering and thirsting for his righteousness. 
We can only hope that an under-current of 
influence is moving, of which we have little outward 

R2740 : page 372 

manifestation; and that in the Lord's own time and 
way during this "harvest" all of the true "wheat" 
will be reached and ripened and garnered. 

THE COLPORTEUR BRANCH OF THE SERVICE. 



We give this department of the work the first 
place in the Report, considering that those who are 
engaged in it are doing the work of evangelists, and 
remembering that the Lord has specially blessed this 
service to the reaching of many who are now rejoicing 
in the light now shining upon the Word. We can 
think of no branch of the work in this harvest that 
more nearly corresponds to the style of service instituted 
by our Lord in the Jewish harvest, than does the 



Colporteur work. The Colporteurs usually go in 
couples, as the twelve apostles, and afterward the seventy, 
went forth,— from town to town and city to city. 
Like them, also, they go from house to house, and 
likewise their message is, "The Kingdom of heaven 
is at hand! The time is fulfilled; repent, and believe 
the good tidings!" Going in this manner into all the 
homes of the civilized world, these Colporteur brethren 
and sisters have opportunities for finding the truth-hungry 
as well, perhaps better, than if the pulpits of 
the land were open to them, and they all competent 
to give able discourses upon the divine plan. Because 
in such a case they would be able either to preach but 
few discourses, or else to reach comparatively few 
hearers: whereas each Colporteur can reach more than 
an average church audience every week; and with 
those whom he can interest he leaves reading matter 
representing many discourses, upon which the reader 
may feed for months. Where enough interest may 
not be awakened to lead to a purchase of the books, a 
tract is left, which sometimes bears good fruitage; and 
even tho some who purchase may neglect and fail to 
read at the time, experience shows us that the books 
thus scattered are often blessed of the Lord to the 
reaching of others, and sometimes years after, under 
more favorable conditions, the purchaser may also be 
blessed through them. 

You will be pleased to learn that the sale of the 
DAWNS and booklets during the year (chiefly through 
the Colporteurs) was as follows:— 

In the English language 84,25 1 

" German " 9,137 

" Scandinavian tongues 6,712 

" French language (estimated) 543 

Total 100,643 

BOOKLETS:- 

English 39,047 

Foreign languages 1,323 

Total 40,370 

It should be remembered that altho we endeavor 
to keep this branch of the work on a self-supporting 
basis, it nevertheless comes short of this, by reason of 
the fact that our wholesale prices are very low: in the 
case of the foreign translations considerably less than 
cost. 

We feel sure that this showing will greatly encourage 
the dear brethren and sisters who are giving 
their lives in this department of the Harvest work; 
and we trust that it will act as an incentive to others 

R2741 : page 372 



who have been contemplating engaging in this work- 
to lead such of them as are of good address, and without 
family and financial encumbrances, to give themselves 
freely to this evangelistic work. It is a department 
which the Lord has greatly owned and blessed; 
it is a preaching of the Word in a most practical manner, 
likely to leave a lasting impress; one which will 
undoubtedly, we believe, bring forth much fruitage 
during the great time of trouble, as well as serving to 
find and to perfect those of the Lord's saints who shall 
be accounted worthy to escape those things coming 
upon the world. We will be glad to hear from, and to 
cooperate with, all who desire to enter this branch of 
the service. Write to us freely of your wishes, hopes, 
difficulties, etc., in respect to this, and we will do what 
we can to open the way before you. There is still 
plenty of room for the work in this land as well as in 
Great Britain. The fields are white for the harvest, 
and the laborers are few; and if we are praying for 
laborers let us see that we are doing what we can to 
fulfil our own petitions. 

Some who cannot give their entire time to colporteuring 
are doing valiantly in their spare moments 
and hours; for instance, one dear brother, an architect, 
not slothful in his business, is nevertheless so fervent 
in spirit and in serving the Lord that during the past 
six months he has disposed of 650 copies of the DAWN 
to mechanics and tradesmen with whom his business 
brings him in contact. Others have less opportunities, 
but the same zeal, and are doing what they can; 
—some by giving, some by loaning, some by selling 
the literature. We rejoice that in any and all of these 
ways there is an opportunity for all of the Lord's dear 
flock to show their love for the truth, and their zeal 
in laying down their lives for the brethren still in 
Babylon and darkness. 

THE "VOLUNTEER" WORK. 



All who labor for the truth do so of their free will 
and without compensation, and hence might properly 
be termed Volunteers: under this head we might include 
in a general way all the efforts that have been 
put forth during the year in the way of free circulation 
of WATCH TOWER literature, bearing on the Harvest 
themes— but the special use of the word with us has 
been confined to a particular feature of this free distribution; 

R2741 : page 373 

viz., that done systematically at or near 
churches at the time of their dismission on Sundays. 
This Sunday church-distribution by those who 



volunteered for the service was begun in 1899, and 
reached good proportions and accomplished good results 
that year, and was continued during the past year 
with excellent effect. When we speak of results we 
have chiefly in mind that which is within our power, 
and not the ultimate results, of which no man can 
now know, and which time alone will show. The results, 
so far as the distribution of the Volunteer WATCH 
TOWER was concerned, were a success, large numbers 
being circulated in all parts of this country and in 
Great Britain. In handing literature to church attendants 
we had no thought whatever that they were 
all going into the hands of saints; but we do hope that 
some of them reached the hands of the Lord's consecrated 
people; and we still believe that it would be 
difficult to find a more effective way of reaching this 
class than by reaching the church-goers. In proportion 
to the circulation we cannot say that we have had 
large returns; on the contrary, they have been small, 
so far as letters, WATCH TOWER subscriptions, etc., 
are concerned. But in various ways we learn that 
they are making an impression upon the minds and 
hearts of many of those who have received them and 
who, while not ready to accept and endorse, nevertheless 
have been influenced by what they have read, and to 
some extent brought nearer to the truth and are better 
prepared for further instruction in the right way, when 
the Lord in due time may again send it to them. 

We incline to think that the greatest blessing of 
all in connection with this part of the work has come 
to those who engaged in it as "Volunteers," and who, 
all over the country, numbered hundreds. These have 
repeatedly testified that no part of their Christian experience 
had ever been more helpful to them in the 
development of true character, in committing them 
fully to the Lord and to his truth and to his service; 
making them strong in him,— "not ashamed to own 
his name, nor to defend his cause." Those who have 
had the opportunity to engage in this work, and who 
have allowed the "fear of man which bringeth a 
snare" to hinder from engaging in it, and thus being 
ministers of the true Gospel, and co-workers with the 
great Chief Reaper in this harvest-time, have missed 
a great deal— how much they may never know in the 
present life, unless some further opportunity for the 
Volunteer work should occur and they should then 
engage in it and ascertain how great the blessing and 
character-development they have already missed. 

The friends in various quarters who have engaged 
in this work during the past two years, are writing us 
hoping that the Lord may open the opportunity for 
further Volunteer service during the coming year, 
beginning early in the spring. The evidence is that 
where the entire company of the Lord's people at any 
point have entered into the work a great spiritual 
blessing has resulted. We will bear their requests in 



mind, and see what can be done as respects a future 
service for the soldiers of the Cross. 

The total number of Volunteer issue of the WATCH 
TOWER circulated during the year was 948,459. 

ORAL PREACHING-'PILGRIM" DEPARTMENT. 



It is not long since this department was inaugurated, 
and yet, as this Report shows, it has already 
reached considerable proportions. While we are in 
direct contact with the Lord's people through correspondence 
by mail, it became evident to us about four 
years ago that if competent brethren could visit 
amongst the little groups of those who have come into 
present truth through the ministry of the printed page, 
they could be of great service and encouragement to 
them; and at the same time might through public meetings 
be able to reach and further interest many who 
were already partially interested through the printed 
page and through private conversation, etc. These 
traveling oral preachers we designate "pilgrims," because 
they are nearly always on the go, their stops 
with the various little groups or churches being very 
brief (two or three days, as may seem to be warranted 
by conditions). We make out the routes for these, 
and send notification ahead of them, so that no time 
need be lost. An evening meeting is always in order 
for the day of their arrival, and afternoon and evening 
meetings for the succeeding days. 

We endeavor, as far as possible, to select for this 
service brethren who give evidence, first, of character, 
and of faith in the Lord, in his Word and in his plan; 
second, such as seem to give evidence of ability in 
presenting the truth to the minds of others— as the 
Apostle expresses it, "apt to teach"— and, so far as 
possible, those who are "mighty in the Scriptures" (1 Tim. 3:2; 
Acts 18:24); and of ability in "rightly dividing 
the word of truth." (2 Tim. 2:15.) These, so 
far as worldly judgment would be concerned, would 
all be classed as plain men; and we trust also would 
be classed as true Christian men, humble-minded and 
modest, both in language and deportment— men who 
do not have the false idea that they are great ones, or 
lords of God's heritage, of superior caste or order 
above the household of faith, but who simply and 
humbly acknowledge that they are "brethren," "servants" 
of the Lord and of the household of faith,— 
men who are very thankful for the privilege granted 
them of being engaged in such a service, and who look 
for their reward, not in luxuries of the present life, 

R2741 : page 374 

but in the Father's house, beyond the veil— in the 



Kingdom. These "pilgrims" are not paid salaries; 
and tho ample provision is made for their comfortable 
maintenance, everything connected with this is expected 
to be done on the reasonable and economical 
lines which we believe the Lord and apostles followed, 
and respecting which we regard them as "ensamples." 
No collections are taken up by these "Pilgrims," nor 
do they in any manner, directly or indirectly, request 
aid privately. Nor need we request their entertainment, 
knowing full well that any we thus send to you 
in the Master's name will be welcomed by you and 
granted a share of such things as you have;— according 
to the Scriptural injunction.— Heb. 13:2. 

In following the plan here indicated we have been 
enabled to reach some of the Lord's scattered ones in 
various parts of this broad land, who never expected 
to hear preaching along these lines; for it will be 
readily seen that the expense connected with this traveling 
ministry is proportionately much less than it 
would be by any other method which would reach the 
same number of the Lord's people. Besides, this 
method assists, rather than discourages, the development 
of talent amongst the brethren of the various 
little groups. It is our thought that, generally speaking, 
the Lord is pleased to use some in each little company 
for the instruction and assistance of the others 
in the same; indeed, we encourage the thought advised 
by the Apostle, that each member of the Lord's 
consecrated Church should strive to "build one another 
up in the most holy faith." 

We believe that an immense amount of good has 
been done through this Pilgrim service during this 
past year, and that quite a number of the Lord's dear 
people, as they read this part of the Report, will offer 
prayer on behalf of this feature of the Lord's service, 
asking for us wisdom and grace in respect to the matter 
for the coming year. The figures in this line also, 

R2742 : page 374 

we believe, will astound many of our readers. They 
are as follows: 

Number of persons who gave more or less of their 
time to the Pilgrim work during the year 14 

Number of miles traveled in connection with 

the service 48,845 

Visits to churches 649 

Public meetings held 1,287 

Private or parlor meetings held 875 

Cost of this branch of the work $3,357.59 

One point alone in this Report seems unsatisfactory 
to us, and that is the number of private or parlor 
meetings. These, we think, should have been much 
more numerous in proportion to the public meetings. 



It is our thought that the chief good in these Pilgrim 

visits is for the household of faith: while, therefore, 

we urge the holding of some public services to which 

all classes of Christian and earnest people may be invited 

by advertisement and otherwise, we urge that 

during the year beginning the parlor meetings be given 

the chief attention. At these, subjects can be discussed 

which would not be so fully appreciated by the public, 

nor by any except those who had been studying 

along the lines of the WATCH TOWER literature. We 

take this opportunity, then, to offer this suggestion 

to the dear friends,— that when notified that a Pilgrim 

will be with them they may make proportionately 

larger arrangements for their parlor meetings and proportionately 

less arrangements for public discourses 

in halls, churches, etc. 

CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 



The Conventions are a part of the "Pilgrim" work, 
but deserve a word of special notice. Three general 
conventions were held during the year— at Philadelphia, 
Chicago and Dallas; these were interesting and 
profitable, but were reported on at the time. Besides 
these the President of the Society (the Editor) attended 
several local, one-day conventions, at different 
points— Toronto, Canada; Saratoga, N.Y.; Houston, 
Tex.; San Antonio, Tex.; Columbus, O.; Cleveland, 
O.; Philadelphia, Pa.; Washington, D.C.; New York 
City; Wilmington, N.C.; Roseboro, N.C.; Hayne, 
N.C.; and the Florida Chautauqua Assembly. 

We have good reasons for believing that these 
gatherings were all profitable to the Lord's flock, seasons 
of refreshing and joyous fellowship in spiritual 
things; nevertheless we feel that in the coming year 
we must be more economical of our time. May the 
Lord direct; we will be glad to follow his leadings in 
the matter. 

THE GENERAL TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 



The circulation of tracts during the year has been 
highly satisfactory to us. They have not been sown 
in a broadcast manner, but rather handed out with a 
measure of discretion, so far as we are able to judge; 
and this is the plan which we commend. Of course, 
in a majority of instances we merely know that tracts 
have been ordered and have been sent; but many give 
us an intimation of how they use what they receive: 
some visit hotels, where they hand them to the patrons; 
others seek opportunity for handing tracts to 
intelligent looking people at railway stations; others 



mail the tracts with their letters, perhaps with a little 
comment, and a request that some report be given 
after the reading; others keep a variety on hand, and 
make a selection for those with whom they come in 
contact. Thus there are various methods in vogue 
in this department, the colporteurs using a considerable 
number, leaving one at every house where they 

R2742 : page 375 

fail to take an order,— the tract sometimes having an 
influence where the words of the colporteur failed. 

The total number of tracts sent out during the 
year was 1,468,990. 

Of these a large number went direct from the 
WATCH TOWER office through the mails, to lists of 
addresses which we procured in various ways— many 
of them those of persons known to be religiously inclined, 
holy people, lovers of righteousness; and some 
of the best of these lists are sent to us, written upon 
proper-sized wrappers by WATCH TOWER readers. 
You are all welcome to avail yourselves of this opportunity 
for service. Besides the tracts, we sent out as 
tracts large numbers of WATCH TOWERS to good addresses. 
We request that no addressed wrappers be 
sent us for either tracts or WATCH TOWERS except 
such as are known to you in some way to represent 
intelligent and religiously inclined people. It is only 
a waste of money and labor to cast the pearls of truth 
before those who are swinish; whose god is their belly 
or their apparel or their pocket book. 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT. 



What blessed opportunities God has provided for 
his people at the present time! What an opportunity 
it affords for all of his dear children to have fellowship 
and communion! In this manner, as well as 
through the printed page, those afar as well as those 
near-by may have the privilege of complying with the 
Apostle's words, to forget not the "assembling" of 
ourselves together, and so much the more as we see 
the day drawing on. (Heb. 10:25.) Many letters assure 
us of the blessings which the wonderful mail 
service of our day has brought to them; and on our 
part we can testify that great blessings and encouragement 
have come to us through this same channel. 
While some of the letters received are cold and business-like, 
and others bitterly antagonistic, others, and 
the majority, are laden with rich perfume of Christian 
love, sympathy and deep appreciation of present truth. 
Through these we are kept in touch with the spirit of 
the Lord's dear flock in all parts of the world; and 
we can assure you that the touch is profitable to us, 



as we trust that our responses are profitable to you, 
and comforting and helpful. 

As the work in general has grown, so this feature 
of it has expanded, so that the figures below are far in 
advance of those in any previous year in our history: 

Letters and postal cards received during the 

year 37,357 

Letters and postal cards sent out 38,609 

CONDENSED STATEMENT. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN circulated 

at cost 100,643 

Copies of booklets circulated at cost 40,370 

CIRCULATED AT EXPENSE TO TRACT FUND. 

Copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 1,247,960 

Copies of Old Theology Tracts 1,468,990 

These amounts expressed in the usual 
form represent in tract pages 131,891,340 



Whenever figures get into the millions they are 
quite beyond the average mind to comprehend. We 
have therefore estimated the matter in pounds,— 
206,7 10 pounds, or over one hundred and three and a 
half tons, weight. 

THE FINANCIAL SIDE-TREASURER'S REPORT. 

TRACT FUND EXPENDITURE: 

Cost of the above 103-1/2 tons matter, including 

freight, postage, gas, help, etc $18,350.21 

Pilgrim Expenses, etc 3,357.59 

Total 21,707.80 

TRACT FUND RECEIPTS: 

Balance on hand Dec. 1, 1899 $ 871.54 

From "Good Hopes" Donations 13,337.72 

From Other Sources 4,472.63 $18,681.89 



Shortage $3,025.91 

THE BLESSED PRIVILEGE OF THIS SERVICE. 



The Editor (who is President of the Society), in 
closing this last report of the century, congratulates 
all the dear friends of the cause upon the above showing, 



and trusts that it will more than meet the expectations 
of all who contributed to the funds thus scattered 
as leaves of spiritual healing all over the civilized 
world. Especially do we trust that the God of all 
grace, the Father of mercies, may accept and approve 
our stewardship— the merit of our Redeemer making 
good whatever unintentional errors the all-seeing eye 
may discern. 

Do we urge the dear co-laborers to make still 
greater sacrifices for the work in the year just beginning? 
Not at all. We have never solicited in the past, 
and we do not expect to do so in the future. Even 
of the Lord we make no requests for money. His 
will, not ours, be done in this and in all matters. If 
he through his people or otherwise sees fit to entrust 
to us financial means, we will endeavor to use the 
same to his praise, and seek for this the wisdom which 
cometh from above. We esteem it a privilege to have 
any share in any department of this "harvest" work, 
and its accompanying blowing of the Jubilee Trumpets 
proclaiming restitution times at hand. And this 
joy in the Lord's service is fully appreciated also by 
the twelve dear "brethren" who, as office assistants, 
have so ably and so patiently lent their best endeavors 
to make the work a success; and their efforts under 
God have contributed largely to the securing of the 
above results. The Lord will reward them as we can 
not. "Brethren, pray for us," as your representatives 
and the Lord's, in this "defence of the truth." 

R2742 : page 376 

Below we give some interesting figures from two 
of the Society's foreign branches (the reports from 
the other two are not yet at hand). Both of these 
reports are included in the totals given above. 

REPORT OF MANAGER OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



FROM MAY 7 TO NOV. 15, 1900. 

LONDON, NOV. 16, 1900. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have the honor to 
submit the following report of the Tract Fund receipts 
and expenditures for the British Branch of the Society, 
May 7-November 15, 1900:- 

R2743 : page 376 

EXPENDITURES: L. s d 

Paper and printing 340 14 10 

Carriage 55 2 3 

Share of expenses for labor, etc 24 10 4 

Expenses in Pilgrim work 45 5 9 



Total 465 13 2 

Receipts from Great Britain 40 11 10 



Deficit supplied from Home Office 425 1 4 



REPORT OF LITERATURE CIRCULATED. 



Copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN circulated 3 ,224 

" booklets 667 



Tracts sent out free 77,835 

Sample WATCH TOWERS sent out free 171,850 



Total sent free 249,685 

These represent in tract pages 19,189,684 



Letters and cards received 1,184 

sent out 9,294 

The Volunteer work has been quite zealously 
pursued here this year; how much so you may judge 
by comparison of the amounts distributed in America 
and here, and reckoning that there are about twenty 
times as many TOWER readers in America as we have 
in Great Britain. Volunteer work has been done in 
39 cities and towns in Great Britain, and with some 
encouraging results. More than 50,000 copies were 
distributed in London. 

Tract distribution has also had considerable attention 
from the friends here, and with such results 
as to warrant its continuance. To be sure, we must 
often put tracts in many houses before reaching one 
which contains persons ready for the truth; but sometimes 
the one tract in the right place has a very far-reaching 
influence, as has been indicated in this city, 
where one tract under a door has thus far reached four 
persons, on the principle of John 1:41,45, and is still 
working. 

The Colporteur work has not fared so well, not 
having had so many workers as have been able to participate 
in the work in other ways; but the few who 
have had this privilege have been industrious, and 
have also been permitted to see some fruit of their labors 
which has caused their and our hearts to rejoice. 
We are praying and hoping for more laborers in every 
branch of service, but particularly in the Colporteur 
department, which experience has demonstrated to be 
by far the most efficient means of reaching "hearing 
ears" with the truth, as it is also the most practical, 
being self-sustaining. The experience of those who 



have engaged in the service of the truth by the Colporteur 

method in Great Britain in the last six months 

shows that the worker can sustain himself in this service. 

It is a most attractive opportunity for those 

who have time to spend in the harvest work, and we 

shall be glad to hear from many on the subject. 

The financial aspect of the work here is presented 
in the figures foregoing, which plainly tell their own 
story. It would have been impossible for the British 
Branch to do as it has done, except for the financial 
cooperation of the head office to the large amount of 
$2,000. 

We pray daily for ourselves, and for all of God's 
saints, that we may be plentifully supplied with heavenly 
wisdom, with strength and grace, for the discharge 
of each day's duties in such a manner as will 
redound to the glory of God and the upbuilding of 
his people. "Brethren, pray for us." Respectfully 
submitted, Yours faithfully in Christ, 
E. C. HENNINGES. 

REPORT OF OUR GERMAN WORK. 



Sister Giesecke reports 448 letters received and 
494 letters sent out; 2,899 copies of the German 
WATCH TOWER circulated as samples, and 10,108 
tracts distributed, representing 232,460 pages. 



R2743 : page 376 

A PERFUME OF SWEET ODOR. 

-MATT. 26:6-16.-JAN. 6.- 

"She hath done what she could." 

PRECEDING LESSONS showed us incidents in 
our Lord's journey toward Jerusalem, via Jericho 
—the healing of the blind men by the wayside, the 
conversion of Zacchaeus, and the parable of the young 
nobleman, given because they were nigh unto Jerusalem, 
and because the disciples and many of the multitude 
expected that the Kingdom of God would immediately 
be manifested,— set up in earthly grandeur, etc. 
The distance from Jericho to Jerusalem was only about 
twenty miles, and Bethany, the home-city of Lazarus 
(whom our Lord raised from the dead) and his two 
sisters, Martha and Mary, was quite near to Jerusalem 

R2743 : page 377 

and with them Jesus decided to spend his last Sabbath-day 



in the flesh. We may presume that the day was 
happily spent according to the observance of the Sabbath 
required by the Jewish law; but the narrative, 
passing over the events of the day unnoticed, draws 
special attention to the feast or supper made for our 
Lord in the evening, after sundown, when the Sabbath 
was considered ended, and the first day of the week 
beginning. 

This feast was at the house of Simon the leper, 
yet Simon is not mentioned in connection with the narrative, 
and it is quite probable that he was then dead. 
It is conjectured that Simon was either the father of 
Lazarus, Martha and Mary, or else that Martha was the 
widow of Simon, and that Lazarus and Mary were 
younger than she. These items, however, are merely 
tradition, nothing in the Scriptures throwing any light 
upon the matter. We remember that on the occasion 
of a previous visit to this home, our Lord was entertained; 
and Mary became so absorbed in listening to 
the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth 
that for the time she neglected the ordinary affairs of 
life, until her more practical, but possibly less spiritually-inclined, 
sister commented upon the fact, which 
brought forth our Lord's declaration to the effect that 
while service is quite acceptable and appreciated, veneration 
and fellowship are still more appreciated— "Mary 
hath chosen the better part." 

The two sisters had the enviable privilege of serving 
the Lord and ministering to his comfort in the feast 
of our lesson, just before the agonies which closed his 
earthly life. As before, so now, the service of the two 
sisters took somewhat different form, but probably this 
time by mutual agreement and prearrangement; Martha 
herself served the table with others assisting, and 
Mary was left free to render her peculiar service, of 
which this lesson is a memorial. From some source 
she had procured a valuable alabaster vase of choice 
perfume. She had either purchased the vase, and manufactured 
the perfume herself, at great expense of time, 
etc., or had spent for its purchase a considerable sum 
of money. She had anticipated our Lord's coming, 
and had fully arranged matters so that at this feast she 
might treat him in a manner in which very few except 
the worldly great were ever treated;— kings, emperors, 
etc., were thus anointed with perfume, but very rarely 
indeed could others afford such a luxury, for the facilities 
for manufacturing perfume then were quite inferior 
to what they are now, and even if the perfume were 
of home manufacture and of fine quality the cost in 
time, etc., would be great, and the perfume would be 
so valuable that it was usual to sell it to the very wealthy. 

The feast had begun, and Jesus, with the disciples 
and other guests, were at the table, which, according 
to eastern custom, was long and narrow, the guests not 
sitting upon chairs, but reclining full length upon couches 
or divans, with the head extending over the table, and 



the feet extending back to the rear, the weight of the 
shoulders poised upon the left elbow, while the right 
hand was used in partaking of the food. 

While Martha and her associates were serving, 
Mary came forward and, breaking the seal upon her 
alabaster vase, she began to pour the precious perfume 
upon our Lord's head, and subsequently, as John's 
record of the matter informs us, going to our Lord's 
feet she poured some of it upon them, and wiped them 
with the hair of her head. Mary's affection for our 
Lord was so deep and so strong that it could not be 
satisfied with any of the ordinary methods of expression. 
If the kings of earth were perfumed and anointed, 
much more did she esteem it fitting that her friend, 
her Lord, the Messiah, should be anointed with the 
best that she could procure for him. Her love was so 
intense that it knew no economy— nothing could be too 
good for her Beloved. She would give expression to 
the rich sentiments of her heart by giving him the 
finest and most costly of sweet natural odors. Our 
Lord appreciated the matter fully— the sweet odor of 
the heart-love which prompted the act, still more than 
the sweet odors which filled the entire house. 

But the disciples, more selfish and less able to appreciate 
Mary's true sentiments, and the propriety of 
their expression in this form, found fault with her, and 
the records show that their leader and mouthpiece, who 
incited the fault-finding spirit amongst the others, was 
Judas, the treasurer of the little company, whose disappointment 

R2744 : page 377 

was great that the value of this ointment 
did not find its way into his money-bag, and thus a 
part of it, at least, to his own private uses; for we are 
told, "He was a thief, and carried the bag." His objection 
seems to favor the thought that Mary may have 
prepared the perfume herself, for he does not object to 
its having been purchased for a large sum, but that it 
might have been sold for three hundred pence. (Mark 14:5.) 
Estimating the value at 300 Roman pence, or 
denarii, worth about 16 cents each, the value of the 
ointment would be about forty-eight dollars, but much 
more than this amount would be represented in today's 
values; for we are to remember that a denarius represented 
a workman's wages for a day, and hence that 
300 denarii would practically represent a workman's 
wages for a year. It was indeed an extravagant action, 
but it represented an extravagant love, and was expended 
upon one whom God and the angels delighted 
to honor, and whom Mary seems to have appreciated 
much more nearly at his true value than did his other 
associates of the hour. 
Beloved Mary! We can, perhaps, imagine to some 

R2744 : page 378 



extent the emotions which filled her heart as she prepared 
this costly expression of her devotion, the sentiment 
of which she hoped others would appreciate. 
But now, on the contrary, she beholds the "indignation" 
of her friends and guests, the Master's nearest companions; 
and her heart sinks within her as she fears 
that the Lord himself will view the matter in a similar 
light, and reject and disapprove her libation. What a 
load is lifted from her heart, when she hears our Lord 
pronouncing her work a noble deed, and reproving his 
disciples for lack of sympathy in her sentiment, telling 
them that this perfuming of his body was in preparation 
for his burial. It was probably in the midst of 
this discussion of the matter between Jesus and the 
apostles that Mary, having anointed his head with the 
perfume, went to his feet, and began anointing them 
also, wiping them with her hair, as an evidence that 
the most precious thing of her personal adornment was 
gladly at the service of her Lord. 

Probably Mary had no thought of perfuming our 
Lord's body for burial, and his words to this effect 
would be as astounding to her as to the others who heard 
them. It was customary with the ancients to spend considerable 
care and money upon the persons of their 
dead in preparing them for burial; sweet spices and 
perfumes, etc., were lavishly bestowed, just as today 
it is the custom to provide handsome caskets and many 
and expensive flowers and fine monuments, as expressive 
of the love and appreciation in which the dead are 
held by their friends. In Mary's conduct in the pouring 
of the precious perfume upon the Savior while he 
was yet living, we have a most excellent suggestion in 
respect to the proper course to be pursued toward those 
we love. It is far, far better that we should unstop 
our alabaster vases of perfume, and pour them upon 
the heads and upon the weary feet of our friends, while 
still they live, than that we should wait until they have 
expired, and then give our attention to the cold, inanimate 
and unappreciative corpse. Our alabaster boxes 
are our hearts, which should be full of the richest and 
sweetest perfumes of good wishes, kindness and love 
toward all, but especially toward the Christ— toward 
the Head of Christ, our Lord Jesus, and toward all the 
members of his body, the Church; and especially on 
our part toward the feet members who are now with 
us, and on whom we now have the privilege of pouring 
out the sweet odors of love and devotion in the name 
of the Lord, and because we are his. The poet writes: 

"How oft we, careless, wait till life's sweet activities are past, 

And break our 'alabaster box of ointment' at the very last! 

O, let us heed the living friend, who walks with us life's common 

ways, 
Watching our eyes for looks of love, and hungering for a word 

of praise!" 



The heart of each truly consecrated child of God 
is like the alabaster vase,— a receptacle for the holy 
spirit, the spirit of love, the choicest perfume and most 
precious to the Lord and to men. It is expensive, because 
it cannot be gathered rapidly, but requires patient 
perseverance in well-doing to be "filled with all the 
fulness of God." Again, it is like Mary's vase in that 
it gives forth its odor not before, but after the seal is 
broken and the contents poured forth. It differs from 
hers, however, in the fact that it may be continually 
poured out and yet its fulness all the while increase. 

Our hearts and their holy love are like Mary's vase 
again, in that they should be poured upon the Lord 
himself— upon the Head first, but subsequently upon 
the members of his body, even the humblest, the lowliest, 
the feet. And this should be our service, even 
tho it be unappreciated by others, who instead would 
think that we should pour our love and devotion upon 
sinners, or upon the poor heathen world. They realize 
not what abundant opportunities there will be for blessing 
the heathen world in the future, in the Millennial 
age, which God has set apart for their blessing, and in 
which his disciples will have abundant opportunity 
for co-working with him in the general uplifting of the 
world of mankind. Those who upbraid us for pouring 
out our heart-treasures upon the members of Christ, 
the Church, do so through ignorance, and if at times 
it has caused some discouragement to us, let us hearken 
to the words of the Master, declaring that such is a 
noble course that has his approval, and that it is proper 
as a prelude to the burial of the entire Church, the 
body;— that it will be appropriate that this shall be 
done to the Church rather than for the poor world, up 
to the time when the Church shall have finished the 
earthly pilgrimage;— up to the time when the sufferings 
of Christ having been fulfilled there shall be no longer 
opportunity to bless and refresh and comfort the body 
of Christ, respecting whom our Lord declares that what 
is done to them is done to him.— Matt. 25:40. 

So, then, let the Marthas serve the Lord in one 
way, and the Marys pour out their most precious spikenard 
perfume, assured that neither service will be forgotten; 
for both are told and have been told for eighteen 
centuries, as memorials to their praise, testimonies of 
their love, which the Lord appreciated and accepted, 
however they were viewed by others. 

OPPOSITION FROM SELFISH HEARTS. 



In this connection it is well to notice sharply that 
the one who made the greatest ado on behalf of the 
poor, and who objected most to Mary's expression of 
her devotion, was the thief and murderer, Judas. And 



the principle, to a considerable extent, seems to hold 
good all down throughout this Gospel age: that those 
who make the greatest outcry on behalf of mission work 
and in opposition to the expenditure of costly time in 

R2744 : page 379 

the anointing and blessing of the consecrated members 
of the body of Christ, are not always those who have the 
interests of the heathen exclusively at heart, but are 
frequently those who have an "axe to grind," a selfish 
interest in some way to serve. And not infrequently 
these hypocrites mislead others of the Lord's dear people, 
who are thoroughly conscientious, even as Judas, 
by his sophistry, for a time misled the other apostles 
into indignation against Mary for the doing of the very 
thing which was pleasing to the Lord, and on account 
of which he decreed that wherever this Gospel should 
be preached her conduct should be mentioned as a 
memorial. 

And so it is today: this gospel is preached in more 
than 350 languages— to every important nation in the 
world. But we presume that it was not merely Mary 
that our Lord wished to memorialize, but especially 
her deed: he wished that all who should know the good 
tidings should know also of his appreciation of such 
devotion to him, to his body, and that the more it costs 
us the more he appreciates it. In view of this, let each 
one who would be pleasing in the Lord's sight seek 
continually to pour the perfume from his heart and life 
upon other members of the body of Christ, and let him 
realize that in so doing he will not only be pleasing to 
the Lord, but will be receiving also a blessing himself; 
for as no alabaster vase could pour forth perfumes upon 
others without itself being thoroughly involved in the 
perfume, so our hearts, as they pour forth upon others 
of the members of the body the sweet perfume of love 
and devotion to the Lord and his cause, will be sure to 
bring a blessing to ourselves, even in the present life 
—our Lord's approval and benediction now and 
everlastingly. 

Some of the methods employed in connection with 
present endeavor to anoint the members of the Lord's 
"body" for burial,— with the perfume of his truth and 
grace— call down the condemnation of fellow-disciples. 
As for instance, the expenditure of time, energy, and 
large sums of money this present year in the "Volunteer" 
work has been, and will be misunderstood by 
many of the Lord's dear children,— and be bitterly reproved 
by those who are of the Judas stripe. Yet realizing 
the Lord's approval we have quite sufficient to 
make our cup of joy overflow. Fellow-disciples tell us 
that we should not be handing the meat in due season 
to the household of faith, but to sinners; that we should 
not be seeking to anoint the saints with the sweet perfume 
of present truth, but should, on the contrary, be 



going to the outcasts of society, engaging in slum-work 

or in foreign-mission work. The real difficulty with 

the Judas class, however, is that they fear that the circulation 

of the truth amongst the Lord's people would 

cut off the revenue which otherwise might flow into 

their coffers: they fear the loss of numbers and influence 

in sectarianism. But their fears are largely 

imaginary; for the perfume of the truth is only designed 

R2745 : page 379 

to fall upon "the members of the body of Christ," 
and our expectations are that the Lord will guide it to 
these, and that to others it will be of no effect. And 
since the members of the body of Christ, the consecrated 
ones, are so few, their anointing and their separation 
from Babylon, and their burial, will be comparatively 
unnoticed so far as numbers are concerned,— tho their 
taking away as the "salt" and the "light" of those 
systems, will indeed be a serious loss, conspiring to 
their downfall in the great time of trouble approaching. 
-Matt. 5:13,14. 

Let us not forget to note clearly and distinctly the 
wide difference between love and selfishness, as exemplified 
in the opposite courses of Mary and Judas. 
Mary, full of burning devotion, was willing to sacrifice 
much to honor, comfort and please her Lord. Judas 
not only was unwilling to sacrifice on his behalf, but 
on the contrary was willing to sell him to his enemies 
for thirty shekels— the price of a slave. Not only so, 
but the devotion of the one seemed not to impress the 
other favorably, but rather the reverse; the devotion 
of Mary, and our Lord's approval of it, seem to have 
aroused the opposite spirit in Judas, for he went 
straightway to negotiate with the chief priests for our 
Lord's betrayal into their hands. 

It would appear from the Greek text, and the rendering 
of the same in the Revised Version, that Judas 
received the money for his work in advance: "They 
weighed unto him thirty pieces of silver." He completed 
the contract; he sold himself to work evil, and 
that against his benefactor, his Lord, of whose power 
he was fully conversant, and of which, indeed, he had 
received so abundantly that he himself had been enabled 
to heal the sick and cast out devils. How strange 
that any could be so perverse! No doubt he had a way 
of reasoning the matter to himself which made his 
crime appear to him less heinous than it does to us. 
No doubt, also, others who today are willing less directly 
to sell the Lord for earthly advantage or influence 
or money find ways of excusing their perfidy; but in 
proportion as our hearts are loyal and devoted, as was 
Mary's, in that same proportion will the Judas course 
appear heinous and impossible to us. 

Yet these climaxes of character are not reached 
suddenly. Mary's love had been growing from the 



first; it was greatly strengthened by her course in sitting 
at the Master's feet and receiving from him spiritual 
nourishment, which our Lord declared to be a still better 
part or course than that pursued by her sister, tho 
the latter was not disapproved. Mary's faith and love 
had been still further increased as she witnessed the 

R2745 : page 380 

Lord's power in various ways, and especially at her 
brother's awakening from the tomb. She had cultivated 
this love and appreciation for the Lord until it 
filled her entire heart, and found its expression in the 
costly libation which she had just poured upon his 
head and his feet. Judas, on the other hand, had long 
been permitting the spirit of selfishness to more and 
more intrude upon his heart; he had permitted himself 
to think of what money would do, and had given 
his thought largely toward its accumulation. It had 
fettered his soul, so that he was unable to appreciate 
the Lord's character, even tho he knew him intimately 
from daily association, so that he was unable to measure 
anything except from a monetary standpoint. And 
these bands of selfishness gradually grew so hard and 
tight about his heart that they squeezed out everything 
of character, of love, devotion and friendship, and thus 
gradually he came to be the representative of, and his 
name the synonym for, the grossest of ingratitude and 
meanness, selfishness and treachery. One lesson for 
us here is, to cultivate love and the appreciation of 
whatsoever things are just, good, lovely and pure; and 
to fight down and eradicate so far as possible (especially 
from our own hearts and lives) everything selfish, 
mean, ignoble, dishonorable. 



R2745 : page 380 

HOSANNA! BLESSED IS HE THAT COMETH! 

-MATT. 21:1-17. -JAN. 13.- 

"Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 

AFTER THE FEAST of our last lesson, the next 

morning, the first day of the week (our Sunday), 

our Lord early began his preparations for his triumphal 

entry into Jerusalem as a King. Altho he 

well knew that "his own" people would not receive 

him, but, as he had already testified to his disciples, 

that he would be put to death by the rulers, and intimated 

the night before that Mary's anointing was for 

his burial, it was nevertheless necessary as a part of 

the divine plan that he should formally offer himself 

as King to the Jews, and thus fulfil to that people God's 



promise that his favor should be "to the Jew first." 

Our Lord had previously resisted the disposition 
of some of the people to take him by force and make 
him King, withdrawing from their midst, etc. (John 6:15); 
but now the time, the due time, having come, 
and that to the very hour, he deliberately planned his 
triumphal procession, instead of, as previously, hindering 
it. He sent some of the disciples for the ass and 
colt, manifesting his superhuman power by designating 
where and how the animals would be found. An ass 
was used rather than a horse, and tradition tells us 
that so all the kings of Israel were accustomed to ride 
to their coronation. 

When the animal arrived the disciples and the 
whole multitude seemed to enter into the spirit of the 
arrangement; for it would appear that quite a number 
of those who came up from Jericho, and who had witnessed 
our Lord's power and teachings en route to the 
Holy City and the Passover, lodged at Bethany over 
the Sabbath, as he did. These, with the disciples, constituted 
quite a little band, who began to hail Jesus as 
the King, and to do him homage, as was customary 
with notables at that time, by spreading their outer 
garments in the way for his beast to tread upon; and 
by plucking grass and flowers, and branches of palm 
trees, and strewing these also in the way. 

Jesus, in the honored position, riding at the head, 
was followed by this multitude on the road toward Jerusalem. 
Then another multitude from the city, having 
heard that the great Prophet and Teacher was at 
Bethany, came forth to see both him and Lazarus, and 
these, meeting the Lord and the shouting company behind 
him, turned about and became a vanguard, shouting 
like the rest, "Hosanna to the Son of David," 
which meant the King, one of the royal line. They 
probably were deterred from using the word "king" 
lest they should bring upon themselves charges of treason 
against King Herod, and against the Roman empire, 
which sustained him in power. 

It was a grand or a ludicrous triumphal entry into 
the city of the Great King, according to the standpoint 
from which it was viewed. From the standpoint of 
the disciples and the multitude, full of Messianic enthusiasm 
and hopes that the longed-for blessings upon 
Israel were about to be realized, and full of faith that 
this great Prophet, who had the power to raise the dead 
and heal the sick, could in his own time and way 
make himself and them invincible against all enemies, 
and amply fulfil all the glorious things foretold by the 
prophets,— for these it was a grand occasion, a real 
triumph. For, notwithstanding the fact that Jesus had 
previously told them repeatedly of his death, and had 
even reproved Peter for speaking to the contrary, nevertheless 
his disciples and others seem to have been unable 
to receive his words in their true meaning, and 
to have interpreted them as merely a part of his "dark 



sayings" which would undoubtedly later become luminous 
in some grand significance. This is attested by 
their language, even after his death and resurrection,— 
"We trusted that it had been he which should have 
redeemed Israel."— Luke 24:21. 

From the standpoint of Herod, Pilate, the chief 
priests and scribes, this triumphal procession was merely 

R2745 : page 381 

the parade of a fanatical leader and his ignorant and 
fanatical dupes. They saw in it evidently no more than 
this. King Herod and Pilate evidently had no fear 
that this despised Nazarene and his company would 
ever be able to organize and equip an army which 
would be of any force as against the order of things of 
which they were the heads. The religious leaders feared 
merely that the fanaticism might spread in some manner, 
and bring down upon them the wrath and further 
oppression of the secular powers, who might make them 
an excuse for further interference with the liberties of 
the Jews. Quite evidently none of these chief rulers 
believed in Jesus as the Messiah sent of God for the 
fulfilment of the gracious promises of their Scriptures. 
To this the apostles testify, saying, "I wot that through 
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers;" "If they 
had known they would not have crucified the Lord of 
glory."~Acts 3:17; 1 Cor. 2:8. 

That procession was viewed from still another 
standpoint by our Lord himself and by the invisible 
multitude of angels, ministering spirits, sent forth to 
minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation. 
These joined in the enthusiasm of the multitude, but from 
a totally different standpoint— realizing this triumph 
as merely a part of the divine plan, and merely a prelude 
to a greater triumph on our Lord's part through 
the completion of the sacrifice of himself and the attainment 
thus of "all power in heaven and in earth;" 
and as a foreshadowing, too, of his coming glory and 

R2746 : page 381 

his triumphal entry upon the Kingdom on his return 
from the far country (heaven) armed with a plenitude 
of power and authority, to put down sin and to bring 
all things into subjection to God; and to lift up out of 
the horrible pit of sin and disease and death all desirous 
of coming back into full harmony with the Father 
and the laws of his empire. This, the most glorious 
standpoint of view of that triumphal march, it is our 
privilege, by the grace of God, to enjoy; and we may 
well say in our Lord's words, "Blessed are our eyes, 
for they see; and our ears, for they hear." 

Luke's account of this matter informs us that certain 
of the Pharisees who were with the multitude at 
the beginning, altho they could not object to anything 



which our Lord said or did, complained that he should 
permit his disciples and others of the multitude to 
hail him as a King, shouting Hosanna! (Salvation, 
Blessing, Praise!) Then it was that Jesus, knowing 
of the prophecy bearing upon this subject (Zech. 9:9), 
not only refused to rebuke the disciples and hinder 
their acclaims, but informed the Pharisees that since 
God himself, through the Prophet, had said, "Shout, O 
daughter of Jerusalem," therefore there must be some 
shoutings; and that if the people had not arisen to that 
amount of enthusiasm to give such shoutings the very 
stones would have cried out, so that the prophecy 
should not be unfulfilled. 

Tho the distance is quite short to Jerusalem from 
Bethphage, where the Lord mounted the ass, nevertheless 
the city was hidden from view by the Mount of 
Olives, and it was when the Lord had reached the top 
of Olivet, and the city of Jerusalem came suddenly into 
view, that he halted the procession and wept over the 
city; saying, "If thou hadst known, even thou, at least 
in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy 
peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. ..because 
thou knewest not the time of thy visitation." 
(Luke 19:41-44.) From this language it is evident 
that our Lord did not consider the multitudes who 
were with him, as in any sense of the word, representing 
the city and nation; for altho these who were with him 
were shouting the very words, "Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of Jehovah!" our Lord's language indicates 
that a time is yet to come when the heads of 
Israel, the chief ones representing the people, shall 
gladly acknowledge him as King of kings and Lord of 
lords, at his second advent; but in the meantime their 
failure to recognize the time of their visitation meant 
to them a great loss of privilege; meant to them that 
their house must be left desolate, abandoned of the Lord 
during this Gospel age, during which he would gather 
from amongst the Gentiles a sufficient number to complete 
the elect number, in conjunction with the faithful 
ones of Israel, the remnant who had or would receive 
him. -See Matt. 23:39. 

The objective point of this triumphal march was 
the Holy City, the capital city, the City of the Great 
King. But our Lord did not go to Herod's palace, to 
demand possession of it; nor to Pilate's palace, to demand 
recognition of him; but as the representative of 
Jehovah, as the Messiah, sent of God to be the Savior 
of Israel and the world, he went appropriately to the 
Father's house or palace,— to the Temple. 

The scene in the Temple must have been a peculiar 
one. It was undoubtedly crowded with pilgrims 
from all parts of the civilized world, who at this season 
of the year came, to the number of hundreds of thousands, 
to worship the Lord and to observe the Passover, 
according to the Law. Probably many of them had 
heard something about Jesus of Nazareth, "mighty in 



word and deed." Many of them had been healed by 

him, or had friends who were thus blessed; and we can 

well imagine the commotion created by the multitudes 

coming with Jesus and crying, "Hosanna in the highest," 

etc. The Pharisees, scribes, and chief priests, 

who were used to dominate the people in religious matters, 

and especially in the Temple, altho filled with 

anger against Jesus, recognized themselves powerless 

to do him injury under the circumstances, for he was 

doing nothing contrary in any sense of the word to the 

Law, and this would be manifest to all. On the contrary, 

as tho to show that he was only doing what was 

in his power, our Lord began to exercise it as would be 

befitting a spiritual King— by reproving those who 

were violating the holy Temple and its precincts, driving 

out of it those who sold doves for offerings, and the 

money-changers who were reaping a profitable harvest 

from the necessities of the worshipers from a distance, 

whose money, not being Jewish, could not be accepted 

at the Temple, and which they must therefore have exchanged, 

at a loss— the profit of the moneychangers. 

We are not to understand that our Lord was interfering 

with the proper laws of the land nor of the Temple; 

—he was in every sense law-abiding. On the contrary, 

he was thoroughly authorized, as was any Jew, under 

the directions of the Law, to use so much force as was 

necessary in the maintenance of the sanctity of the 

Temple. 

Blind and lame people came to our Lord in the 
Temple and were relieved of their infirmities, and then 
he taught the people— continuing the healing and the 

R2746 : page 382 

teaching for several days, returning at nights to Bethany 
and coming the next morning to the Temple, but 
without any further demonstration, as a King, for that 
one demonstration had served the purpose intended. 
It had given to the officials of the city and nation the 
opportunity to formally accept him as king, but their 
contrary spirit is shown by their coming to him while 
the children in the Temple courts were crying "Hosanna!" 
requesting that he should put a stop to the 
matter; but our Lord answered them, quoting from the 
Scriptures, that this was in harmony with the divine 
plan: "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou 
hast perfected praise." The worldly-wise did not appreciate 
this, and were blinded by self-interest; but little 
children, and especially those who in simplicity of heart 
and meekness became like little children, should be the 
instruments the Lord would use in shouting his praises. 

Many of our Lord's parables and special teachings 
were uttered during those days in the Temple, between 
his triumphal entry and presentation on the tenth day 
of the month Nisan and his crucifixion on the fourteenth, 
as the Passover Lamb. (See Exod. 12:3,6.) 



These parables, etc., are recorded in Matthew, chapters 23-25, 

in Mark, chapters 11-13, and in John, chapters 12-16. 

Among other things he declared that the favor 

of God was, there and then, taken from fleshly Israel, 

saying,— 

"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets 
and stonest them which are sent unto thee! How often 
would I have gathered thy children together, even as a 
hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye 
would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate!" 
-Matt. 23:37-39. 

In considering the best lessons we at the present 
time can draw from these incidents, we suggest that 
their typical feature be not forgotten— that all shall remember 
that the events in the close of our Lord's ministry, 
and everything pertaining to the rejection and 
dissolution of the fleshly house of Israel, is typical and 
illustrative of the things which are to be expected to 
transpire in the present time, in the end of the Gospel 
age,— in the rejection and dissolution of nominal Israel 
of today, "Babylon." As already shown in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II., page 235, the time which corresponded 
to the Lord's formal offering of himself to 
fleshly Israel and his rejection was the year 1878. There 
nominal spiritual Israel was rejected, as previously the 
first or fleshly house had been rejected; yet in both 
cases all Israelites indeed receive him and receive corresponding 
blessings at his hand. 

It is since this date (1878) we understand that 
our Lord has been in his spiritual Temple, the true 
Church, teaching in an especial manner all those who 
have an ear to hear, opening the blinded eyes and helping 
those who are spiritually lame to walk in his ways. 
It is since that time that all who belong to the Temple 
class of true worshipers are permitted to hear and see 
wonderful things out of the divine Word; and it is 
during this time also that the Lord is casting out of his 
Temple all those who make merchandise of the truth 
and who are not true worshipers— the money-changers 
and dove-sellers, etc.; and it is during this time that 
out of the mouth of babes and sucklings the truth is 
being proclaimed so often to the offense of the scribes 
and Pharisees of today. 

Shortly, the last members of the body of Christ, 
the feet, already being anointed for burial with the 
sweet odors of the truth, will complete their sacrifice 
shortly, the first resurrection will be complete and all 
the members of the body of Christ be glorified together 
with him;— and then, the sufferings of Christ being 
ended, the glory will speedily follow. But meantime 
before the glory is revealed, there will come a great time 
of trouble, symbolically a time of fire (trouble) and 
smoke (confusion) upon the world, and especially upon 
rejected "Babylon," and all who do not escape from 
her before the great tribulation comes, even as similar 
fiery vengeance came upon Israel after the flesh, and 



all who had not escaped from her.— Luke 3:16,17; 
Matt. 13:38-43. 



R2747 : page 382 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



DUTY TO THE HEAVENLY AND TO THE EARTHLY 
HUSBAND. 



Question.— I am the wife of a minister in one of 
the denominations. I have been studying the truth for 
now several years, and feel convinced that the WATCH 
TOWER publications represent the true Gospel. I desire 
to be faithful to my Lord, no matter what the consequences; 
but I am in a measure of perplexity to know 
just what my duty is. As the minister's wife I am, of 
course, a member of the church; I am the organist for 
the congregation, and a teacher in the Sunday School. 
My question is, Should I, or should I not, come out of 
Babylon— withdraw from worship and cooperation in 
that which I believe is in many important respects a 
misrepresentation of the gospel;— of God's truth and 
character? 

I do not wish to weigh earthly interests so far as 
I am myself concerned, being quite willing to suffer whatever 
the Lord's providence may permit. My hesitation 
is more on account of others who would necessarily 
suffer with me. My husband, who would undoubtedly 
lose his position and its small salary, is not in sympathy 
with the truth; my best efforts to awaken his interest 
in it having proved unavailing. He would suffer, and 
our two children would suffer, as well as myself; and 
my query is,— To what extent is it right for me to involve 
others? And what would be the proper course 
for me to take that would be pleasing to our Lord? 

Answer.— Yours is a peculiar case, dear sister. We 
will suggest what we would consider to be the Lord's 
will in the matter, and give the reasons, and then leave 
it for your own conscience to decide upon. It is your 
duty to do what you understand to be the Lord's will 
according to the best light which you possess or can 
obtain. 

First then, we advise that you explain the whole 
situation fully and frankly to your husband, and tender 
to him, as the minister and representative of the congregation, 
a letter requesting that your name be stricken 
from the list, etc.,— one of the printed letters which 

R2747 : page 383 



we supply free would answer this purpose. Your husband, 
as the representative of the congregation, can, if 
he choose, erase your name from the roll. You may 
request him to make the matter public, but he will 
not be bound to follow your request, and under your 
peculiar circumstances we advise (differently from 
usual) that you do not send the Withdrawal Letters to 
all the members of the congregation unless your husband 
is willing. Leave the responsibility with him. 

As for the teaching of a class in the Sunday School 
—we advise that you continue it, especially if it be a 
class of adult scholars— teaching, however, not any sectarian 
theory, but the true theology of the Bible. Let 
your husband, as the pastor of the church, know that 
it is the only condition upon which it would be possible 
for you to retain your class. As for the playing of the 
organ, we recommend that you continue it also, explaining, 
however, to your husband your objection to 
certain false hymn-book theology, that you believe to 
be contrary to the Scriptures, and requesting that if he 
desire you to continue to be the organist he will give 
you some little liberty and consideration in the matter 
of the selection of the hymns. But we advise that you 
be not too particular, not hypercritical, in this matter. 
We reason that God's people are justified in praising 
God with any words from which it would be possible 
to take a proper thought— even tho others might from 
the same words take an improper thought. 

Our reasons for advising in this case differently 
from what we would ordinarily are two-fold: (1) Your 
husband is nominally, and perhaps really, a Christian, 
and hence it would be proper for you to render some 
deference to his judgment in any matter not compromising 
your own conscience— as, for instance, along 
the lines above suggested. 

(2) There is a little difference between the position 
of a husband and of a wife in such a matter: the wife 
may throw some responsibility upon the husband, but the 
husband could throw no responsibility upon the wife. 
We are not under the Law, but nevertheless the Law 
in a shadowy way gives to us some conception of the 
Lord's view of matters; as for instance, see Leviticus 30. 
Your husband was aware of your vow unto the 
Lord whereby you consecrated your all to him, and 
made no dissent thereto. It would appear, therefore, 
that he could not in any way interfere with the proper 
liberty of your conscience without doing violence to 
his own. 

"WHO ONLY HATH IMMORTALITY"-WHO? 



Question.— How should we understand 1 Tim. 6:14-16? 
Is it the Father or the Son who is referred to 



as the "King of kings and Lord of lords, who only hath 
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can 
approach unto," etc.? 

Answer.— We understand that the Apostle here refers 
to our Lord Jesus. Our reasons for so concluding 
are as follows:— 

(1) While immortality belongs exclusively to the 
divine nature, we are to remember that the Apostle 
Paul declares that the entire Church is called to "glory, 
honor and immortality," and the Apostle Peter says 
that God has given us exceeding great and precious 
promises, that by these "we might become partakers 
of the divine nature." This implies, therefore, that 

the Church of God is to possess this divine attribute of 
immortality or deathlessness. But only our Lord Jesus 
had yet been made partaker of this quality at the time 
of the Apostle's writing. The Church, his Body, would 
not be thus honored and glorified until their due time, 
in the First Resurrection, when they shall be like him, 
sharing his divine nature, glory, honor, and immortality, 
etc. 

(2) That our Lord Jesus already possessed this 
divine nature, and therefore possessed immortality at the 
time of the Apostle's writing, is fully attested by the 
Scriptures, which assure us that "as the Father hath 

life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life 

in himself." This describes immortality, for no other 

condition of life is inherent life; all other conditions 

are derived or imparted life. The statement here that 

our Lord will give this same inherent life to his followers, 

is in agreement with the Apostle's assurance that 

all who have part in the First Resurrection are raised 

in incorruption, in immortality (1 Cor. 15:52,53); and 

remember that our Lord's resurrection was the beginning 

of this First Resurrection, and that it could have 

meant no less to him, the Head, than it is by and by 

to signify to the members of his body. We are to remember 

the same Apostle's declaration that our Lord 

Jesus' resurrection was as a "first-fruits;" that thus he 

became the "first-born among many brethren." We are 

to remember also, that the Apostle, in harmony with 

the above, expressed the desire that he might have a 

share in "his resurrection," "the resurrection," "the 

First Resurrection," in which all the overcomers are to 

share.-Phil. 3:10,11; 1 Cor. 15:20; Jas. 1:18. 

(3) If, therefore, sharing in "his resurrection" is 

to bring his faithful members to immortality, our Lord's 
own resurrection can have been to no inferior condition. 
Hence, to apply the text in question to the Heavenly 
Father would not be consistent with the testimony of 
Scripture, that the Heavenly Son possessed immortality 
at the time as well as the Heavenly Father. 

(4) That the passage in question relates to our 
Lord Jesus and designates him the only Potentate, 

King and Lord, does not imply any disregard or disrespect 
of the Heavenly Father and his attributes, kingship, 



etc., as the same writer (St. Paul) elsewhere 
points out. When speaking in similar strain about 
Christ's Kingdom and the subjugation of all things under 
him, he says, "It is manifest that he is excepted 
who did put all things under him." In other words, 
comparisons which show dignity and honor pertaining 
to Christ, Head or Body, are never understood to be 
comparisons with Jehovah, who is beyond all comparison. 
-See 1 Cor. 15:27,28. 

(5) The correctness of this application is further 
attested by our Lord's own application to himself of 
the same titles.— See Rev. 17:14 and 19:16. 

(6) The Apostle's entire discourse is along the 

line of showing the faithfulness of our Lord Jesus, his 
humility and high exaltation, and how servants and 
all of us should be likewise humble and lowly and 
faithful to the truth as servants of God, and in due time 
be exalted— manifested to the world— in glory, honor 
and immortality in the Kingdom. 



