Announcements
● Literature offer for December: Mankind’s Search for God. January and February: Any 192-page book published prior to 1980 that the congregation has in stock. If the congregation has no stock of such books to be offered, the book “Let Your Kingdom Come” should be used. The “Kingdom Come” book may be requested from Brooklyn. March: Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!
● The Memorial for 1992 will be Friday, April 17, after sundown. This advance notice of the date for the 1992 Memorial celebration is given so that brothers may make necessary reservations or contracts for available halls when there are too many congregations using the Kingdom Hall and they must find other facilities.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on December 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● It is important that brothers planning charters to visit Brooklyn Bethel, Watchtower Farms, or the Watchtower Educational Center project site at Patterson correspond by mail with the Brooklyn Bethel Office first. Please provide information on the number coming and the dates and times of the visits. The Society will provide tour information as well as a map indicating the route charter buses should take. All letters regarding tours, whether for Brooklyn, Watchtower Farms, or Patterson, should be addressed to Watchtower, Bethel Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
● Congregations should begin requesting bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! for 1990 on their December literature requests. (See the Watchtower Publications List, paragraphs 6-8, 10.) The bound volumes will be available in Dutch, English, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. Until the bound volumes are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Pending” on congregation packing lists. Bound volumes are special request items.​—See the Watchtower Publications List, paragraphs 24 and 25.
● As stated in the October 15, 1990, letter sent to all congregations in the United States and its possessions, individuals interested in obtaining the 55-minute English-language video, Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name, should make their request through the congregation. Please bear in mind that these videocassettes are special request items.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 7 (Over-Slaan)​—Dutch
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” 1990 Edition​—Spanish
Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 1 (Aara-Imla)​—Italian
Mankind’s Search for God​—Japanese
Watch Tower Publications Index 1945-1985​—Italian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1950-1985​—Greek
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Ndonga, Slovak, Tamil
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Polish, Russian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Mahorian
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Japanese
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century​—Croatian, Serbian
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Basque
School and Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Polish
Should You Believe in the Trinity?​—Hindi, Romanian, Tamil
Tract No. 15​—Laotian
● The following publication is now available in grade-one French Braille:
How Can Blood Save Your Life? (one volume)
● The following publications are now available in grade-one German Braille:
A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It (one volume)
Is There a God Who Cares? (one volume)
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide (one volume)
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (one volume)
● The following publication is now available in grade-one Spanish Braille:
How Can Blood Save Your Life? (one volume)
Mark requests for Braille publications, ATTENTION: BRAILLE DESK. Include name and address of the person that will use the Braille material.

