Being Taught by Jehovah
1 The prophet Isaiah declared: “The Sovereign Lord Jehovah himself has given me the tongue of the taught ones, that I may know how to answer the tired one with a word.” (Isa. 50:4) One way Jehovah does this is through the training provided by the Theocratic Ministry School. Individual effort, though, is still required. The Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook on page 39 makes this observation: “No matter how many times you have handled a certain type of assignment, preparation is always of value.” This applies to all of us, whether we have been in the school for just a few months or since the school began in 1943.
2 All students should prepare thoroughly. This includes being conscious of timing. The instructions in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule state: “No talk should go overtime.” When a brother handling Assignment No. 1 repeatedly goes overtime, he should be given private counsel. The school overseer should also start the meeting right on time and observe the instructions regarding the time allotted for his counsel and remarks. Please observe that the 1990 revised edition of the “All Scripture” book is to be used.
3 All can benefit greatly from the Bible highlights portion. We are reminded that these should not simply be a review of the assigned material. The speaker should help the audience to appreciate why and how the information is of value to us.
4 With Talk No. 3, many settings have been used with varying success. But having in mind one of the main purposes of the school, which is to help us present the truth accurately and clearly, it is preferred that settings involve field service or informal witnessing.
5 Talk No. 4, when taken from the book Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work, will be assigned to new or younger students. Of course, the student assigned should be able to read. These talks will alternate every other week with a presentation from the Reasoning book. With both Talk No. 3 and Talk No. 4, the student should use the theme shown.
6 Care needs to be exercised when it comes to bringing in additional material. Some of the assigned material may involve only one or two paragraphs. But the material can still be effectively presented in the allotted time by reading and explaining the Scriptures, using illustrations, and so forth. Generally, we do not need to present material outside of what is assigned. The audience should be able to follow you in the publication the talk is based on.
7 The God we worship provides an inexhaustible source of wisdom and knowledge. (Rom. 11:33) Even after millenniums of time, we will still have much to learn. Our ability to praise our heavenly Father and handle life’s problems as well as our contentment and joy will all increase in proportion to the effort we expend to acquire godly wisdom. Make it your determination, then, to benefit fully from the provision our Grand Instructor has made for us by regularly attending the Theocratic Ministry School. May your diligence in preparation for and participation in the Theocratic Ministry School during 1991 help you to accomplish this.

