Conducting Meaningful Family Bible Studies
1 One of the most important activities parents perform is teaching their children the truth. It is an obligation from Jehovah. (Deut. 6:6, 7) Children need direction and guidance to walk uprightly in an ungodly world. They need to learn to love Jehovah and the truth and be determined to stick with it. The August 1, 1988, Watchtower, page 11, stated: “Despite any other obligations you have or the troubles you face, spending time with your children needs to be given priority. The time spent together will allow you to inculcate the spiritual values that will safeguard the hearts of your children and set them on the right course.”
2 If families are to follow the guidelines given in God’s Word, time must be set aside regularly for family study. Family heads need to give priority to caring for the family’s spirituality. If proper attention is not given to the spiritual needs of the household now, very likely parents will have to deal with serious problems in the future.
STUDY MATERIAL AND METHODS
3 What should be studied? The family head is in the best position to know what the family needs. He can inquire as to what the others think will be beneficial and take their suggestions into consideration. Flexibility will make the family study practical and stimulating. Many families choose to prepare the weekly lesson in The Watchtower. However, it may be necessary at times to discuss specific subjects covering problems youths face in school. Published information dealing with dating, extracurricular activities, sports, and immoral tendencies can be considered in an upbuilding, encouraging way. It is important that the family head continually reexamine what information the family needs and how best to reach their hearts with it.​—See The Watchtower, February 15, 1971, pages 105-6.
4 How should a study be conducted? Cultivate a relaxed yet respectful atmosphere. Avoid a mechanical, overly formal procedure. Ask additional questions, and use illustrations to stimulate thinking and keep all involved. Visual aids, such as maps and charts, can be used to enhance the material. Assignments can be given to locate material in the Index or the Insight volumes, according to the children’s ages and abilities. Bring younger children into the discussion as soon as they are able to respond. Simple questions requiring answers of only a few words can be asked of them. Do not use study periods to scold children. Rather, commend them, show appreciation for their efforts, and be enthusiastic in sharing spiritual viewpoints with them.
5 How can you be sure you are reaching the heart? Encourage all to put answers in their own words. Tactfully use viewpoint questions to determine heart attitudes. You could ask: “How do children in school feel about this matter? Do you ever have any doubts on this point?” Be careful not to overreact to answers the children may give to viewpoint questions, or your children may not feel free to express themselves honestly. Give them time to speak. Their knowing you are interested in them and their problems will make your teaching efforts much easier.​—See The Watchtower, November 1, 1986, pages 23-5.
6 Keep in mind that the main objective of your family study is to inculcate Jehovah’s thoughts and not just to find an answer to recite at a congregation meeting. (Eph. 3:17-19) This means working to get information into the heart. Give the family reasons why they should want to do God’s will and why that is the very best course in living.
7 Regular family Bible study is essential for building up the family’s spirituality. It trains and equips children to cope with life’s problems. You parents are in the best position to help your children. Assume this God-given responsibility. Surely Jehovah will bless you if you make every effort to be consistent in conducting a meaningful family Bible study.

