Offering Mankind’s Search for God
1 As we preach from house to house, on the streets, and informally, we sometimes meet people who profess a non-Christian religion. If we have only a scanty knowledge of their religious background, it may be difficult for us to give an effective witness about God’s Kingdom. Now, with the new publication Mankind’s Search for God, we can get insight into the world’s major religions and better understand the beliefs of these people. We can be equipped to help as many as possible to come “out from the snare of the Devil.”​—2 Tim. 2:24-26; Titus 3:2.
2 In the course of our ministry, some people will identify themselves as Muslims, Jews, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, or as a member of some other major religious group. We can kindly acknowledge this fact and perhaps say: “It is interesting to meet people of many different religions. Mankind’s search for God has taken many different directions. [Here, according to the circumstances, one can use the text(s) from the Topic for Conversation.] But do you not agree that generally people profess the religion of their parents, rather than search for God themselves? In other words, they were born into a certain religion. That is a point made in the first chapter of this book Mankind’s Search for God. [Show page 8, paragraph 12.] Learning more about other religions can be interesting. This book explains the origin, practices, and teachings of the major religions of the world.” Then flip through the pages to show some illustrations on the religion professed by the householder. Explain briefly that you are a volunteer worker and that the book is published as part of a worldwide effort to help sincere people in their search for God. If the person shows genuine interest, encourage him to accept and read the book.
3 When appropriate, explain also that this work is supported by voluntary donations, and make arrangements to return.
4 Another approach might be to go directly to the chapter that relates to the householder’s own religion. Certainly a Hindu will be attracted to the map of India found on page 123 and to the photos on pages 96 and 117. Occasionally we may meet a Sikh wearing a traditional turban. Pages 100-101 present a brief summary of that faith.
5 A Muslim may be pleasantly surprised to see the sequence of pictures of Mecca and the Ka‛bah on page 289 and the quotations from the Qurʼān on page 288 and other pages. Buddhists in search of enlightenment might show interest in chapter 6 and its illustrations on pages 141 and 157. People of Chinese origin should appreciate chapter 7, on Taoism and Confucianism. The illustrations on pages 171 and 173 may arouse interest in the book. While many Japanese profess both Buddhism and Shintoism, they will identify with the illustrations on pages 190 and 195 in the chapter on “Shinto​—Japan’s Search for God.”
6 In many territories we meet those of the Jewish religion. Chapter 9, “Judaism​—Searching for God Through Scripture and Tradition,” should spark their interest. They are usually interested in education, and thus the whole book will appeal to many. We also meet atheists and agnostics, and chapter 14, entitled “Modern Disbelief​—Should the Search Continue?,” will appeal to sincere ones among them. The arguments in favor of a belief in God are found from page 334 onward.
7 For anyone professing a religion of Christendom, chapter 10 might be of interest. Page 236 raises the question, “Jesus​—What Were His Credentials?” Pages 243 and 251 illustrate two of the miracles Christ performed. How do we know that Jesus had God’s approval? The illustration on page 253 answers that question.
8 Obviously, in order to adapt our presentation to each individual, we need to know the contents of the book and be familiar with the sequence of the chapters and the illustrations. (For further suggestions refer to Reasoning From the Scriptures, pages 21-4.) Then we may be able to sow the seed of truth by a tactful presentation of this new book. (1 Cor. 9:19-23; Col. 4:5, 6) Since the Bible is often quoted for comparison throughout the book, there is a good basis for starting Bible studies. A later article will suggest how we can make return visits so as to start studies with people of many faiths.

