Presenting the Good News​—On Holidays
1 Although many celebrations associated with Christmas and the New Year have pagan origins, over a billion professed Christians observe these holidays every year. Many people sincerely believe that these observances are approved by God. How can we reach the hearts of such ones with the good news during the holiday season?
BE CONSIDERATE AND RESPECTFUL
2 The elders make special arrangements for holiday witnessing, since many of us have time off from secular work. The time for beginning house-to-house work should be adjusted out of consideration for those householders who may be sleeping later than usual on these days.
3 As we carry on our ministry, we will likely find a number of people quite occupied with visitors and meal preparations. Recognizing that it is a special time for them, we can respectfully make our comments brief and to the point. Christian courtesy on our part may open the way for a further witness in the future.
4 We do not share in worldly religious celebrations, and we do not exchange traditional holiday greetings. Therefore, tact is needed in how we react to such greetings. There is no need to make an issue of the greeting, but in most cases we can simply thank the householder for his good wishes. If people inquire about our belief, we can assure them that we honor Christ Jesus, since that is required of those who honor God. (John 5:23) However, many holiday customs do not honor either Christ or God. If individuals desire more information at that time or later, we can share with them the material in the Reasoning book on pages 176-8 and 180.
INTRODUCTIONS
5 Since the Christmas holidays are religious in nature, we may find many people who are more inclined to talk about God at this time than at any other time of the year. We can take advantage of this fact in our introduction. For example, we might say: “Millions of persons throughout the earth are celebrating Christmas and New Year’s Day. Do you think that these festivities are bringing people closer to God?” Whether the householder feels that the observances are good or bad, after acknowledging his comments, we could say: “Many people wish that they had a better relationship with God, perhaps feeling that God is somewhat distant from them. Happily, God himself invites us to search for him.” Then proceed with the Topic for Conversation.
6 Taking another approach, we could say: “During this Christmas season, we often hear people express the hope that there will be peace on earth and goodwill toward men. Do you think God will bring peace to the earth in our time?” Thereafter we can go on to show that Jesus Christ is the foretold “Prince of Peace.” (Isa. 9:6, 7) As the appointed Ruler in God’s government, Christ will soon take action to bring lasting peace to the earth.​—Dan. 2:44; Rev. 21:3-5.
7 Though most people are apathetic toward the Kingdom message and take delight in their false religious holidays, Jehovah will most certainly bless our efforts to find truth seekers, for he himself “is looking for suchlike ones to worship him,” and he will direct them to his organization.​—John 4:23, 24.

