Watchtower Educational Center
The Society is pleased to extend to you an invitation to visit the recently opened visitors’ center for the Watchtower Educational Center now being constructed at Patterson, New York. The visitors’ center includes a video presentation, picture displays, and an outside observation deck. What is the purpose in constructing an educational center, and why are over four hundred brothers and sisters now working on this project?
Mankind’s greatest need in this last decade of the 20th century is to be properly educated about its Creator, Jehovah God. Jesus Christ said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Whereas fast-moving political changes have captured the attention of much of the human race, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been actively educating millions of honesthearted ones about God’s purpose involving life, freedom, and peace. These people are being helped to align their lives with Jehovah’s will and thus have the prospect of everlasting life.​—Isa. 48:17.
In recent years, there has been a tremendous growth in the number of Kingdom proclaimers worldwide. In 1980 the peak was nearly 2.3 million. By 1990 this number grew to some four million. This growth has placed an increased demand on the Society’s branch facilities throughout the world. As an example, the U.S. headquarters staff (including Brooklyn and Watchtower Farms) has increased in number nearly 75 percent during that same ten-year period. So at the present rate of growth, nearly 250 additional Bethel family members are needed each year. The same increased demands have been felt in other countries as well.
A major forward step in this worldwide Bible educational activity is the construction of the Watchtower Educational Center at Patterson, New York. When complete, the project will include housing for about 1,200 brothers and sisters. This number will consist of members of the Bethel family and students invited to the Gilead missionary school and others who may receive training from time to time. There will be classrooms, an auditorium for approximately 1,600 people, and considerable office space. These additional facilities will no doubt play a vital role in the continued Bible educational work being done worldwide.
Progress to Date
In December 1984 a property consisting of 684 acres was purchased. It is centrally located about 70 miles north of Brooklyn Bethel and 45 miles east of the Society’s Wallkill, New York, facility. Between 1984 and 1988 many months were spent in surveying, preparing drawings, and obtaining necessary building permits. Eight houses on the property were renovated. These houses now provide accommodations for some members of the Bethel family. Since many more accommodations were needed, a total of 14 houses within seven miles of the property have been leased. Also, many brothers who live near Patterson have opened their homes to accommodate members of the Bethel family working on the project.
To provide support services, several temporary buildings had to be erected. This work began in 1988. It is anticipated that nearly 75,000 cubic yards, or 10,000 truckloads, of concrete will be used on the project. So a concrete-mixing plant was moved to Patterson from Watchtower Farms. Trailers were installed to serve as construction offices. Facilities were built for the repair and maintenance of equipment. A 300- by 85-foot metal building that was constructed in 1989 now houses a temporary kitchen, a dining room that will seat up to seven hundred people, a locker room, and construction shops.
Since the project is comparable in size to a small town, considerable work is involved in constructing some three miles of paved roads, underground utilities, and facilities for treating water and wastewater. This work began in 1989. One of the first projects was the building of the main entrance road, which included widening the state highway in front of the main entrance, allowing for safe entrance to and exit from the site. To provide utilities for the educational center, 30 miles of electrical conduit, 1 1/2 miles of water pipe, and 3 miles of sewer pipe were installed.
In July 1989 construction began on the Patterson Inn, a 150-unit hotel located next to the educational center. This will initially serve as housing for construction workers and then will eventually be used as guest facilities for those visiting the educational center. Occupancy of portions of the Patterson Inn by the workers is scheduled to begin in the spring of 1991.
Work is proceeding well on a 450-car parking garage, which will be used initially for additional construction shops and storage. Work has also been started on the first residential building, which will accommodate about three hundred Bethel family members.
Currently, there are over four hundred workers on the project. During 1991 the number of workers will likely increase to over six hundred, as the Patterson Inn is completed. In addition to work on the above-mentioned buildings, work will also begin on the kitchen and dining room facilities, with a capacity of 1,600, and on the powerhouse. This work will require several years to complete. After 1991 a total of 11 buildings are yet to be constructed.
Jehovah’s People Offer Themselves Willingly
In addition to Bethel family members, about 125 brothers and sisters living near Patterson have volunteered as commuter workers. Over 2,200 brothers from all parts of the country have had a share in the temporary worker program. Most serve for a period of one to four weeks. They are housed in the Society’s facility at Wallkill, New York, and travel by bus one hour each way to Patterson. Those who are married and serve for three months have been accompanied by their wives, who assist in the work at Watchtower Farms.
Psalm 110:3 says: “Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.” This is certainly true of Jehovah’s people in supporting this project.
There continues to be a need for qualified brothers in the construction and engineering trades to make themselves available. (Compare Exodus 36:2.) Brothers who would like to apply for one to four weeks may receive an application from the congregation secretary or write the Society. Those who have already served in this capacity and are in a position to volunteer for a three-month period may write the Society, indicating the dates they are available.
Another way we can assist is through our voluntary contributions. Many brothers have already made financial contributions to the work. (1 Chron. 29:3-7) Those wishing to contribute to this special project may send their donation to the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society at 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201.
In these ways, all can have a share in the important work being done. (Phil. 1:9, 10) All of us pray for Jehovah’s rich blessing upon the expansion and spiritual prosperity of his organization.
[Box on page 12]
Central Tour Desk
  A new arrangement has been instituted to provide information on all the tours offered at Brooklyn Bethel, Watchtower Farms, Patterson, and the Jersey City Assembly Hall. A central tour desk will answer all correspondence related to tours. It will no longer be necessary to write each location separately. All tour correspondence should be addressed to the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, New York 11201, Attention: Bethel Office.
  All tour bus groups should write to the central tour desk giving information regarding their itinerary so that further instructions can be given.
  The Society has current information regarding hotels and motels that offer reduced rates to those visiting the headquarters facilities. This information may be obtained by writing the tour desk.
[Picture on page 9]
Architect’s rendering of educational center
[Pictures on page 10, 11]
BUILDING KEY
1 Wastewater Treatment  7 General Services   13 Patterson Inn
2 Powerhouse            8 Offices              14 Concrete-Mixing
                                                 Plant
3 North Garage          9 School/​Auditorium  15 Precast/​Welding
4 Maintenance          10 Residence          16 Construction
                                                 Offices
5 Kitchen/​Dining Room  11 South Garage       17 Temporary
                                                 Receiving
6 Recreation           12 Equipment Sheds    18 Visitors’ Center
A Architect’s model
B Aerial view of construction site
C Outside view of visitors’ center
D Inside view of visitors’ center
E Tilt-up panels lying on slab
F Placing tilt-up panels
G Aerial view of Patterson Inn
[Pictures on page 12]
Left, view east of Route 22 and below, pond and temporary Bethel accommodations west of the highway

