R1002 : page 1 

VOL. LX. 

ALLEGHENY, PA., FEBRUARY, 1888. 

NO. 6. 



page 1 

Zion's Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY. 



BUSINESS OFFICE: No. 151 Robinson St., Allegheny, Pa. 
C. T. RUSSELL, EDrfOR. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, relative to 
what shall appear in these columns, which he cannot and does 
not cast aside; yet he should not be understood as endorsing 
every expression of correspondents, or of articles selected from 
other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :-FIFTY CENTS A YEAR, POSTAGE FREE. 
Including special number (Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., paper 
bound) seventy five cents. Remit by draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Three shillings per year. Including "Special Number," four 
shillings. Remit by Foreign Postal Money Order. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lord's poor who will 
send a card yearly requesting it. Freely we have received and 
freely we would give the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy 
and eat— yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and 
without price." And you that have it- "Wherefore do ye spend 



money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which 
satisfieth not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is good, 
and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "-ISAIAH 55:1,2. 



Entered as SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER, at the P.O., 
Allegheny, Pa. 



page 1 

WE HAVE PLENTY of the "Missionary Envelopes" now. 
Every letter you send out should bear this much of the gospel 
upon the outside, beside what you may think proper to write 
within. 



R1003 : page 1 

WE SEND THIS TOWER to many who have not renewed 
their subscription, nor indicated in any way their desire to have 
it come during 1888; because we want all to read the series of 
articles commencing "Who are Sons of God. " Those whose 
paper stops with this number, have themselves to blame. You do 
not appreciate the spiritual food, if you will not "ask, that ye 
may receive, that your joy may be full"— and we are quite sure 
none of you are so poor that you cannot purchase a Postal Card. 

page 1 

Remember, too, that though moneys sent at any time are 
credited on our books, requests to have the TOWER continued 
free, hold good only for that year. So, if you wrote only last 
October it will not serve for 1888;-none prior to December 
count for 1888. Even if you have at sometime written that you 
"want the TOWER as long as you live," that is not sufficient, as 
we cannot tell but you may have died or changed your mind. We 
want to hear from you all once a year. Write a good letter or at 
least a card. 

Again, while we will gladly send sample TOWERS to all the 
addresses you send us, we enter none for the year but such as are 
paid for or have sufficient interest to write and ask it for 
themselves. 



R1003 : page 1 



MORE ARP SLIPS. 



We were out of Arp Slips "for free distribution" for a while, but 
have plenty now. Order all you can use. Put one into every letter 
you write; wrap one in every bundle you send away, and if 



possible arrange to engage help and distribute them to every 
church in your town. 

As noticed in previous TOWERS, several friends paid for 
printing slips for free circulation in Ohio, Pennsylvania, W. 
Virginia and Maryland. Now we can announce to you that it is 
decided to use receipts of the TOWER TRACT FUND to further 
this cause. Seeing the good results from the slips already 
distributed, it is proposed to deluge the country with them. 
Order all you can use. Labor while it is called day, for the night 
cometh wherein no man can work. 



R1002 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

The events of the past month show that the time is hastening 
rapidly when the Papacy will say, "I sit a queen and am no 
widow." The present Pope, Leo XIII., has just celebrated his 
fiftieth year in the priesthood, calling it a Jubilee. It has been 
made the occasion of the grandest gifts and ovations to the 
Papacy on the part of the civilized world, witnessed in centuries. 
Engrossed memorial letters and costly presents came from every 
quarter— from kings, queens, princes, bishops, mayors, clubs, 
churches and societies, aggregating in value ($15,000,000) 
fifteen millions of dollars. 

The day of the celebration in Rome was a wonderful one, which 
can only be appreciated by those who realize what the Papacy 
really claims to be. It claims to be nothing less than the glorious 
millennial kingdom of Christ established in dignity and power to 
rule over the kingdoms of earth, the fulfillment of our Lord's 
prayer -"THY KINGDOM COME, thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven. " The papal hierarchy consisting of the 
bishops, cardinals, etc., with the pope as their head, claims to be 
the Kingdom of God in power, the pope being instead of Christ 
or the "vicar" of Christ, and the bishops, etc., instead of the 
apostles, in fulfillment of the Lord's promise, "It is the Father's 
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. " It must be 
remembered that the papacy claims [falsely] that the time of 
suffering with Christ is in the long ago past, and that the time of 
the Millennial reign and rule began long ago, when Papacy 
obtained the control of the Roman Empire. Papacy claims that 
the Protestant movement, the "Reformation," led up to the 
events of 1799, from which time to 1870 was accomplished the 
gradual destruction of her political power, and this period since 
1799 she considers the "little season" of Rev. 20:3, in which the 
devil is loosed. Papacy thus ignorantly fulfills the predictions of 
God's word, by establishing a counterfeit kingdom, and 
instituting an unauthorized reign over the world under a 
counterfeit head, (the popes), thus constituting the anti-Christ 



kingdom so prominent in prophecy. Those only who see clearly 
the coming hierarchy or kingdom of the true kingly priesthood - 
the true church-under the true head, the Lord Jesus, can 
appreciate how great is the counterfeit deception by which 
papacy has blinded, and is still blinding herself and the world. 

How great then is papacy's triumph at the present hour, as she 
seems to see what she considers the little season of Satan's 
power drawing to a close; and herself rising again to glory and 
power. But her fall will come all the more severely when it does 
come. In proportion as she has glorified herself, she shall have 
trouble and sorrow. The present uplifting in influence is but the 
lifting of the great millstone to make its casting down the more 
violent-See Rev. 17:6,18, and 18:7,8,21. 

Papacy's "King of Glory," the pope, wearing the Prussian 
Emperor's present, the triple crown, covered with a thousand 
costly pearls, was carried about from place to place during the 
ceremonies of the celebration, and offered mass, etc. He 
received the homage of the forty-eight cardinals, two hundred 
and thirty-eight arch-bishops, and an audience of thirty thousand 
in the great cathedral known as St. Peters. [It will be 
remembered that it was the public sale of "Indulgences," to raise 
money to finish this immense cathedral, that opened the eyes of 
Luther and others, and led them to search and finally locate 
Papacy as the "Mystery of Iniquity," photographed in Daniel 
and Revelation.] But, poor man, as if to show that he was not the 
real, but only an imitation "King of glory" (Psa. 24:7,9), he 
fainted twice during the ceremonies. 

Everything was done on the princely, or rather the kingly scale 
befitting to the claim that the pope is Christ on earth. The 
feeding of a hungry multitude on five loaves and two small 
fishes was not imitated, though thousands of the so-called 
children of the papacy are declared to be in a starving condition 
in Ireland; but on the contrary "Peter's pence," given out of their 
penury by the wretchedly poor the world over, to help the poor 
pope, was squandered lavishly by this (would be, if he could 
be,) "king of nations," (Rev. 15:3.) He began the day with a 
breakfast costing several thousand dollars,— over eighty dollars 
each, for all the bishops, cardinals, etc., (princes of the church) 
who partook of his hospitality. And by the way, it must be 
remembered that this was not extravagant on the part of the 
pope; he can well afford to do it. His poor predecessor, it will be 
remembered, left over twenty millions of dollars in the treasury 
on his decease— safely and wisely invested with the Rothschilds, 
the Jewish bankers. This sum with interest and additions is 
probably not less than thirty millions now, as his regular income 
is put at a million and a half per year. Evidently the popes are 
unlike the apostles whom they claim to succeed. They are rich 
by making others poor, while the apostles were "poor while 
making others rich. "-2 Cor. 6:10. 



It should not surprise us to learn that Catholics did homage and 
sent gifts to their king, but how shall we interpret it when we 
learn that Protestants in places of representative influence did 
the same? It inclines us to think that Protestants themselves are 
beginning to see that they have gradually swung around so 
much, that they now see the foolishness of calling themselves 
protestants while they do not protest at all, but flatter and do 
homage to the system and the doctrines against which their 
fathers protested even to the stake, the rack and the dungeon. 

The Queen of England, (the nation which claims to be the chief 
protestant against Papacy)-the head of the Church of England 
sent a very costly gift consisting of plate— ewer basin, etc.,— 
which was used by the pope in celebrating his Jubilee Mass. 
These are of gold and probably the most elegant and costly of 
any ever used in that most blasphemous of all the errors of 
Papacy-the Mass, -noted in the prophetic Scriptures as "the 
abomination" greater than all others.* 

Next in religious influence among the sovereigns of the earth is 
Emperor William, of Germany. The Emperor being himself a 
member of the Lutheran church, and Germany the home of 
Luther and his notable work, any recognition of Papacy's claims 
on his part must not be overlooked. Did he send a present? Yes, 
and one of the greatest significance as indicating the German 
government's attitude toward the restoration of temporal power 
to Papacy. He sent as a present a new triple crown such as has 
been worn by the popes since the time of Benedict XIII. This 
crown is the distinctive badge of civil authority. It said in figure, 
Germany recognizes you as a civil ruler, though at present you 
are dispossessed of your territory; just as the present of the head 
of the Church of England said in symbol, Protestant England has 
changed her views on the subject and no longer recognizes your 
system as that of Anti-Christ, but upholds your communion. 

The Duke of Norfolk was the Queen's envoy in this matter and 
approached the pope kneeling three times, and as the Catholic 
Times, of Liverpool, pointedly notes, is the only envoy sent by 
an English sovereign for over two hundred years. 

These are so many additional straws, pointing the direction of 
public sentiment -pointing as we have heretofore noted to the 
grand confederation of the great religious systems— a union 
which to the many will seem a grand achievement, 

R1002 : page 2 

a token of Millennial harmony, but which, to the extent that it is 
successful, will be as oppressive to the true church as it will be 
advantageous to the human systems called churches. For when 
the power of organization is once felt, it will soon be used to 
frown down and hinder all growth in grace and knowledge, and 
to suppress all teaching and teachers not in harmony with the 
errors and bondage of said unions. The only union and bondage 



which God has ever authorized in his children, is the union 
between each individual and Christ the head; and the union 
between the members of the church if in any way more than, or 
different from that prompted by love and the spirit of the head, 
is of the devil, no matter how honorable and moral the agents he 
may employ, or the arguments he may cause to be advanced to 
secure the bondage of God's children under the name of 
Christian Union. There can be no union between truth and error 
to last, and every attempt to secure it is an attempt to fetter the 
truth. We are in the "harvest" of this age, and the errors must fall 
before the "sharp sickle" of truth, which the Lord is now 
thrusting in. (Rev. 14:15,16.) Hence the doings of those who say 
"a confederacy" (a union) must not discourage us, for though 
they will succeed and cause a night to come, wherein no man 
can work except those who worship the beast or his image, 
(John 9:4 and Rev. 13:16,17,) yet the truth will eventually 
triumph, as well as all faithful to it, under the true pope, the true 
"King of glory," the High priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. 

Some further showing of the Roman anti-Christ system as "a 
great Christian camp" by leading protestant ministers, blinded 
by long cherished errors and wrong expectations concerning the 
church's 

R1003 : page 2 

present work and the promised kingdom under the whole 
heavens, we have been obliged to leave for another number of 
the TOWER; but they are truly surprising to those who see, but 
unnoticed by the majority, whom, as always, the god of this 
world blinds to the truth. 

Meanwhile, as a proof that some eyes are getting open while 
others are being closed, we print below a brief report of a 
discourse delivered in New York by the ex-priest, now well 
known as Dr. McGlynn, as reported in the public press. 

NEW YORK, Dec. 8. -The announcement that Dr. McGlynn 
would speak tonight on the Pope's right to interfere in politics 
drew an even larger audience than usual to the anti-poverty 
meeting at the Academy of Music. The address was a protest 
against a recent statement by Monsignor Preston, that Catholics 
are bound to vote as the Pope advises. Dr. McGlynn handled the 
subject boldly, declaring that wherever papal influence had been 
felt in politics it had been a curse to the country where it was 
exercised. Christ, the founder of the Church, had refrained from 
mixing religion with politics, but some of his vice-gerents had 
thought themselves wiser. 

The speaker declared that even in religious matters Popes had 
often shown themselves far from infallible. It was the shameless 
abuse of the Papal power that led to the disruption of the Church 
in the sixteenth century. At the time when a flaxen haired 
German boy, named Martin Luther, was playing around his 



mother's knee, Pope Alexander VI. was installing his 
illegitimate children in his papal residence. Many Popes had 
been guilty of egregious blunders and crimes. It had been said 
that Catholics must take their religion and not their politics from 
Rome. But even in matters of religion they were not bound to 
blindly submit to dictation. Every man's conscience is to be the 
final arbiter for him how far he is obliged to obey the Pope. 



*We have heretofore shown the error of the principles involved 
in the Mass, and when Vol. II. of DAWN is ready it will contain 
a full explanation of it, in connection with the prophecies which 
foretold its institution, and Papacy's rise and fall. 



R1003 : page 2 

THE DAWN IN GERMAN 

We are glad to announce to you that the German translation of 
Millennial Dawn Vol. I. is complete. It will be on the press 
shortly, and the first edition of 1000 copies, cloth bound, will be 
ready for mailing very soon. Orders may now be sent in; they 
will be served in order as received. 

As the German language requires more words than the English 
to express the thoughts, this volume will contain over 400 pages. 
The price will be one dollar. We cannot promise a paper covered 
50 ct. edition at present, as there will probably not be a 
sufficient interest to justify it. It is only by getting out large 
editions that paper bound books can be made to pay expenses. 

We are confident the translation is excellent: it is the work of 
Bro. Zech, a German by birth, whose education in the language, 
as well as his growth in the knowledge of the truth, the spirit of 
which he seems to have drunk into deeply, has well qualified 
him for the work. We are confident, therefore, that his work is 
so complete that the German reader can catch the spirit and 
intent of "The Plan of the Ages." For this blessing to our 
German brethren, we on their behalf thank God especially, and 
secondarily we thank Bro. Zech, who in this work has been 
God's honored instrument. 

To the interested readers of the TOWER, let us say: The work is 
in your hands now; now is your opportunity to engage in the 
service of the truth and in the service of your fellow-Germans. 
God made the plan and revealed it in His Word, and is therefore 
the real Author of the "Plan of the Ages;" the writer of it 
endeavored to do his part as best he could in the English 
language, and now Bro. Zech as translator has spent precious 
months of labor in preparing it for you in German. Now it is 
your turn to spend your consecrated time and talent in using this 



which is thus by others made ready for your use. How many of 
you will prove faithful to so great privileges as are here laid 
before you? How much sleep will you lose in trying to put the 
plan into the hands, heads and hearts of others? Probably few of 
you will lose as much sleep as we are sure Bro. Zech lost in his 
part of the work. How many will feel it a pleasure to deny 
themselves some comforts and pleasures, earthly, in order to 
carry to others the comforts and pleasures mental and heavenly, 
which a knowledge of God's plan only can give? 

The TOWER Publishing Co. promises that as soon as the 
brethren and sisters shall order 2000 copies of paper bound 50 
ct. Dawn in German (or send pledges that they will order as 
soon as the books are announced as ready) they will get out an 
edition of 10,000 copies. Now dear friends use your privileges 
and opportunities faithfully, so that the Master at the reckoning 
may say, "Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joys of thy Lord. " 



R1003 : page 2 

THE GERMAN TOWER. 

The German TOWER has been stopped for some months to 
permit Bro. Zech's time to go to the preparation of Dawn. That 
work being now done, the regular issues of the German TOWER 
were resumed, commencing January, 1888. 

As a reward for the patience of the German readers obliged to 
wait during the preparation of German Dawn, it is proposed that 
such of them as order cloth bound GERMAN DAWN shall be 
presented free with the next year's GERMAN TOWER. 
Therefore such in ordering DAWN should mention the fact that 
they wish the GERMAN TOWER renewed as per this promise. 



R1004 : page 2 



CHAS. H. SPURGEON'S POSITION. 

In our December '87 issue we referred to this celebrated 
minister of London, as having left the Baptist denomination. We 
were promptly contradicted by some who felt loath to 
acknowledge the loss to Babylon of so able a man. Fuller reports 
show that we were entirely correct. Mr. Spurgeon's withdrawal 
was from the Baptist Denomination— the "Baptist Union." 

Many do not know that the "Baptists," "Disciples," 
"Congregationalists," and some others, are not organized into 
one body throughout the world, in the same manner as are 
Roman Catholics, Episcopalians, and E. Methodists, but each 
congregation maintains the right to control its own affairs and its 



own faith independently of other congregations. [This is well, 
but the same principle should extend to each individual in each 
congregation. Each should be asked if he accepts the Lord by 
the only name, Savior, and the Bible as God's divinely inspired 
communication to man; and beyond this, each should be left to 
believe all that he can find in God's revelation, each ready to 
assist and be assisted by the other, to grow in grace and 
knowledge and in the love of God.] But those independent 
congregations, imitating the various sects, have formed 
"Unions" by which the majority of such churches attempt to fix 
the faith and affairs of the others, much the same as Conferences 
do for the Methodists, and the Presbyteries and Synods and 
General Assemblies of the Presbyterians, and the Convocations 
Councils and generally the hierarchies of the Protestant 
Episcopal and Roman Catholic churches. 

We did not say that Mr. Spurgeon withdrew as pastor of the 
congregation he serves. If they as a people are free from 
denominational shackles, free from the control of others, and 
meet to study God's Word and to offer Him worship they are a 
church in the original form, such as the congregations in the 
days of the apostles were. And this is just where Mr. Spurgeon 
and the congregation he ministers to stand: They have 
withdrawn from the "Baptist Union" and stand independent. For 
this others blame Brother Spurgeon, while we commend his 
steps. He does not see all the truth as we see it yet, but now that 
he is free and has taken a bold stand, if he follows on, he will 
soon see more and more light— until the perfect day. That we 
correctly state Mr. Spurgeon will we think be apparent from the 
following abstract from the Sword and Trowel, a paper which he 
publishes. 

In it he has written: "The case is mournful. Certain ministers are 
making infidels. Avowed infidels are not a tenth as dangerous as 
those preachers who scatter doubt, and stab at faith. " In these 
remarks Mr. Spurgeon evidently refers to the same class in its 
many forms so often reproved (Eph. 5:1 1) in the TOWER, who 
reject the inspiration of the Bible, laugh at the stories of the 
flood and of Balaam's speaking ass, and Jonah and the fish, etc.; 
who declare with great show of worldly wisdom that Adam's fall 
must have been upward, and who, denying the original sin and 
its penalty, see no reason to believe in a redemption from that 
fall by the precious blood of Christ, and who consequently deny 
the ransom, and claim that our Lord was merely a good 
example, and that the whole world in God's order is being 
evolved from lower to higher conditions, and that all will finally 
be saved irrespective of faith and obedience to a "historic 
Christ. " This error, as we have shown, is spreading into all the 
pulpits and pews of "Christendom" rapidly, being helped along 
by the false views hitherto held concerning the wages of sin and 
the character of our Lord's ransom-sacrifice. That Mr. Spurgeon 



is opposing this same class, is evident from the following 
quotations from his paper. 

He says: "It is only too evident to all who are zealous for God 
and his truth, that on one side there is a perilous growth of 
superstition and sacerdotalism, and on the other of unbelief and 
indifference to vital religion. The substitutionary sacrifice of our 
Lord and Savior is lightly esteemed and even repudiated by 
some prominent teachers-the plenary inspiration of the Holy 
Scriptures, with other verities of the faith of Christ, are 
explained away, in many instances." 

"A new religion has been initiated, which is no more 
Christianity than chalk is cheese; and this religion, being 
destitute of moral honesty, palms itself off as, the old faith, with 
slight improvements. The atonement is scouted,... the 
punishment of sin is turned into fiction, and the resurrection into 
a myth; and yet these enemies of our faith expect us to call them 
'Brethren' and maintain a confederacy with them. 

"The results of this erroneous teaching and perversion of the 
gospel are apparent; worldliness, sensuality, and luxury... 
abound, and Christian liberty has become license in the walk 
and conversation of many of the professed disciples of Christ. " 

In closing Mr. Spurgeon asks- "What shall we do?" and 
answers, "We retire at once and distinctly from the 'Baptist 
Union.'" 

To the supposed inquiry whether he would attempt to head a 
new denomination, he answers, No; and declares [what we 
declare] that denominations are unnecessary among Independent 
congregations. 



R1004 : page 2 

THE TRUTH IN CHINA. 

Shanghai, China, 

DEAR SISTER RUSSELL:-The Dawns reached me on the 23d 
of September, for which many thanks. Three of the books are 
now in Shanghai. The good and thoroughly orthodox Methodist 
sister, to whom I gave one, said, "The restitution theology is 
very interesting, and I am glad you have found such rest and 
peace in believing it." I am sure she will read the book carefully, 
and be benefited by it. Another book has gone into a Baptist 
family. And the third I gave to Rev. Dr. W., who believes in the 
Millennial coming of Christ, and is, I think, somewhat prepared 
for Dawn. One book has gone to Ching-chew-fu into the Eng. 
Bap. Mission. The others I shall send— one to Peking, one to 
Amoy, one to Tang-chon, etc. The papers also arrived in due 
time and will soon be scattered over China. The books ordered 



came by last mail, received two or three days since. Since 
writing the above, the Concordance and Diaglott came. I cannot 
thank you enough for the kind letter received at the same time. I 
am using my Dawn, and the others and the papers are being 
scattered broadcast over the land. The Rev. Bp. S. has a Dawn. 
You may be sure I lose no opportunity to tell the glad tidings. 

Your sister in Christ, 

C. B. D. 



R1003 : page 2 

OUR PASSOVER ANNIVERSARY.-Sunday night, March 
25th next, will be the anniversary of our Lord's last night with 
the disciples in the flesh. As usual, the church will 
commemorate it. So many as can meet with us here will be 
welcomed. 



R1004 : page 3 

"THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVETH YOU." 

John 16:27. 

Be still, my soul, Jehovah loveth thee! 
Fret not, nor murmur at thy weary lot; 
Though dark and lone thy journey seems to be, 
Be sure that thou art ne'er by Him forgot: 
He ever loves; then trust Him, trust Him still; 
Let all thy care be this-the doing of his will. 

Thy hand in his, like fondest, happiest child, 
Place thou, nor draw it for a moment thence; 
Walk thou with Him, a Father reconciled, 
Till in his own good time He calls thee hence. 
Walk with him now: so shall thy way be bright, 
And all thy soul be filled with his most glorious light. 

Take courage, faint not, though the foe be strong; 
Christ is thy strength! He fighteth on thy side. 
Swift be thy race; remember 'tis not long, 
The goal is near; the prize He will provide. 
And then from earthly toil thou restest ever, 
Never again to toil, or fight, or fear-oh never! 

He comes, with his reward; 'tis just at hand; 

He comes in glory to his promised throne; 

My soul rejoice! ere long thy feet shall stand 

Within the City of the blessed One- 

Thy perils past, thy heritage secure, 

Thy tears all wiped away, thy joy forever sure. 



-Horatius Bonar. 



R1005 : page 3 

WHO ARE SONS OF GOD? 

Few seem to get a clear idea of the meaning of the words son 
and father. The word father, signifies producer, generator, life- 
giver, the word son correspondingly signifying one produced, 
generated, one who receives life from a father. 

Applying these definitions, we find that in a general way 
Jehovah God might be said to be the father, producer or creator 
of every living creature, from the crawling worm to the great 
arch-angel. But a restriction is placed about the word son, by its 
use in Scripture, which shows us that God uses the expression 
"sons of God" with reference only to those of his creatures 
whom he created more or less in his own likeness; i.e., with 
mental and moral qualities in harmony with his, and capable of 
understanding his laws and arrangements. This cuts off from the 
honorable name of sons the lower, the brute creation, but still 
leaves sons of various natures— angelic sons, human sons, and 
sons of divine nature. 

Angels are called "sons of God" in parable, in Job 1:6 and 2:1. 
They are again represented as "morning stars," i.e., early bright 
ones, rejoicing together at the creation of this earth, when they 
as "the sons of God shouted for joy."- Job 38:7. As shown in 
the TOWER of December '87, those angels which kept not their 
first estate are referred to as "sons of God" up to the time of 
their fall into sin. -Gen. 6:2,4. 

Among men, Adam of course was a son of God, i.e., God's 
creation. God was his Life-giver, Creator, Producer or Father, 
and hence he was a "son of God" and is so designated, Luke 
3:38. Be it noted, however, that none of Adam's children are 
called "sons of God" down to the time that our Lord Jesus gave 
himself a ransom for all. Those who, by wilful sin, forfeit and 
lose the likeness of God, the perfection in which he created 
them, are reckoned as unworthy of the honorable title of sons of 
God-as the brute creation which never had and never lost this 
likeness; and such are to be treated as "natural brute beasts, 
made to be destroyed." (2 Pet. 2:12; Eccl. 3:18.) In the case of 
man (Adam), he was sentenced to death at once, as unworthy of 
life and the various privileges God had prepared for his sons. 
Having misused his grand superiority to the beasts, he was no 
longer worthy of the honors prepared for sons. From the 
moment of sin onward, Adam was not recognized as a son of 
God; and if he was fallen and degraded from sonship, it is 
manifest that he could in turn give life to none better or more 
worthy of divine sonship than he himself was. And so for four 



thousand years— until our Redeemer's coming— there were no 
sons of God, none whom God would recognize as such, except 
our Lord and those angels who kept their first estate of purity 
and sonship. Even Abraham, and Moses, and Elijah, and the 
prophets, were not called sons of God. "Friend of God" and 
"faithful servant" were the dearest names then possible (Heb. 
3:5,6. Gal. 4:4-7); because no matter how good their intentions 
they were all imperfect, fallen from the likeness and liberties of 
sons of God, and had not yet been redeemed from that great 
calamity. 

Next in order let us consider our Lord Jesus :-- 



GOD'S ONL Y BEGOTTEN SON. 

The question at once arises, How can there be more than one 
son of God, since that one is called the only begotten Son? We 
answer: both statements are true. God has "many sons," and one 
"only begotten Son." Our Lord before he became a man, was a 
spirit being, as "God is a spirit," and angels are spirits; and he 
was the "first born of every creature," or "born before all 
creation," as some translate it— the beginning of Jehovah God's 
creative work. -Rev. 1:8; 3:14. 

And since he is both the first and the last, the beginning and 
ending of Jehovah's direct creative work, it is very evident that 
he was the ONLY Son of God thus directly begotten of the 
Father. And since it is clearly stated that "all things were made 
by him, and without him was not anything made that was made 
(John 1:3), it becomes the more evident to every reasoning mind 
that His creation was more directly and specially the Father's 
work than that of any other creature, or Son of God-man or 
angel; for though it was the Father's power and vitality that was 
given to angels, to men, to beasts, and birds, and creeping 
things, yet with none of these was the begetting a direct work of 
Jehovah, as in the case of the one Son distinguished forever 
among the sons of God by the title, "only begotten Son." And 
though God calls angels sons, mark the pointedness of the 
apostle's question, and how it points out our Lord's superiority, 
when he asks, "Unto which of the angels said he at any time, 
"Thou art my [special] son, this day have I begotten thee.'"- 
Heb. 1:5; 5:5. 

Our Lord did not lose his right to the title "Only Begotten Son," 
by becoming a man; for the life was not laid down in death, 
when his nature was changed and he was made flesh. That 
change was only a transfer of existence from a higher nature to a 
lower nature, from spiritual nature to human nature; for, or in 
order to the suffering of death by him as a just man for the 
unjust; as the corresponding price for Adam's sin-penalty. Even 
as a man, then, our Lord retained his title "only begotten Son of 
God." As John says, "We beheld his glory [dignity, perfection], 



the glory [perfection and grandeur] as of the only begotten of the 
Father, full of favor and truth."- John 1:14. 

But when our Lord in obedience to the Father's purpose would 
redeem mankind, nothing but his death could accomplish the 
work. That was the penalty imposed upon Adam and the race 
which lost life in him— and that he must suffer if he would 
redeem Adam's life (and ours lost in him); so then the "Only 
Begotten" died, ceased to be, and remained so until the third 
day. Now, question: Did our Lord cease to be the only begotten 
Son of God when he laid down his life a ransom for many? Yes, 
truly. When his existence terminated in death the only begotten 
Son had ceased to exist— was dead. But in his resurrection, his 
re-creation, he was again the only begotten Son of God, for no 
agency was called into service to accomplish his resurrection, 
but, as when first created, he was the direct workmanship of 
Jehovah, who so arranged that not even this distinctive title and 
honor of "only begotten" should be lost by his obedient Son. 
Hence no agency of man, nor even of the angel Gabriel, was 
permitted in the work of our Lord's resurrection: no agencies 
great or small were employed, but it is written "Whom God hath 
raised from the dead"— "God hath both raised up the Lord, and 
will also raise up us by his own power. "-Acts 2:24; 3:15; 4:10; 
Rom. 4:24; 6:4; 8:11; 1 Cor. 6:14; 15:15; Col. 2:12; 1 Thes. 
1:10; 1 Pet. 1:21. And since his resurrection was a re-creation of 
the same being or individuality first created, it can still be said 
of him that he is the first and the last, the beginning and the 
ending of the creation of God, the Only Begotten of the Father. - 
See Rev. 1:18. 

POWER TO BECOME SONS OF GOD. 

Coming now to the Gospel age, consider the import of the 
words, "To as many as received him, to them gave he power 
[i.e., liberty] to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe in his name," (John 1:12) and "Beloved, now are we the 
sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know that when He shall appear we shall be like him; for we 
shall see him as he is." -1 John 3:2. 

As already noted, all the human race from Adam down came 
under condemnation through his wilful sin (1 Tim. 2:14), and all 
lost recognition as the sons of God, as well as the likeness 
because of which they had been so recognized above the brute 
creation. Indeed since their minds ceased to be godly, and 
became carnal and devilish, they might be said to have been 
reconstructed by the tyrant Sin to bear much of the image of 
God's adversary; and hence they might in this sinful state be 
called sons of the devil, bearing his moral likeness. And so our 
Lord declared even to the Jews, "Ye must be born again"-"Ye 
are of your father the devil." (John 8:44.) And since the same 
apostle also records, (1 John 5:19) that "The whole world lieth 



in wickedness," it is evident that the standing of all in God's 
sight is that of children of the devil. 

The question then arises, Since only those possessing the perfect 
likeness of God, are worthy to be called sons of God, and since 
God himself refuses to call any others by that honorable title, 
how can we be called "sons of God" who are confessedly 
imperfect, and who at most bear but a slight likeness to the holy 
God? The answer is, that our Lord Jesus gave power or liberty to 
become sons of God, -"to them that believe on his name." Mark 
well, he did not make us sons, but simply gave us the liberty or 
privilege to become sons. It follows then, that the patriarch and 
prophets of the preceding four thousand years could not become 
sons, because they were not given that privilege or liberty. 

What did our Lord do for us to secure us this great boon, this 
liberty or privilege? Something must have been done, for 
Jehovah changes not (Mai. 3:6.) He did not once declare Adam 
and his children cut off from sonship and subject to destruction 
in death, as brute beasts, and then change that decree. Nor could, 
nor would our Lord Jesus set aside the divine decision to 
reinstate the sinners to the dignity of sons and to worthiness of 
life. No; he came not to oppose the Father's will, but to obey it. 
"I delight to do thy will, O God," was the sentiment expressed in 
his every act and word. "Not my will but thine be done," was his 
constant prayer. Hence we say, he must have done something 
for us, by which he lifted from us the embargo of sin, to give us 
liberty to again become sons of God. What did he do for us? 

Ah yes ! he did a great work for us; he gave himself a ransom for 
us, he redeemed 

R1006 : page 3 

us from all iniquity and from all the condemnation and loss 
attaching to it. Giving thus the price of Adam's guilt he thereby 
purchased the dead and dying race, with full right to do what he 
wills to them and for them. He wills to give during this Gospel 
age, liberty to become sons of God to all that believe on his 
name. His name was called Jesus, which signifies Savior or 
Liberator. -(Matt. 1:21.) "Thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he 
shall save his people from their sins. " Hence we see that it is to 
them that receive him in the sense of believing in him as their 
Savior or Liberator, that he gives now the liberty of becoming 
sons of God-none others. Believing that such a person lived at 
such a time is not the kind of belief which brings the liberty: 
believing that he was a fine man who taught many excellent 
precepts, is not the kind of belief necessary: believing that he set 
a good example, and that all should try to follow it as best they 
can, is not the belief demanded here: No, it is a different belief, 
a belief in and recognition of his name Savior: the recognition 
and acceptance of him as the one who saves his people from 
their sins. No one who rejects the Bible account of the fall and 



condemnation of all in Adam, and the utter loss of sonship and 
all its privileges (life, etc.), can possibly receive and "believe" in 
this SAVIOR or Liberator, who by redeeming them grants them 
liberty or privilege to become sons of God. 

But is it only to "believers" in his name that our Lord grants this 
privilege? Only these; belief in no other person will do, nor will 
the acceptance of our Lord by any other name than the one 
which acknowledges his ransom-sacrifice avail— he must be 
recognized as Savior, and not merely as Lord and Guide. He 
saves his people from their sins that are past as well as teaches 
and guides them to abhor and avoid sin for the future. 

Next let us examine the liberty which proper believers obtain 
through the Savior. What does the expression liberty signify as 
here used? It simply means that our Savior, having paid the 
penalty of Adam's sin, offers to all who accept of his finished 
work, and who desire to return to the likeness of God and to 
sonship, a clear receipt of exoneration from the sin which 
brought condemnation upon all six thousand years ago, and that 
he will throw about such the robe of his own righteousness to 
cover all their present imperfections and unavoidable 
weaknesses, so that they may at once go to God and thus find 
acceptance and grace to help, until having proved by their 
obedience in the present life, the sincerity of their consecration 
to God's will and service, they shall ultimately be delivered from 
all the present weaknesses into the grand, perfect spiritual 
bodies like unto our Lord's. This is the promise to such 
overcomers, who thus will be received into final and complete 

R1006 : page 4 

sonship, as heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord and Savior. 

This is what the apostle means when he says: "Beloved now are 
we the sons of God-and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; 
but we know that when He shall appear we shall be like him. " 
The "we" here does not refer to the world of mankind, but to the 
saints, the truly consecrated, who believe in the only name 
[Jesus— Savior] whereby we must be saved. As already shown 
God really has no imperfect sons, such as we now are, hence in 
the full sense we will not be sons until in the end of this age, the 
selection and trial of these probationary sons being complete, 
they shall be received to the full perfect likeness of God-like 
unto their Redeemer and King. But now we may reckon 
ourselves Sons of God by faith. Grasping by faith the anticipated 
end of our high calling, we may and do speak of the things 
which are not yet fully accomplished, as though they were 
completed. In saying, Now are we the sons of God, and grasping 
it as a reality, we fasten to it by the threefold cord of faith, the 
three parts of which are first, faith in the perfect sacrifice, and 
finished work of him who gave us liberty or privilege to become 



sons; second, faith or confidence in promises made us of grace 
to help us overcome and quench all the fiery darts of our 
opponents; third, faith or confidence in our consciousness that 
our consecration is full, complete, and that our desire is to know 
and do the Father's will under any and all conditions. This 
threefold cord of faith, firmly fastened upon our promised 
inheritance and sonship, to be verified to us when we are tried 
and made perfect, will indeed be "an anchor to the soul both 
sure and steadfast," which will enable us to say and feel that 
even now (by faith) we are the Sons of God, though not yet 
clothed upon with our perfect bodies. 

WILL LIBERTY TO BECOME SONS OF GOD 
BE GIVEN TO ALL MEN? 

Do not answer this question hastily— give it due consideration. 
At first you may be inclined to differ from our view when we 
answer that it will not. To us it seems clear that this liberty is 
connected with the special high-calling of this Gospel age, and 
ceases with it. 

Call to mind again what we saw above to be the meaning of the 
words father and son: father-life-giver or creator; son- 
offspring, one who receives life from a father. Now consider 
man as represented in Adam. At first he was God's son, but 
afterward because of sin he forfeited all, and ceased to be, as 
God's son. Now if brought back to life and perfection, whoever 
is his life-giver will be his father. Since man's life was forfeited 
totally, it follows that his resurrection will virtually be his re- 
creation, and he who re-creates will be the father of the re- 
created being, in the same sense that Jehovah God was Father to 
the being destroyed by sin. 

While all things which our Lord Jesus did, were done according 
to the will and plan of the Father, yet the Scriptures are 
particular to keep separate the work of Christ Jesus in man's 
redemption. Our Lord Jesus "bought" the world; he gave the 
"corresponding price" for all; and the earth and all belonging 
thereto are called his "purchased possession. " (Eph. 1:14.) 
Having thus become possessed of sin- wrecked, dead humanity, 
it is the purchaser's privilege and design to begin the work of 
restoring all things-of giving life to the dead world, which he 
purchased eighteen hundred years ago. He delays the 
commencement of this life-giving work until the "little flock" to 
whom he gives liberty to become sons of God is complete. "He 
is not ashamed to call them BRETHREN," and they shall be his 
joint-heirs in the purchased possession, and his co-workers in 
restoring the redeemed race to life. 

Since it is from death that man is saved, the Savior is evidently 
the life-giver. In fact the Syriac MS. of the New Testament gives 
the name LIFE-GIVER in every instance where we have the 



name Savior in our common translation. The special work of the 
Millennial age will be to awaken the dead, and by gradual 
process give to them the life secured for them by their Redeemer 
as they shall believe and accept of it upon the conditions 
(obedience, etc.) which the Life-giver, as judge of all, shall 
require. This being the case, it must be evident to all that 
(separating the works of the Father and the Son- John 5:17,) the 
life-privileges which come to the world, come directly from the 
Son-our Lord Jesus: He BOUGHT them with his own precious 
blood, and He it is that will restore all who will comply with the 
conditions, to full perfect LIFE at His appearing and kingdom of 
a thousand years. He therefore is the one and only direct life- 
giver to whom the world must look; and as life-giver is the true 
meaning of father, He is properly declared in prophecy to be to 
mankind "The everlasting Father," as well as the "Prince of 
Peace" and the "Mighty God" [ruler]. 

Hence it is, that though Abraham and David, etc., are spoken of 
as fathers of Jesus, -"of whom according to the flesh Christ 
came"-yet it is also declared that "Instead of thy fathers shall be 
thy children," (Psa. 45:16,) meaning, instead of the fathers 
continuing as such, they shall, by the fact that our Lord becomes 
their LIFE-GIVER in resurrecting them, thus become his 
children— his sons. 

As heretofore shown, the process of life-giving while it will 
begin with the awakening from the tomb, the giving of a 
measure of life such probably as men now generally possess, (as 
illustrated in the awakening of Lazarus from the tomb,) and such 
only as "obey that prophet," will reach completeness, in full 
restoration to all that was lost-human perfection-LIFE in the 
full sense of the word. That only such as "hear [obey] shall live" 
in this perfect sense of attaining life, see John 5:25. All others 
awakened and granted a knowledge and full opportunity of 
gaining this perfect and lasting life, who will reject it by 
rejecting its conditions, -conformity to God's perfect law-will 
be "cut off" in the second death. They will not become sons of 
Christ, because of refusal under full opportunity to receive his 
image. Those refusing the likeness of Christ or the proffered 
terms of the age of Restitution will be treated as Jehovah treated 
Adam when he chose disobedience; only, that the experience 
being greater there will be no preparation for another 
redemption. Such as die the second death are not sons as above 
shown, but as those who having the opportunity yet despise the 
likeness of the Life-giver they will be treated "as brute beasts- 
destroyed."-^ Pet. 2:12; Eccls. 3:18-20. 

The question may occur to some, How comes it that our Lord 
who redeems or purchases all, is not the LIFE-GIVER to the 
"little flock" of the Gospel age as well as to the world in 
general?— Where and how comes the distinction between us as 



the "Sons of God" and "brethren" of Christ, and the world as 
children of Christ? 

We answer: He who redeemed all, did not actually give or 
restore to us the perfect human life as he will to the world in the 
next age, but instead he threw over us the mantle of his merit, of 
his imputed 

R1007 : page 4 

righteousness, and thus introduces us directly to the Father, to be 
begotten BY HIM as "new creatures," "partakers of the divine 
nature" (not restored human nature, grand as that will be), and 
joint-heirs with our Lord and Redeemer. 

The liberty [freedom from condemnation, -otherwise known as 
justification through his blood] which our Redeemer grants us is 
FREE; we can do nothing to purchase or merit it; it must be 
accepted as a free gift of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, or 
not at all. But there the free part stops. Having obtained the 
privilege or liberty to become Sons of God, the matter thereafter 
rests with us, and to profit by this great privilege or liberty, we 
must work out our salvation, with fear and trembling. 
Appreciating the grandeur of the privilege put within our grasp, 
we must act soberly, wisely, earnestly, not as them who idly 
play and beat the air, but as true soldiers we must fight a good 
fight. We must overcome our former master, Sin; and let not Sin 
reign and rule in us, but throwing all our (at most) little 
influence on the side of our new Captain, Leader, and Fore- 
runner Christ Jesus, we must overcome the world, that with him 
we may be sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a wicked 
and perverse generation, among whom we are to shine as lights. 
(Phil. 2:15) If thus we prove our earnestness, and love and zeal 
for God and his truth, we shall be accounted "meet to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light." (Col. 1:12.) 
Faithfulness in our warfare implies that we will be continually 
losing mental and moral likeness to the world, and be more and 
more conformed to the image of God's dear Son, who is a 
perfect likeness for us to copy after.-Rom. 8:29; 1 Pet. 2:21. 

But if the liberty or privilege granted to us of becoming sons of 
God consisted only of a covering of the sins that are past, if it in 
no way continued to cover our imperfections, it would avail us 
nothing; for cleansed in the morning and presented to the Father 
as candidates for sonship, we would through inherited 
weaknesses and imperfections be defiled and worthy of 
condemnation again before night; hence, as the apostle declares, 
it would be a fearful thing for us in our present condition to have 
to deal direct with the perfect laws of the Father; and we are 
glad that he has graciously provided that we shall have our 
standing before him as yet, not as individuals, but as body 
members of the perfect one whose robe of righteousness covers 
fully our every deformity and weakness, whose sacrifice made 



full atonement for every result of inherited depravity to which 
our shattered depraved "earthen vessels" are subject. 

So then we are safe so long as we abide in him— under the cover 
of his merit; while in him, we are "accepted in the beloved" by 
the Father, as sons. But having been admitted to this privilege, 
having tasted that the Lord is gracious, having learned the 
necessity of abiding in him, we must do the abiding— we must 
not ignore the precious blood through the merit of which this 
access into sonship and joint-heirship was obtained; we must not 
ignore our Redeemer, and attempt to offer our own imperfect 
works as meritorious and acceptable (See the type of this Lev. 
10:1-4. Num. 3:3,4), else we shall come to nought. If any branch 
abide not in the vine it is cast forth, and destroyed. (John 
15:5,6.) So then the liberty which our Lord grants to all who 
come unto the Father by him and in him, (John 14:6.) is full and 
complete; and the assistance rendered such as draw nigh to God 
with their whole heart is sufficient, that they may come off 
conquerors through [in] him who loved them and gave himself 
for them. This sufficiency of grace to help in every time of need 
is supplied mainly through God's Word, the exceeding great and 
precious promises of which are given us that thereby we may 
overcome self and the world, and become partakers of the divine 
nature. -2 Pet. 1:4. 

It is thus that the Father deals with those to whom, through the 
Son, liberty to become sons is now granted, viz., by the word of 
his grace— the Scriptures. Granted the privilege, or liberty, or 
ability, to do so through their Redeemer's merit, these are then 
"begotten by the word of truth that they should become a kind of 
first fruits of God's creatures." -James 1:18. 

The apostle Peter clearly tells the whole story saying: "The God 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.. .hath begotten us. ..to an 
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, 
reserved in heaven for us, who are kept by the power of God 
[his exceeding great and precious promises and providences 
upon which we lay hold] through faith unto salvation, ready to 
be revealed in the last time" [-in the end of this age when the 
body, the "Royal Priesthood," the little flock of Sons of the 
"divine nature" shall be completed and glorified] "Wherein ye 
rejoice greatly though now for a season if need be ye are in 
heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your 
faith... might be found unto [or result in] praise and honor and 
glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ... Of which [special] 
salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, 
who prophesied of the grace [peculiar favor] that should come 
unto you."- 1 Pet. 1:2-10. 

Since the overcomers of the Gospel age —those who use their 
ransomed privilege or liberty and become sons of God on the 
divine plane of sonship-are to be so closely identified with their 
Lord and Head Christ Jesus, as to be called "members of his 



body," his "bride" and his joint-heirs, it is evident that they with 
him, and by virtue of the ransom which he gave, are to be 
members in particular of that great Prophet and Life-giver 
Christ, and will share in the work of life-giving, restoring the 
dead and dying world to perfection; hence the term Everlasting 
Father, as well as every other title of the Head, is to be shared by 
his joint-heirs and co-workers. In harmony with this, note the 
Apostle's words in Heb. 1 1 :39-40. Here speaking of even the 
overcomers of the past he contrasts their position [sons of 
Christ] with our position as sons of God in Christ saying: These 
all, having obtained a good [record] through faith received not 
the promise [made to them], God having provided some 
BETTER THING FOR US, that they without us should not be 
made perfect. "-Heb. 11:40. 

Since in God's plan they are to be the children of Christ instead 
of the fathers, it follows that they could not get their life— be 
perfected-until the Christ (head and body) their Everlasting 
Father (or father of their everlasting life) shall first be made 
perfect on the higher plane -Sons of God of the divine nature. 

Then, dearly beloved, appreciate more fully than ever before 
your privilege as a Son of God and understand the Apostle's 
words, "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access 

R1007:page5 

(by faith) in to THIS GRACE [special favor] wherein we stand, - 
-rejoicing in hope of the glory of God" [as sons, as joint-heirs 
with our Redeemer in his great work of reconciling the world, 
whom he has already redeemed.] And from this standpoint of 
hope and grand anticipation, knowing that we must be tested and 
tried, "we glory in tribulations also," knowing that it is by such 
means, with his promises, that the Father would develop in us 
patience, experience, and hope, as well as the love of God shed 
abroad in our hearts by the holy spirit of the truth imparted to us 
from the truth. -See Rom. 5:1-5. 

Be strong then, acquit yourselves like earnest, sober men, 
receiving now by faith (trust) the grace [special favor] to be 
brought unto you at the coming of our Lord Jesus, for HE that 
raised up Christ from the dead will raise up US also, by Jesus 
who will present us before him, unblamable and unreprovable in 
love.-See 2 Cor. 4:14-18. 

LIBERTY OF THE SONS OF GOD. 

"For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain together until now. " "For the earnest expectation of the 
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the SONS OF GOD." 
"Because the creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption [death and dying] into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God."-Rom. 8:2. 



Though the race in general will not become sons of God, it is 
here expressly shown that they may obtain, through the Sons of 
God, the liberty or freedom from death, pain, etc., the common 
heritage of all sons of God. The children of the Christ-all who 
receive the redemption life— will stand as dear and as close to the 
Father Jehovah, as sons, even as in the earthly family the 
grandsons are as dearly loved and as kindly treated. And they 
shall be treated as sons, having full release from all corruption 
and from all condemnation. But here again it is shown that "they 
without US [the sons and heirs] cannot be made perfect;" they 
cannot receive the life provided for them until all the sons of 
God are selected and glorified. "The manifestation of the Sons 
of God" is therefore the great event for which the whole creation 
waits and hopes and groans, even though in ignorance their 
hopes and expectations of the future are not clear and fixed, but 
only a vague longing for "a golden age" a "good time coming by 
and by." 

ONL Y THE CONSECRATED ARE SONS. 

The liberty to become Sons of God not only did not extend to 
those men who lived before the Redeemer came and purchased 
the world, but it has extended to only a comparatively few 
during this Gospel age; the great mass of mankind even in the 
present day know nothing about our Lord Jesus, and how could 
they believe on him "of whom they have not 

R1008 : page 5 

heard?" (Rom. 10:14.) And of those who have even heard that 
there was such a person, how few comparatively believe in or 
recognize the meaning of his name Savior; yet none but these 
have even the liberty or privilege of becoming Sons of God. 

Look again, and see among the comparatively few, even of 
those who do recognize him as the Redeemer, the Savior, and 
who therefore were all granted this privilege, liberty, favor, and 
note how few have availed themselves of the great privileged- 
how few have become Sons of God. To see clearly just what 
class of believers constitutes the Sons of God, let us now 
examine the process by which those who "believed in his name" 
were granted and accepted the proffered liberty and became 
Sons of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord. 

We have said that all such are covered by the robe of Christ's 
righteousness imputed to them, because of which they find 
acceptance with the Father. But to whom does the Lord give his 
robe for this purpose? Not to all believers; for though all have 
the liberty to wear the robe and obtain "access," all do not 
choose to use it by fulfilling the conditions. The robes are 
provided for the BODY OF CHRIST, and to come under those 
robes we must get into that consecrated company, into that 
select class, known as those whose names are written in the 



book of life-and as branches in the Vine. This is the class to 
which the Master said, "Abide in me and I in you. As the branch 
cannot bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine, no more can 
ye except ye abide in me... If a man abide not in me, he is cast 
forth as a branch. " To the same class the apostle John wrote, 
"Abide in him." The apostle Paul wrote that God "hath chosen 
us in him" and exhorts "so walk ye in him"— "rooted and built up 
in him, " for "ye are complete in him. " And of his own aims he 
says, "That I may win Christ and [abiding in him to the end] be 
found in him" complete at last. -See John 15:4,6; 1 Cor. 8:6; 2 
Cor. 5:21; Eph 1:4; Phil. 3:9; Col. 2:6,7,9; 1 John 2:5,6,28. 

The way in which we get into Christ,- counted in as members 
of his body, and therefore under the robes of his righteousness, - 
-is fully explained by the Apostle in Rom. 6:3-5. He there shows 
that such members are immersed or buried into Christ, i.e., their 
wills, plans, etc., are completely buried; such having thereafter 
no will of their own; instead, the will of Christ reigns in and 
rules over them, controlling their acts, and words, and looks and 
thoughts. Being dead to self, to their own wills, plans, etc., for 
them to live is for Christ to live; and in them Christ is still 
present in the flesh, they being his representatives before men. 
(Phil. 1:21.) These share the reproaches of Jesus their Head and 
Lord now and have fellowship as members of his body, in the 
sufferings of Christ; and in due time, if they continue faithful 
unto the end, they are promised membership in the church or 
body to be glorified-joint-heirship in the glory and dominion 
and work of their Lord when the sufferings are past.- Rom. 
8:17. 

These are represented in the Jewish types by the priesthood and 
its head, the High-Priest. The high-priest of our profession, or 
order, is Jesus; and all the under priests together with him 
constitute the Royal Priesthood, as Peter says. As the under 
priests were all represented in the person of the High Priest, by 
his head and members, so in our priesthood; while we are each 
severally priests, we are all represented in our High Priest as 
body members in particular. (1 Cor. 12:27.) Our Lord the head 
of the body is not covered with any covering, for he was perfect; 
"in him was no sin;" but we all need the covering of his white 
robes of justification, else we never could have found access 
into the "holies" and "into this grace wherein we stand rejoicing 
in hope of the glory of God" soon to be revealed in us as Sons 
and heirs- joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

So then we see that only those who after believing in the only 
name, Savior, followed on and consecrated themselves, took up 
the cross and sufferings of Christ and shared them, -only such 
were accepting of the liberty to become Sons; and only such 
coming into his "body" and under his robes are presented before 
the Father, or accepted as Sons. In these only, can we see a 



begetting of the truth and a desire to be conformed to the image 
of God's only begotten Son. 

But are not all believers under Christ's robes? even those who do 
not consecrate themselves? No; only the consecrated. In fact the 
others have no need for those presentation robes [robes in which 
to be acceptably presented to the Father as candidates for 
Sonship and heirship] because they do not wish to occupy the 
positions of sons, after they find that its distinguishing features 
in the present time are trials and sufferings, etc., in the "narrow 
way." (Heb. 12:6.) To be a Son implies both special favor and 
special endurance, and since the only benefit of the "robe" 
consists in making the wearers presentable to the Father, and 
since these do not desire to thus present themselves living 
sacrifices to God, holy and acceptable [as sons and heirs] 
through [in] Jesus Christ, it is manifest that to cover such with a 
robe would be useless. 

The question then occurs: Do believers in Christ who have not 
consecrated, but merely practiced benevolence and moral 
reforms,— who endeavor to live moderately, soberly, honestly, 
truthfully, etc., influenced to such a life by their faith in 
Scripture and in our Lord,-have these no blessing as a result of 
their faith, etc.? We answer, Yes; every one who lives 
moderately, morally and temperately, has a reward daily and 
hourly,-in his health and true pleasure; and his every deed of 
kindness and generosity done from unselfish motives always 
brings a blessing to the doer in the present life, and is sure of a 
suitable recognition by the Master in the Kingdom, after the 
resurrection and exaltation of the "Body" class. (See Luke 
14:14.) These too may have quite a measure of joy and peace 
through believing in the Savior. They can see in Christ, dimly 
the Redeemer and realize (even though vaguely) that he is the 
one through whom God has arranged to save all who shall be 
accounted worthy of the gift of life. Thus all believers have 
much advantage over the ignorant and blindfolded even in the 
present life; and present progress in righteous living will be a 
step of progress beneficial to such in the "times of restitution" 
under the Kingdom soon to be set up in power. 

So then all who have consecrated, and only they, have the 
"robe" which assures to them access to God and to sonship. 
Question- Will all the consecrated become sons of God? Many 
have consecrated (i.e., resolved on complete submission to the 
will of Christ at any cost) who do not fulfil their consecration, 
who do not follow the Lamb through evil as well as good report, 
but instead are drawn away into half-hearted service, dividing 
their services between God and Mammon. Only a "little flock" 
of "overcomers" are represented as attaining to joint-heirship 
with Christ their head, only such constitute his "body" as finally 
glorified. Now the question is concerning the great number who 



do not fully and freely fulfill their covenant- will they be sons of 
God? 

In our opinion, yes; their heart intentions were good, and their 
"robe" was good, and if they do not cast away the robe of 
Christ's righteousness and deny his name Savior, and do not 
willfully violate their covenant, they stand in the position 
mentioned by the apostle: their works shall suffer loss, but 
themselves shall be saved so as by fire [severe discipline 
destroying what such do not sacrifice]. Such are building on the 
rock, though it be with wood, hay and stubble, and though they 
will suffer the great loss of the prize— the kingdom and the joint- 
heirship with Christ-yet they themselves, under the Master's 
discipline, will be saved, brought to perfection, because their 
hearts were longing for better things even when they fainted by 
the way, and got their "robes" contaminated with the affairs of 
this world. They did not keep their garments unspotted from the 
world, and hence they are represented as washing away such 
defilements of their "robe" in the Lamb's merit, but with great 
tribulation to themselves. We read of this "great multitude" that 
they came up "through great tribulation and washed their robes 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." "Therefore are 
they before the throne and serve." (Rev. 7:15.) They suffered 
great loss by reason of their failure to go forward boldly in self- 
sacrifice for the Lord and his truth -the loss of the crown, and 
the loss of positions in the throne, and suffered more tribulation 
than if they had been faithful, but holding to their "robes" they 
were finally brought off victors of the second grade with palms 
of victory, though not with the crowns of glory to which they 
were invited, and to obtain which their robes gave them liberty 
or privilege. 

Beloved, "Abide in Him;" let the mind of Christ dwell in you 
richly, let his spirit control your mortal bodies and present them 
living sacrifices, partakers of his sufferings and death, that you 
may be glorified with him also in due time and crowned sons of 
glory. 

R1009:page5 

STRANGE CHILDREN. 

"For they have begotten strange children." -Hosea 5:7. 

"They are not all Israelites that are of Israel." -Rom. 9:6. 

Since the true "church of the first born whose names are written 
in heaven," are all of this consecrated class, begotten by the 
word of truth, sons of God possessing the "mind of Christ," it 
follows that many of the nominal church are what might well be 
called "strange children," begotten not of the truth, but begotten 
of error; partaking not of the spirit or mind of Christ our head, 
but of the spirit or disposition of the world. These, God does not 
acknowledge as his sons. Many of them are well meaning, i.e., 



honest and kind, lovers of peace and plenty more than lovers of 
the truth with the tribulations, and persecutions, and self denials, 
which faithfulness to the truth always brings, things which every 
son of God begotten of the spirit of the truth appreciates as the 
foretold witnesses of the spirit to their faithfulness. (2 Tim. 
3:12.) These are as really the "children of this world" as were 
the popular religionists of the nominal typical church, Israel 
after the flesh. In the next age such may become children of 
Christ by faith, and obedience to his just requirements, but they 
do not become "Sons of God" now, because of one of two 
reasons: either because, being blinded by the delusions of the 
god of this world they cannot discern even fundamental truths, 
or else because though seeing the fundamentals they do not 
appreciate the privilege or liberty afforded them of becoming 
sons, preferring rather lives of ease to lives of self-sacrifice with 
Christ, preferring the pleasures and ambitions of the present 
world (age) to what they can see of the honor and glory 
promised to those who shall become sons. 

As the true sons, begotten of the truth, 

R1009 : page 6 

are the "wheat" described in our Lord's parable, so those 
nominal children of God, "strange children," developed by fear 
and error and by false ideas and theories, are the "tares," and the 
"field is the world" which makes no profession of Christ, 
containing elements which in the next age under the rule of the 
great Master and King will be accepted and used of him, but 
which at present unfilled brings forth noxious weeds. 

In the time of separation (the "harvest") the wheat and tares so 
long permitted to grow together are to be separated. The "tares," 
which constitute the majority in the nominal church or kingdom, 
will be separated from the true sons of God, the consecrated, 
who as joint-heirs with their Lord of the kingdom, will be 
established, "set up" in power and great glory. The "tares" on the 
contrary will be consumed as "tares" (as imitations of the true) 
and will be resolved into the elements of the field again. "He 
that hath an ear to hear let him hear!" The gathering together of 
the elect to receive the kingdom is in progress— they are being 
gathered, not into one place, but into one condition of heart and 
mind. Those who love the friendship and companionship and 
communion of the worldly minded, tares, shall suffer loss, and 
have their portion with them, partaking of their "plagues" in the 
trouble already beginning. Think not that the "harvest" time is a 
time of peace and quiet. Nay! the Jewish harvest proves to the 
contrary that it is a time of commotion and unsettling, a time for 
breaking up of old associations, for bundling tighter the bundles 
of the tare classes, and for the gathering of the true wheat into 
the barn. All this is a part of the test put upon the true wheat, to 
prove the "overcomers. " 



For the joy and refreshment of such, let us suggest here a Bible 
reading, pointing out our high calling now, our acceptance in the 
Beloved, our final exaltation and joint-heirship with him, and 
our glorious work of blessing the world in the coming age. 
These promises are indeed a great power of God unto salvation 
to all them that believe and obey them. 

Take your Emphatic Diaglott and read- Col. 1:9 to 28; next 
read 1 Pet. 1:2 to 23; next Eph. 1:3 to 14 and finally, Acts 20:32. 



R1008 : page 6 

ABOUT HELL-CONTINUED. 



HELL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

In the New Testament, written in Greek, hades corresponds 
exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As proof see the quotations 
by the Apostles from the Hebrew, in which they render it hades. 
For instance Acts 2:27-"Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades" 
is a quotation of Psa. 16:10 "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
sheol." And 1 Cor. 13:55-"Deathis swallowed up in victory. "O 
death, where is thy sting? O hades [grave], where is thy 
victory?" is an allusion to Isa. 25:8-"He will swallow up death 
in victory," and Hos. 13:14-"0 death, I will be thy plagues: O 
sheol, I will be thy destruction. " 

HELL IN THE FOLLOWING CASES IS FROM THE 
GREEK WORD, HADES. 

Matt. 1 1:23. -"And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto 
heaven, shalt be brought down to hell. "-Luke 10:15— "Shalt be 
thrust down to hell." [In privileges, etc., the city was highly 
favored, or figuratively, exalted to heaven, but because of 
misuse of God's favors would be debased, or figuratively, cast 
down to hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is so thoroughly buried 
in oblivion that even the site where it stood is a matter of 
dispute. Capernaum is certainly destroyed, thrust down to 
hades.] 

Luke 16:23. -"In hell he lifted up his eyes being in torments. "— 
A parabolic figure: See article— "The Rich Man and Lazarus" in 
January TOWER. 

Rev. 6:8. -"And behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on 
him was Death, and Hell followed with him. [Symbol for 
destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16:18. -"Upon this rock I will build my church; and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. " [Here the tomb is 



represented as a great prison with strong doors. The Lord's 
assurance is that though his church may seem to be forever 
locked up in the tomb, yet its strong gates will not hold the 
church when the due time shall come and her Lord shall break 
the bars and set at liberty the captives by his resurrection power, 
the result of the ransom which he gave once for all. Compare 
Luke 4:18, Isa. 61:1.] 

CHRIST IN HELL [HADES] AND 

RESURRECTED FROM HELL. 

ACTS 2:1,14,22. 

"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come... Peter... lifted 
up his voice and said... Ye men of Israel, hear these words:— 
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you,. ..being 
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God 
["He was delivered for our offenses"] ye have taken and by 
wicked hands have crucified and slain: whom God hath raised 
up, having loosed the pains [or bands] of death, because it was 
not possible that he should be holden of it [for the Word of 
Jehovah had previously declared his resurrection, as saith the 
prophet David]; for David speaketh concerning him 
[personating, or speaking for him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord 
[Jehovah] always before my face; for he is on my right hand, 
that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice and 
my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, 
because thou wilt not LEAVE my soul in hell [hades] neither 
wilt thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Thou 
[Jehovah] hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of life" [thy 
plan]. Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet David, 
expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of a resurrection, and in 
the full and glorious accomplishment of Jehovah's plan through 
him, and rejoices in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds saying- "Men and brethren, let me freely 
speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and 
buried and his sepulcher is with us unto this day [so that this 
prophecy could not have referred to himself personally; for his 
soul was left in hell, [hades,] and his flesh did see corruption]: 
Therefore, being a prophet and knowing that God had sworn 
with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the 
flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; he, seeing 
this before [prophetically] spake of the resurrection [of Christ 
out of hell— hades— to which he must go for our offences] that 
his soul was NOT LEFT in hell, [hades-the death state] neither 
his flesh did see corruption. " Thus Peter presents a strong 
logical argument based on the words of the prophet David 
showing first, that Christ who was delivered by God for our 
offences, went to hell, the grave, the condition of death, 
destruction (Psa. 16:10); and secondly, that according to 
promise he had been delivered from hell, the grave, death, 



destruction, BY A RESURRECTION-a raising up to life, 
created again, the same identical being, yet more glorious and 
exalted, even to the express image of the Father's person. (Heb. 
1:3) And now "this same Jesus" (Acts 2:36) in his subsequent 
revelation to the church, declares- 

Rev. 1:18 — "I am he that liveth, and was dead, and behold I am 
alive forevermore. Amen: and have the keys of hell [hades, the 
grave] and of death." Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in 
his resurrection we see the glorious outcome of the whole plan 
of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power of the 
resurrected one who now holds the keys of hell and of death, 
and in due time will release all the prisoners- "prisoners of 
hope" therefore. -Zech. 9:12. No craft or cunning can by any 
possible device wrest these scriptures entire and pervert them to 
the support of that monstrous and blasphemous papal tradition 
of eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, to be our 
vicarious sacrifice, must still and to all eternity endure it, which 
is not the case as these scriptures affirm. But death was our 
penalty and "he died for our sins" and "also for the sins of the 
whole world." Rev. 20:13,14 -"And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which 
were in them: And they were judged, every man, according to 
their works. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: 
this is the second death. " The lake of fire is the symbol of final 
and everlasting destruction. See TOWER Oct. '86. The utter 
destruction of everything cast into it, is implied. "Death and the 
grave cast into it" signifies in the language of symbols,— the utter 
destruction of Adamic death, hence it signifies the resurrection 
of all from the death penalty as we now know it, which passed 
upon all through Adam, but from which all men were redeemed 
by Christ. (Rom. 5:12,17,19.) 

The texts containing the Greek word gehenna, will be examined 
in our next issue. 



R1009 : page 6 

SPIRITUALISM, RITUALISM, THEOSOPHY. 

All this is hard to say, for one who prefers the charity which 
covers a multitude of faults to the criticism which lays them 
bare. And in dwelling on this subject we are not insensible to the 
perversions of another kind which have crept into our non- 
liturgical bodies. For, so far as we know, the liturgical churches, 
have not fallen into the cooking stove apostasy, which is turning 
so many of our church basements into a place of feasting; nor 
have they been ensnared with the entertainment heresy, which 
sets up all sorts of shows and exhibitions for amusing the 
unchurched masses into an interest in the gospel. We deplore 
these things and here and now lift our warning against them as 



another device of the enemy for corrupting and enervating the 
church of God. 

But while considering ourselves lest we also be tempted we 
must none the less warn our neighbors against the fatal 
infatuation of ritualism. We take the Trinity church catechism of 
Dr. Dix and find it streaked through and through with the tinge 
of the scarlet woman— baptismal regeneration, eucharistic 
sacrifice, apostolic succession, prayer for the dead, intercession 
of departed souls, when we find its eminent author so enamored 
of the Papacy that he draws away from all Protestant bodies and 
embraces her, declaring that the three chief branches of the holy 
Catholic church are the church at Rome, the Greek church, and 
the Anglican church, and that the body thus formed is the true 
church catholic "because she endures throughout all the ages, 
teaches all nations, and maintains all truth." When we find 
Protestant ecclesiastics so smitten with what reformers used to 
call "the trinkets of anti-Christ," as to allow themselves little by 
little to be reinvested with the cast-off clothing of Babylon 
Papacy, so that a recent writer describes the Bishop of Lincoln 
as "adorned with miter and cloth of gold, his orpheys so lavishly 
decorated with amethysts, pearls, topazes and chrysolites set in 
silver as fairly to dazzle the beholder;" when we see all these we 
are moved to repeat with solemn earnestness the warning of 
Bradford, the Smithfield martyr, "O England, beware of anti- 
Christ; take heed that he doth not fool thee." 

Theosophy, is the latest religion of transcendentalists. In it the 
attenuated unbelief of our times is seeking to find relief from the 
ennui of denial. How to describe that which takes for itself the 
name of "Occultism;" how to give an idea of doctrines which 
claim to be hidden from all but the initiated we do not know. It 
is enough to say that substantially it is Buddhism seeking 
conquests in Christian lands; "the light of Asia," offering itself 
to those who have been turned away from "the light of Christ. " 
It has its circles in many of our great cities, where its occult 
philosophy is diligently studied; though its following is small 
compared with that of spiritualism, it being the religion of the 
literary elite, as the other is of common people. If we question it 
in regard to its doctrines, it tells us that they are the same as 
those of "the sacred mysteries of antiquity. " It inculcates a very 
attenuated philosophy of evolution; it teaches the pre-existence 
and the transmigration of souls, and instructs its disciples how 
by a rigid asceticism they may cultivate what is called "the 
intuitioned memory" by which they can enter into profound 
recollection of what they knew in far distant ages. In a couplet 
which it is fond of repeating, it declares that- 
Descending spirits have conversed with man 
And told him secrets of the world unknown. 

And those words give the most remarkable hint of its origin. For 
its creed is "the doctrines of demons" from beginning to end. No 



personal devil, that which is mystically called the Devil being 
but the negative and opposite of God. No atonement except 
man's "unification" with himself; no forgiveness of sin, souls 
being required to wear away their guilt by self-expiation, 
miracles, mysteries, ultimate deification— these are specimen 
articles of the delusive creed. Its whole character and contents so 
far as we can comprehend them as yet is another phase of 
Satanic delusion. Now if we compare these three systems, 
counting ritualism as incipient Popery, we find them agreeing 
remarkably to fill up the outlines of the predicted apostasy. The 
"forbidding to marry" realized in the celibacy of Romanism, the 
enforced continence of theosophy and the anti-marriage 
doctrines of spiritualism; the "commanding to abstain from 
meat" appearing in the superstitious fasts of ritualism, and the 
rigid abstinence from flesh enjoined on the initials of esoteric 
Buddhism; the doctrines of demons manifested in the magic 
idolatry which ritualism substitutes for the chaste and simple 
doctrines of the ordinances of Christ, and which in many 
particulars hold a common ancestry with those of theosophy and 
spiritualism, and the fantastic miracle-working which 
characterizes them all. All three of these delusions give a 
practical denial of Christ's second advent-that doctrine at which 
demons fear and tremble-spiritualism and theosophy declaring 
that in them the promised Epiphany of Christ is taking 

R1009 : page 7 

place; while ritualism by its doctrine of transubstantiation makes 
the communion 

R1010:page7 

declare the "real presence of Christ" in flesh and blood, when 
the Lord ordained it to declare his real absence "till he come"-I 
mean, of course, bodily absence. 

What now is the prophetic significance of all that we have said? 
Thus it seems to me, that according to the predictions of 
Scripture we are witnessing an irruption of evil spirits who are 
again working powerfully along their favorite lines-ritualism, 
superstition and "philosophy. " 

We hear much said about infidelity and communism "heading 
up" in a personal anti-Christ. Believing as I do, that anti-Christ 
came long ago, and that he was crowned a few years since in St. 
Peter's at Rome as the deified man infallible and supreme, I see 
in the present aspect of affairs his final dodging forth, rather 
than his ultimate heading up. As in the case of Christ, so in the 
case of "the man of sin," the head is revealed first, and the body 
gathered throughout the generations grows up in all things into 
him who is the Lord. For the career of anti-Christ, the exact 
parody and evil counterpart of that of Christ, if you say "the 
anti-Christ must be an individual as certain as Christ is," I 
remind you that the word Christ does not always stand for a 



single individual in description, for in 1 Cor. 12, the apostle 
describes the body or beloved, gathered to the Lord through all 
time with its divine gifts and administrations, and this corporate 
whole with its many members, but "all baptized by one spirit 
into one body," he names Oxpiotos -the Christ. So that evil 
system with its various offices and administrations, yet baptized 
into unity by "the spirit which now worketh in the children of 
disobedience," is the anti-Christ. The one is the head of the 
ecclesia, and the other is the head of apostasia; but the head and 
body are so identical that they bear the same personal name. 

"But he is called 'the man of sin,'" you say, "and therefore must 
be an individual. " Not of necessity. For the line of believers is 
declared by the apostles to be taken out from the Jews and 
Gentiles to "make of twain one new man." 

I cannot believe that "the mystery of iniquity," which Paul 
declared to be already working in his day, has been toiling on 
for nearly two thousand years in order to bring forth a single 
short-lived man, and he so omnipotently wicked that the pope 
anti-Christ, with the blood of fifty millions of martyrs on his 
skirts, is too insignificant a sinner to be mentioned in 
comparison. And now then, the objections coming thick and 
fast. "But is he not an open infidel since he is said 'to deny the 
Father and the Son?'" Search your concordances for the meaning 
of the word "deny," and observe how constantly it signifies the 
denial of apostasy and false profession. But is he not the 
incarnation of Satan since he is called "the son of perdition?" 
Yes, Judas was named "the son of perdition; " and "Satan entered 
into Judas Iscariot;" but so far from atheistically denying Christ 
he openly professed him, saying, "Hail, Master," and then 
betraying him with a kiss. But is he not a godless blasphemer, 
since he is declared to have "a mouth speaking great things and 
blasphemies?" The counterfeit of Christ again, for Christ was 
twice falsely accused of blasphemy, because he made himself 
equal with God, and because he presumed to forgive. 

The pope is justly accused of blasphemy on both these grounds, 
for he profanely calls himself God, and assumes to forgive sins. 
Said Alexander VI., "Caesar was a man; Alexander is a God." 
But must he not be a Jew established in Jerusalem, since it is 
said that he sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he 
is God?" No. The particular phrase "temple of God," is never in 
a single instance in the New Testament applied to the temple at 
Jerusalem, but always to the church, the body of Christ, to its 
head or to its members in heaven or on earth. But could the Holy 
Ghost call that "the temple of God" which has become apostate? 
Just as possibly as Christ could call the apostate Laodiceans 
whom he spat out of his mouth "the church at Laodicea." 

"But does not this view commit one to the year-day 
interpretation, since the career of anti-Christ in three years and a 
half and the papal system extends through centuries?" Yes, for 



the one instance of prophetic time which has by unanimous 
consent been fulfilled, the seventy weeks of Daniel, is 
demonstrated to have been upon this scale. Since the period was 
actually only 490 years— a day for a year —this may be taken as a 
clue to the prophetic time of Revelation. But if the Holy Spirit 
meant years in the Apocalypse why did he not say years? you 
reply. Why, when he meant churches and ministers, and 
kingdoms and kings, and epoch, did he say candle-sticks, and 
stars, and beasts, and horns, and trumpets? Yet, having used 
these miniature symbols of greater things, how fitting that the 
accompanying time should also be in miniature! To use literal 
dates would distort the imagery— as though you should put a life- 
sized eye in a small-sized physiognomy. 

I have said that anti-Christ is the evil counterpart of Christ. 
When Satan offered Christ all the kingdoms of the world if he 
would fall down and worship him he refused, accepting present 
rejection and crucifixion, and waiting the Father's time for the 
kingdoms of the world to become the kingdoms of our Lord and 
of his Christ. The Papal anti-Christ accepted the kingdoms of 
this world when the temptation was presented him, and 
proceeded to announce himself the "king of kings" and that the 
kingdom had come, and that in himself was fulfilled the 
Scripture. "He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from 
river to river, unto the ends of the earth. " 

The bride of Christ, the church, was left in the world to share the 
Lord's rejection and cross, enduring present suffering and 
widowhood, and waiting for the return of the bridegroom. But 
the harlot bride of anti-Christ accepts an earthly throne and a 
present glory, boastfully saying, "I sit a queen and am no 
widow, and shall see no sorrow. " Do we not see that it was this 
usurpation of the headship of the church by the man of sin, this 
premature grasping of the kingdom, and the setting up of a mock 
millennium under rules of a pseudo-Christ, that destroys the 
millennial life of the church, and has infected all, generation 
after generation, with the delusion of a present reign and a 
present kingdom, while Christ is yet absent in person from his 
flock? But this enemy of God and his saints must soon come to 
an end. In Daniel and Thessalonians this end is predicted in two 
stages, the gradual and the sudden and complete. "They shall 
take away his dominion to consume and destroy unto the end," 
says Daniel. "Whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of 
his mouth and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, " 
says Paul in Thessalonians. The consuming process has been 
going on mightily in our generation by the breath of the Lord's 
mouth, in the world-wide diffusion of the inspired Scriptures. 
"And now the devil is come down with great wrath because he 
knoweth that he hath but a short time. " He is putting forth the 
energy of despair. He is sending his legions to work along 
various lines, which all center, visibly or invisibly, in one head. 
On the line of sacerdotalism he is seeking to thwart the work of 



the Reformation by again insinuating popish worship into its 
churches; on the line of superstition he is aiming to bewitch the 
godless and curious multitudes through the energy of unclean 
spirits; on the line of culture he is moving to foist upon the 
literary elite a diluted Paganism as an extra fine religion. But 
these things cheer us rather than sadden us, for all the shadows 
point to the dawn. The church's salvation means anti-Christ's 
destruction, and the same Scripture which speaks to us so 
powerfully to-day in the light of passing evils, "Yet a little while 
and he that shall come will come and will not tarry," says also, 
"And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet 
shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen. " 
All this which I have set forth, I have declared with unutterable 
sorrow. All this I can think of only with weeping and crying "O 
bride of Christ, how are they increased who would rob thee of 
thy chastity. " 

I need not remind you that one of the first tasks which the 
ritualistic leaders fifty years ago felt called upon to undertake 
was that of getting rid of the Protestant interpretation of anti- 
Christ as the pope of Rome. How desperately they wrought at 
this task will be apparent to those who read Newman's essay on 
"The Man of Sin," and observed especially his earnest wrestling 
with the ominous saying of Gregory the Great, that, "Whosoever 
adopts or desires the title of universal bishop is the forerunner of 
anti-Christ." 

If I must take sides between parties on this question my 
sympathies will be with Latimer and Cranmer and Bradford, 
whose vision was clarified by the fires of martyrdom, who 
recognized their persecutor, and called him by name, rather than 
with Manning and Newman, whose eyes are holden by the 
charm of mediaevalism. 

I speak rather of the book than of any human books, and avow 
my conviction that the papal "Man of Sin" was accurately 
photographed on the camera of prophecy thousands of years 
ago; that no detective searching for him to-day would need any 
other description of him than that which is found on the pages of 
the Bible. Taking these photographs of Daniel and John and 
Paul, searching the world upside down for their originals, I am 
confident that this same detective would stop at the Vatican, and 
after gazing a few moments at the Pontiff, who sits there 
gnawing the bone of infallibility, which he acquired in 1870, 
and clutching for that other bone of temporal sovereignty which 
he lost the very same year, he would lay his hand on him and 
say: "You are wanted in the court of the Most 

R1011 : page 7 

High to answer to the indictment of certain souls beneath the 
altar, who were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony 
which they bore," and who are crying, "How long, O Lord, holy 



and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell upon the earth?" 

My brethren, let us search the Scriptures anew, and let us be 
sure that they do not require it of us before we silence our 
testimony against the man of Rome as anti-Christ. —A. J. 
Gordon. 



page 7 

"THERE is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ 
Jesus." 



R1011 : page 7 

STAR OF BETHLEHEM. 

What it was or how it appeared eighteen hundred years ago is 
unknown; the conjectures are various. 

Some who claim that it was a star of peculiar course or orbit, 
sometime approaching close to the earth and becoming quite 
prominent, and sometimes receding far away into invisibility, 
claim that it has regular periods for appearing, centuries apart. 
These claim, that this star has appeared since our Lord's birth, 
and is due to appear shortly now. 

From this it is evident that no special importance could attach to 
the star's appearance, except at the one time, when our Lord was 
born and when the "wise men of the east" were directed by it. 
For if it has the peculiar orbit claimed, which brings it into view 
of the earth every few centuries only, it is certain that it 
appeared centuries before as well as centuries since the time it 
was used of God to mark our Lord's birth. Hence, if this theory 
be true, the miracle would not be in the star's appearance, but in 
the directing of the wise men by it. 

But as we said at first, this is merely a theory, and has nothing 
specially to recommend it. We know no more about it than 
others, but favor, as most reasonable, the idea that it was a bright 
luminous appearance which during these five months' journey 
guided the wise men to Judea, and finally to Bethlehem, and to 
the place where the young child was. We cannot conceive of a 
distant star in the sky being a guide by which a house or even a 
city could be found. Try it some starry night. 

But a luminous appearance, a speck of light travelling through 
the air would not be a star says some one. No, not as the English 
word star is used to-day, when by that name we refer to far off 
suns and planets; nor can we conceive of planets many times 
larger than the earth coming close down so as to mark the stable 
where our Lord lay. But the Greek word here translated star has 



the meaning of brightness or shining whether of a planet or a 
candle or other shining, and hence it as a word would fit well to 
our opinion of this miracle. 

So then we have no reason as yet for expecting anything from 
the promised reappearance of the star which some suppose to be 
the star of Bethlehem, but which we think improbable. For even 
if it were the star supposed, its re-appearance would no more 
prove a second coming of the babe of Bethlehem, than the 
recurrence 

R1012:page7 

of Washington's birthday proves that Washington comes again. 
On far better evidence than this, do we look for the Lord-not 
again a babe in the flesh, but a spirit being, in power and great 
majesty. 

But to find the Lord now, as then, it will be necessary to see his 
star and to follow its leadings. First to the fully consecrated, 
waiting, watching ones, and finally to all "who look for him, he 
will appear. " Those who find him first will be the truly wise; 
and the star which will guide them will be the "Day-star" (2 Pet. 
1:19), the light of truth which will arise within their hearts, 
giving them understanding as to where, how, and what to seek 
and expect. This light of knowledge, in our hearts, is the star of 
importance now, without which the Lord's second advent cannot 
be properly discerned. 



R1004:page7 



Not science, fiction, poetry or art 
Our services engages. 'Tis our part,— 
Guided by gentle fingers, and a mind 
That loves to praise the Savior of mankind, - 
To tell his wondrous deeds, his Bride to seek; 
Ever "to preach good tidings to the meek. " 

—Selected. 



page 8 

EXTRACTS FROM 
INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Ontario, Canada. 

BROTHER RUSSELL, DEAR SIR:-A few months ago I was 
called to do some mechanical engineer work in the back woods 
of Canada. Being detained there over Sunday, and stopping at 
one of the lumbermen's homes, our conversation on Sunday took 
a religious turn. Creeds were pulled over the coals and dissected; 



the bright as well as the dark side was brought forth to show 
which was right and who was in the narrow way. I myself was 
born and brought up in the Roman Church, and three of my 
children were christened therein, we complying to all of her 
rules until within a few years, when we cast off the Roman yoke 
and began to search the Scriptures. 

We joined the Presbyterian church, hungering and thirsting for 
more light and truth in the way of holiness. I attended regularly, 
Sunday after Sunday, also prayer meeting on Wednesday 
evenings; and I am sorry to say that I did not feel as though it 
did me any good. I with my family were thrust away in a back 
seat up in the gallery, where we could hear but little that was 
said, while we had a good view of the dress circle below, where 
the seats were upholstered and the floor was carpeted. I once 
tried to get a sitting down there where we could hear what was 
said, but in vain. Trustees said all seats were taken, but I might 
be able to arrange with some of the pew holders. I approached 
one for the purpose, who alone occupied a pew with sitting for 
eight persons. No, was his answer, I have a great many friends 
and visitors and I want the whole seat. I took note of the 
member for a while who sat in that pew, but for a dozen 
Sundays he alone occupied it, and for as many more no one at 
all; and in that same church there are a hundred pews as the 
above described, but I could get no sitting. I went in and out of 
this church for five years, was spoken to by four different 
members at different times in that five years— never spoken to or 
as much as looked at in the prayer meetings by any one; and I 
began to feel I had got in the wrong place. Finally there crept in 
a discontent in the congregation, and the knowing ones got 
dissatisfied with the pastor, and the upshot of it was the minister 
was dismissed, and I must say that I feel he was a true follower 
of the Lord in every respect. I began to feel that grace was far 
from that little party, and I gave up going, but never for a day 
forgetting my God and praying for more light and grace to battle 
the evil of this wicked world. This frame of mind found me in 
the lumberman's home on Sunday, a seeker after light. I was 
handed a little book, and upon a glance I saw "why evil was 
permitted. " I perused it till nearly Monday morning, alone with 
my God; and I felt the next day as though I had been wearing 
some dark glasses and they had fallen from my eyes. 

Completing my labors, and upon going to take the train, my 
friend placed in my hand another book and a few papers, telling 
me to read them at my leisure. Upon opening the package it 
contained some papers headed ZION'S WATCH TOWER and 
Herald of Christ's Presence, with the Millennial Dawn. I have 
read, studied, re-read, and have been comparing it with the 
Scriptures, to make sure, and I am led to exclaim "In the Lord I 
will put my trust. I will bless the Lord who hath given me 
counsel. " The TOWER has come to my home since my visit to 
the back woods, and it must be through the kindness of my new 



found friend, the lumberman, although I have not had the 
pleasure of seeing or hearing from him since my return. To- 
night the Dawn and TOWER are being perused by some seekers 
after light, and I hope in a few days to forward you some 
subscribers for both. I have the money for two subscribers now. 

I hope to spread the glad tidings of great joy to all people in this 
locality, in the workshop and the highway. 

Since the above writing I have received a few more applicants 
and hope a week from to-day to send $10.00. 

I hope to do better than at first expected for there are a lot of 
Romans here. 

Yours respectfully, J. S. 

R1011 : page 8 

[The following letter is from the Brother mentioned as "A 
Missionary Free" in the Dec. '87 TOWER, page 1. We know 
that you all will be glad to hear from him and to know of his 
zeal in spreading the truth on the "Dark Continent. " 

Is it not remarkable that without the means to carry on 
"missions" ourselves or even to reach with the truth the truth- 
seekers among the missionaries and converts in far off lands, 
God is laying hold of faithful servants there, and using them to 
pass the truth from one to another? Thus, as we have heretofore 
shown by letters published, the truth has its missionaries or 
ambassadors in India, Turkey, China, Hayti, South America, and 
now in Africa. We can only say, "It is marvellous in our eyes." 
We pray for these and all the dear "home missionaries" (which 
includes all of you who are doing with your might what your 
hands find to do),-0 Lord, grant us according to the word of thy 
prophet of old. May it be fulfilled to each of us, as it is written: 
"Strengthen the feeble hands and confirm the feeble knees. Say 
to them of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God 
will come with vengeance even God with a recompense; he will 
come and save you. Then the eyes of the blind shall be 
opened. "-EDITOR.] 



Liberia, Africa. 

CHAS. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BRO:-Your favor of the 2nd ult. 
has duly come to hand on the 10th inst., with the following 
publications: 20 copies Millennial Dawn, 2 copies Food and 25 
copies Z.W. TOWER. 

I am glad to inform you that we, viz: Hon. J. T. G., the 
superintendent of our county, C. T. B., George H. C, and myself 
-met at Brother G.'s residence on the first inst., and duly 
recognized ourselves as part of the Church of Christ, after 
reading the article "The Ecclesia," published in Z.W.T. of Sept. 
1884. 



On the 3rd I addressed a letter to Bishop F. of the P.E. Mission 
here, advising him that I had severed my connection with his 
church, and gave my reasons for the same. My course so 
displeased him that he issued a leaflet entitled "A Warning," in 
which he bitterly denounced us and the cause we espoused. 

Notwithstanding this state of things, and the Bishop's strong 
effort to prevent his people from hearing the heresy that we were 
teaching, on the 4th Sunday afternoon, Bro. G.'s commodious 
parlor was full to overflowing with an anxious audience. We 
now have weekly Bible readings, and preaching three times at 
three different places on the Lord's day. I believe we have the 
presence of the Lord with us. 

I hope you will send me some extra copies of Z. W. TOWER for 
gratuitous distribution among the Lord's poor here, who are 
many. 

As I expect to leave here shortly for Monrovia, and as we hear 
one of Messrs. Y. & P.'s vessels will leave U.S.A. for Liberia, 
please send me 2 dozen copies M. Dawn, cloth bound; 4 dozen 
copies M. Dawn, paper bound, in care of Hon. W. M. D., 
Monrovia, Liberia. Send also some specimens of Z.W.T., to 
induce the people there to become subscribers. 

Please pray for me and others here. Your Brother in Christ. 

S. W. S. 

P.S. -Enclosed find a copy of my letter to Bishop Ferguson. 

The following is the letter mentioned. 

S. D. FERGUSON, D.D., 

DEAR BROTHER:-I am compelled to discharge the painful 
duty of acquainting you with the fact that I have this afternoon 
severed my connection with the Prot. Episcopal church, of 
which you are the representative in Liberia. My reason for so 
doing, in the first place, is that I believe the Protestant churches 
have departed from the pure word of God, as taught by Jesus 
Christ and His Apostles, and have adopted human dogmas and 
traditions of the elders which make void the word of God (Mark 
7:13); on account of which Jesus denounced woe upon the 
Pharisees and others who were guilty of the same thing in His 
day- Matt. 23:1-33; 15:2,3,9; Mark 7:2,3,5. Not only was Jesus 
displeased with the observance of the traditions of men, but the 
Apostle to the Gentiles strongly warned his converts to beware 
of the same, among other injurious things.- Col. 2:8, Gal. 1:14.- 
-The nominal church-Papal mother and Protestant daughters-I 
believe is called Babylon (confusion) by reason of opposing and 
jarring creeds; and discord prevails among them. I firmly 
believe God calls you and me, as well as all His people, to come 
out of her; for her punishment for her sin is due. -Revelation 
18:2,4,5,6. 



My second reason for leaving the Prot. Episcopal church is, I 
desire to preach the pure word of God under the sole authority 
and commission of none but Jesus, whom I recognize as the 
only Head of His church. 

Having my eyes once anointed with the eye salve (Rev. 3:18) of 
the pure word of God, I dare not remain longer to dabble in the 
human teachings, which are the prolific sources of discord and 
wrangling in the Protestant churches. 

You may ask, Where are you going, my brother? I answer, I am 
not going back to heathenism, where I once was; but I have 
already united myself with the Church of Christ-the church 
which Christ and His apostles organized, and which is 
characterized by the preaching of the pure word of God, and by 
primitive simplicity in all things appertaining to the same 
church. You are hereby assured that I will ever stretch out the 
right-hand of fellowship to welcome you, and all my friends and 
brethren whom I have left behind in the bondage of Babylon. 

I shall ever endeavor to win you all to Christ and into His 
church. May our brotherly love continue! -Farewell! 

With fraternal regards, your friend and brother in Christ, 

SAM'L W. S. 

page 8 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, DEAR BRO.:-Enclosed is $1.50 for ten 
copies of Dawn received last week. A few blocks from my home 
resides a pastor of the Evangelical Association. I went there a 
few days before I received my last Dawns, and he being from 
home, his wife gave me an order for a copy of the book. 
Yesterday, when I went to deliver it, I found him in the parlor, 
the wife being engaged. I told him that I had brought the book 

that Mrs. had ordered. He took it in his hand, looked 

at the title, then turned to the back cover and read, "Zion's 
Watch Tower," then asked, "Is this book published by ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER?" "It is," I answered. Then he said, "O sister, 
you have got hold of the most dreadful, hurtful doctrines and 
heresies. I have seen some of their papers" etc. "Well," I said, 
"you have not fully examined the matter. I wish to call your 
attention to what Solomon said, 'He that answereth a matter 
before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto him.'" (Prov. 
18:13.) Then I said, Paul in one of his journeys came to 
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews, but they 
would not hear him, and drove him away. Then he went to 
Berea unto another synagogue of the Jews, and it is related of 
them, "These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in 
that they searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things 
were so. " Then he began to preach to me eternal punishment, 
because of the very laws of retribution in the nature of all wrong 
doing. He would not think of reading the book, nor of having his 



family exposed to reading it. (His oldest child is five years old, 
and so safe from heresy for some years to come.) Then the Lord 
opened my mouth and filled my heart, and brought scripture to 
my lips which I had not thought myself capable of repeating 
with such fluency. I showed him that Israel's promises related to 
the land and restoration to favor and forgiveness, while the 
promise to the church is the high calling that she shall be 
glorified, and that from her, and not from Israel, shall go forth 
the law, and that God loved Zion more than all the dwellings of 
Jacob. I showed him our mission to the world as kings, priests, 
etc. In the meantime I had put up my book, but at last he said 
"Give me the book again, I will buy it for my own satisfaction. " 
If I had strength to canvass for Dawn I could sell them well, but 
I have not as yet found just what the Lord's will is for me in this 
work. He has, however, given me work in corresponding with 
my brothers and sisters. One sister, a Seventh Day Adventist, 
wrote me a letter a few days ago, saying, "O sister, believe the 
blessed book when it speaks so plainly." I answered, "Yes, I 
believe every word of it, and I call upon you to do the same. " I 
told her that God expected Abraham to believe in the fullness of 
his promises, and that he expected us to believe as fully in the 
promises as in the threatenings, for he was able to make them all 
good. I referred her to such promises as in Psa. 82:8; Rom. 86:9, 
and Jesus' own declaration, "If I be lifted up from the earth, I 
will draw all men unto me. " 

I sometimes wonder if it does not worry you to get so many, and 
long letters from day to day. But our hearts, and lips, and pens, 
overflow almost without volition; and as you seem to make a 
sort of a center for the communion of the little flock, we can 
hardly send you a little bit of money without telling you a long 
story of our experience in the work. In love, yours, 

MRS. M. G. ATCHESON. 

Fillmore Co., Minn. 

DEAR SIR:-Enclosed you will find a money order for five 
dollars, which I wish to give to the Tract Society with the 
exception of enough to pay for two Dawns, paper covers, to lend 
to friends. I am very anxious to have all who will read and think, 
have access to those wonderful books. Those ordered came all 
right and were soon delivered. If circumstances will permit I 
shall take more orders. O, that I could only convince my own 
family that it is time to look into such matters. They are not 
opposed, but think it is not necessary. I am all alone, but none 
the less determined to be faithful to the end. 

MRS. S. L L. 



"AS ALL the water that is upon the hills runs into the valleys, 
so all grace goes to the humble." 


