Pay Attention to Wisdom
TO FIND sound judgment and keen discernment about life, would you go to a child? Obviously not. Children are too immature to be a source of wise counsel. That is why the Bible proverb says: “Foolishness is tied up with the heart of a boy.” (Prov. 22:15) Knowing that you might get foolishness rather than wisdom from the mouth of a child, you would more likely than not go to a mature man who has lived a long time and is noted for giving wise counsel. But since he is imperfect his counsel can at times be wrong. It may not be what is best for you. What you need to do is to turn to the only dependable source of wisdom.
The very fountainhead of wisdom is Jehovah God, man’s Creator. His judgment is never wrong and his discernment is never faulty. The counsel he gives is the very best you can find. As a child can look to a good father for instruction, counsel and regulations that are in its best interests, so you can look to Jehovah God for the same things. “For Jehovah himself gives wisdom; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment.” (Prov. 2:6) If you would be attentive to what a wise man has to say, you should with more reason be attentive to what the all-wise Creator says.
The heavenly Father has caused his wise counsel and good regulations for man to be written in the Bible. There you can find his thoughts, his discerning judgments, his wise instructions and loving commandments. His written Word contains, not only knowledge about himself and his will for man, but also wisdom that will help you in choosing a course of life that is best for you.
Wisdom is more than just knowledge. It involves discernment and good judgment, especially concerning facts that relate to life and conduct. What the Bible says about life manifests this good judgment. But most people neglect this dependable source of wisdom by seldom, or perhaps never, reading the Bible. If they would seek the counsel of God’s Word and pay close attention to the wisdom it contains, they could avoid much confusion, unhappiness and many heartaches. They would not make the grave mistakes that ruin so many lives and destroy so many marriages. A person can never go wrong by paying close attention to the wisdom of God’s Word and following it.
Listen to the fatherly admonition Jehovah gives: “My son, if you will receive my sayings and treasure up my own commandments with yourself, so as to pay attention to wisdom with your ear, that you may incline your heart to discernment; if, moreover, you call out for understanding itself and you give forth your voice for discernment itself, if you keep seeking for it as for silver, and as for hid treasures you keep searching for it, in that case you will understand the fear of Jehovah, and you will find the very knowledge of God.” (Prov. 2:1-5) The “very knowledge of God” is the life-sustaining knowledge that he has caused to be written in the Bible. But diligent effort must be made to draw upon that knowledge.
A hidden treasure is seldom found by a cursory search; a meticulous examination of the place where it is supposed to be is necessary. So too the knowledge and wisdom contained in the Bible must be sought with great diligence and careful attention to details. A mere superficial reading of the Scriptures is insufficient. Zealous effort must be made to tap that treasure by regular and thoughtful Bible study. “This book of the law should not depart from your mouth, and you must in an undertone read in it day and night, in order that you may take care to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way successful and then you will act wisely.” (Josh. 1:8) It is by remembering what you read in God’s Word that you prevent its wisdom from departing from you. When you keep it in mind you are inclining your heart to wisdom and will reap the many benefits wisdom brings.
By following the lead of divine wisdom you can gain an understanding of what is righteous. It gives you the best standard for determining what is good and what is bad. With it you can discreetly judge what course is best to take when confronted with unrighteous reasoning and actions. At such times the wisdom of the Scriptures can help you walk in the way that is upright and good, the way that brings you happiness, contentment, peace of mind and life. If you pay attention to divine wisdom, you “will understand righteousness and judgment and uprightness, the entire course of what is good.” (Prov. 2:9) The many men of ancient times who received the approval of the Most High found this to be so. You can too.
As the immature minds of children find it extremely difficult to judge what is righteous and must seek the counsel of persons who have lived longer, so you need to seek the guidance of Jehovah, who knows more about life than any man who has ever lived. Be attentive to what he has to say. When famous men express opinions that conflict with Jehovah’s Word, it is best to follow what Jehovah says. Men make mistakes and must change their opinions, but Almighty God is never wrong. So vitally important is the wisdom of his Word that your very life depends upon it.
If you pay attention to divine wisdom, it will lead you through the coming battle of Armageddon, when God will destroy the present wicked system of things. Into the new order that will follow that great day it will guide you. By continuing to permit divine wisdom to direct your ways the gift of eternal life will eventually be yours. This incomparable gift comes from Jehovah God as a reward for continued faithfulness. “Happy is the man that has found wisdom, and the man that gets discernment. It is a tree of life to those taking hold of it.”—Prov. 3:13, 18.
Turn to God’s written Word and let its wisdom guide your judgment and discernment of life. Do not be like an immature child and think the wisdom of the heavenly Father is unreasonable or impractical. Instead, pay close attention to it and reap the bountiful blessings it can bring you.

