Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Say No to Drugs?
ONE cool summer evening, two young men got together to listen to music. They were cousins and also close friends. “Let’s make a pact,” suggested Joe, the younger of the two. Frank’s curiosity was aroused. “No matter what anyone else does,” Joe continued, “let’s never fool around with drugs.” Frank was delighted at his cousin’s suggestion and expressed his full agreement, saying, “Let’s shake on it!”
It would be nice to report a happy ending to this real-life experience, but, sad to say, there isn’t one. Just five years later, Joe was found dead in his car due to a drug-related accident. And Frank was severely addicted to drugs.
What went wrong? Why would two young men who were so determined to stay free from drugs fail in their endeavor? The answer lies in this urgent warning found in the Bible: “Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Corinthians 15:33) Both Joe and Frank got in with the wrong crowd. As they associated more and more with those who used drugs, their resistance weakened. They began experimenting with drugs.
Peer Pressure
The Bible’s reference to association can be applied to your peer group, that is, those in your age group with whom you have close fellowship. This peer group will have a very definite influence on you. In what ways? According to one study by the University of Minnesota, “Teenagers most strongly influence each other regarding dress and appearance, choice of leisure-time activities, language, and use of alcohol and drugs.”​—Italics ours.
Thus, if drugs are used in your group of friends, you are more likely to follow suit. “Peer pressure to me was one of the hardest things to deal with,” says Mike, a young man with a long history of drug-related problems. “The first time I smoked marijuana, I did it because all the kids I was with did it, and I wanted to fit in.”
As a young person, have you at times felt pressured to “fit in” with your peer group? It’s interesting to note that your desire to fit in is a normal one. Explains the book Adolescent Peer Pressure: “Strong peer interaction and influence is a normal, necessary, and healthy part of adolescent development.” Thus as you grow up and develop close personal friendships, you may begin to depend more and more on these friends as a source of comfort, understanding, and information.
However, this could easily develop into a negative situation. How so? Well, if the young people that you have developed such a trusting relationship with start using drugs, you will be under strong emotional pressure to conform, to fit in. No matter how honorable your intentions, unless you change your circle of friends, in all probability you, too, will become a drug user.
‘But that’s impossible!’ you may say. You may feel that your convictions are so strong that nothing could change them. However, this in itself can be a snare. How so? Well, remember, in the scripture quoted earlier the warning about bad associations was preceded by the words, “Do not be misled.” So the Bible implies that when it comes to bad associations we may have a tendency to minimize the danger, to mislead ourselves into thinking, ‘My friends can’t influence me!’
And that’s what Frank and Joe thought. Yet, despite their good intentions, they fell victim to negative peer pressure, and one of them paid with his life. So if you really want to say no to drugs, it is vital to avoid association with those who use drugs.
“Walking With Wise Persons”
For the past few years, Mike has managed to stay free from drugs. What has helped him? For one thing, he changed his circle of friends. He explains: “Drug abuse is looked down upon by the people I now stay with. So there’s never any pressure to take drugs; it’s never suggested or brought up.”
So how is Mike helped by his friends to say no to drugs? Once again, we might say, it’s peer pressure​—not the negative kind that comes from bad associations but the positive type that results from good associations. A Bible proverb says: “By iron, iron itself is sharpened. So one man sharpens the face of another.” (Proverbs 27:17) So a friendship supplying mutual encouragement can sharpen your ability to resist the temptation to take drugs.​—Compare Hebrews 10:24; 1 Samuel 23:15, 16.
Why is this true? Well, as stated earlier, it’s normal for you to want to fit in with your peers. That’s why it’s essential that you choose the very best peers possible. As the Bible explains: “He that is walking with wise persons will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly.”​—Proverbs 13:20.
To illustrate the point, consider some precautions you might take to avoid catching a cold. You might watch what you eat, get proper rest, and avoid close contact with infected people. “In a similar way,” states the book Adolescent Peer Pressure, “if we are to prevent . . . drug abuse . . . , we need to maintain healthy balanced conditions and reduce exposure to harmful influences.”​—Italics ours.
So, do you really want to say no to drugs? Then watch your associations! Seek out the positive peer pressure that results from good associations.
“The Peace of God”
As important as good associations may be in preventing drug abuse, it alone may not be enough. There may still be times when you’re offered drugs. So it’s important that you be firm in your resolve. Don’t be apologetic about refusing drugs. Say no with conviction! It’s also helpful to understand why many young people turn to drugs in the first place. Consider.
Adolescence is a time marked by rapid changes. For instance, you may be undergoing physical changes that cause you to be anxious or confused. And your social relationships may be changing too. At the same time, perhaps more is expected of you by your parents or your teachers. The result? Answers the book Adolescent Peer Pressure: “When all of these adjustments are superimposed on one period of life​—one that is still wobbly in terms of coping skills—​it is a major crossroads of development. The wonder is that so many early adolescents do so well and actually survive.”
Yes, the adolescent years can indeed be difficult. This may tempt you to turn to the temporary relief that drugs may bring. But there is something better. The Bible explains: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers.”​—Philippians 4:6, 7.
This “peace of God,” Paul says, can stand like a sentinel to guarda your heart and mind. How can you have this “peace of God”? By coming into a close personal relationship with God. By learning about him and coming to love him, you will find a peace of mind that cannot be obtained by any artificial means such as drugs. Thus, no matter how stressful your life may be, you can confidently turn to God for help and experience the warm sense of security that only faith in God can bring.
[Footnotes]
In fact, the Greek word translated “guard” (a form of the verb phrou·reʹo) is a military term literally meaning ‘standing on guard.’
[Box on page 14]
To Say No to Drugs . . .
  Avoid associating with those who use drugs
  Refuse any offer of drugs! Do so in a way that reflects your firm determination not to use drugs
  Search out good associates who will strengthen you in your resolve to stay free from drugs
  Talk out your problems. Discuss them with your parents or other responsible adults who can help you to sort out things
[Picture on page 15]
Don’t be apologetic about refusing drugs. Say no with conviction!

