Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will probably be able to recall the following:
□ What is the source of true happiness?
Jesus said: “Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!” (Luke 11:28) Thus Jesus showed that true happiness is found in being a faithful servant of God and doing his will.​—8/15, page 8.
□ What is one way in which we can resist Satan’s subtle and crafty acts?
In order to resist Satan, we must examine ourselves. Do we have a weakness that Satan could exploit or is exploiting right now? For example: Do we have an ego problem? Must we always be number one? If we know ourselves, then we can rectify such problems, provided that we are humble. In this way, we will not leave ourselves open to Satan.​—9/1, pages 15, 16.
□ What is the symbolic mark that the antitypical ‘man in linen’ puts on those who become Christ’s “other sheep”? (Ezekiel 9:2-4; John 10:16)
The “mark” is the evidence that such sheeplike ones are dedicated, baptized individuals with a Christlike personality.​—9/15, page 14.
□ What did the apostle Peter mean when he said that we should “love one another intensely from the heart”? (1 Peter 1:22)
“Intensely” literally means “outstretchedly.” For such a love to be expressed among Christians requires effort and a widening out of our hearts so that they can enfold people to whom we would not normally be attracted.​—10/1, page 12.
□ What is the temple referred to at Revelation 11:1, and when did it come into existence?
It is the great spiritual temple, of which the holy of holies is Jehovah’s abode in heaven. It came into existence in 29 C.E. when Jesus was anointed and began to serve as high priest. (Hebrews 3:1; 10:5)​—10/15, page 12.
□ What is the Codex Sinaiticus, and how important is it?
The Codex Sinaiticus contains the entire Christian Greek Scriptures and a Greek translation of parts of the Hebrew Scriptures. It is at least 1,600 years old, and it forms a vital link in our catalog of Bible manuscripts.​—10/15, pages 30, 31.
□ What makes for the greatest happiness in marriage?
Each partner must make sure that God is in their marriage. In this way, spiritual needs will be satisfied, and the marriage bond will be strengthened. (Ecclesiastes 4:12; Matthew 5:3)​—11/1, page 16.
□ What is “the peace of God” that the apostle Paul speaks about at Philippians 4:7?
This peace is a God-given tranquillity and calmness, even amid the most trialsome circumstances. It results from a close relationship with Jehovah and a conviction that what one is doing is pleasing in his eyes.​—11/1, page 30.
□ By what means does one become approved by Jehovah?
Through dedication and baptism, it is possible for an imperfect human to become a ‘man of goodwill,’ or a man approved by God. (Luke 2:14)​—11/15, page 11.
□ What can parents do to help their erring minor child even if he is disqualified as an unbaptized publisher or he is disfellowshipped?
Just as the parents will continue to provide food, clothing, and shelter, so they need to instruct and discipline him in line with God’s Word. They can study with him alone or have him share in the family study arrangement.​—11/15, page 20.
□ How did Jewish tradition annul God’s command at Exodus 20:12 that children should honor their parents?
A person could pledge his property to be later donated to the temple by declaring it “corban,” which meant, “a gift dedicated to God.” (Mark 7:11) This corban could still be used by that person to his own advantage, but he could deny it to his parents.​—12/1, pages 4, 5.

