“It’s Scriptures We Want”
“THIS is an experience I feel sure you will be happy to hear about; as Jesus said: ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.’
“Mrs. O————, after having learned the truth, found it no longer tolerable to leave her two children in the Catholic school, as they were obliged to go through all the Catholic ritual and teachings. Steps were taken through the Society’s legal department to register the girls in the English Protestant school. This was necessary because Mrs. O———— was separated from her husband, who was strongly opposed both to her new religion and to the transfer of his children to the Protestant school.
“Finally, the registering was completed without the consent of the father and all was thought to be fine. One week before school opened in September, Mr. O———— visited his wife and discussion ensued concerning the children, Mr. O———— again strongly opposing the change from the Catholic school and threatening to just simply pack up the girls and take them with him.
“He then urged his wife to make one last trip to see the Jesuit ‘fathers,’ who he felt sure could convince his wife that she was leading the entire family astray from the good religion. She consented to go with him, but she stated to her husband in advance that she was sure the Jesuits could not prove Scripturally that she did not now have the true religion from Jehovah’s witnesses. Also that what they would probably tell her would be something like this: ‘My dear little lady, don’t you know the Catholic Church has been established 2,000 years and that this man Russell was a very bad man?’ etc.
“They made an appointment to see the Jesuit ‘fathers’ (supposed to be the branch that specializes in Scriptures) and, after being ushered in, the husband explained to the priest that he would like the priest to explain with Scriptures why his wife should repent and be a good Catholic again. The priest’s first words were, ‘My dear little lady, don’t you know the Catholic Church has been established 2,000 years and that this man Russell. . . ?’ ‘No, No!’ broke in Mr. O————, ‘that’s not what we want at all. It’s Scriptures we want.’ ‘Well,’ said the priest, ‘that’s not my line; I specialized in theology. You want Father [so and so] upstairs.’
“They then went upstairs to see ‘Father so and so,’ and Mr. O———— explained to this second priest the situation. This second priest’s next words were the changing point in Mr. O————’s estimation of the Catholic Church, because the priest said: ‘My dear little lady, don’t you know the Catholic Church has been established 2,000 years?’ etc.
“Mr. O———— jumped up out of his chair, grabbed his wife’s hand and bounded out, calling after him, ‘I’m sorry, you just don’t have what we want.’
“From that point on Mr. O———— has been much more reasonable. He has accepted ‘Let God Be True’ and ‘The Truth Shall Make You Free’ in French as well as a copy of the Scriptures, which he is reading. He has also permitted his wife to let one of the children attend the Protestant school.
“Mrs. O———— was immersed at the Divine Will assembly in New York.
“In the meantime, because of Sister O————’s stand for the truth, her sister, Mrs. G————, is now studying and progressing rapidly.
“Also, Mr. G———— has decided that he will send his children to the English Protestant school. A study is being arranged for him.
“It is a real joy to us working here to see these French people throw off the yoke of the Catholic system and find real happiness and a hope in the New World society. We thank Jehovah for the increase he gives as these lost sheep are found.”—From a pioneer minister in Quebec.

