
LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
“A Gift in Hand for Jehovah”









How can we “come forward today with a gift in hand for Jehovah”? (1Ch 29:5, 9, 14) Below are various ways in which we can choose to make voluntary donations to support the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses, both locally and worldwide.



DONATIONS MADE ONLINE OR PLACED IN CONTRIBUTION BOXES SUPPORT:






THE WORLDWIDE WORK
  construction and operation of branch facilities and remote translation offices
  theocratic schools
  special full-time servants
  disaster relief
  printing, video production, and digital publishing






LOCAL CONGREGATION EXPENSES
  congregation expenses, such as utilities and basic maintenance of the Kingdom Hall
  any resolutions made by the congregation to send funds to the branch office for:
  Kingdom Hall and Assembly Hall construction worldwide

  the Global Assistance Arrangement

  other worldwide activities




CONVENTIONS AND ASSEMBLIES
Donations made to your regional convention are forwarded to the worldwide work. In turn, the expenses related to regional, special, and international conventions are paid from the worldwide work.
Donations made to a circuit are used to rent, operate, and maintain assembly venues and for other circuit-related expenses. A circuit may resolve to contribute excess funds to the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses.








LEARN MORE ONLINE
To see how you can donate, use one of the following options:
  go to donate.jw.org

  select “Donations” in the About Us section of jw.org

  use the “Donations” link at the bottom of the home page on the JW Library app


In some countries, there is a document entitled “Frequently Asked Questions” that supplies answers to common questions about donations.
The video Tutorial for Making Donations Electronically provides helpful information on donation methods that are available.


CHARITABLE PLANNING
Some donations made to the worldwide work require advance planning and/​or legal advice. These include:
  wills and trusts

  real estate, stocks, bonds, and insurance

  conditional donations


If you would like to make such a donation, contact your branch office, using the contact details found on donate.jw.org.


