From Our Readers
Divorce  I am writing to express my deep gratitude for the series “Child Custody—What Is the Balanced View?” (December 8, 1997) After my divorce, there were problems in determining how much access my ex-husband should have to our daughter. My new husband felt that access should be denied as much as possible. But Awake! cleared up this issue by putting the child’s welfare first and not the emotions of parents or stepparents.
L. C., Wales
I had my daughter, my only child, taken away from me when the court decided she should live with her dad. The article therefore seemed to be written for me. It is a blessing to know that Jehovah is giving us our “food at the proper time.”—Matthew 24:45.
D. B., Switzerland
I thanked Jehovah in tears when I saw the cover of Awake!, as I have been in a child-custody battle for two years. It has been a highly emotional experience. I truly appreciate the informative, well-thought-out manner in which this subject was presented.
A. F., United States
When I was only a child, my parents divorced. I felt torn between the two of them. You can thus imagine how much I welcomed the articles on this subject. I am deeply grateful that you dealt with this problem from the viewpoint of the children.
K. D., Yugoslavia
Alpine Parks  I’d like to thank you very much for the article “The Beauty of Alpine National Parks.” (November 22, 1997) Frankly speaking, I had bypassed previous articles about nature. But I saw the magnificent photos that accompanied the article and decided I wanted to read it. When I finished, I realized that I had missed out on reading many other interesting nature articles.
T. M., Ukraine
Homosexuality  I was thrilled when I received my December 8, 1997, Awake!, with the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Should Christians Hate Homosexuals?” It was a very well-written and balanced coverage of a very sensitive subject.
L. W., United States
Boredom  I handed my supervisor a copy of the article “Are You Bored With Your Work?” (December 22, 1997) The next morning at work, she told me that the article was excellent. She passed it out to some of my coworkers and left a copy of the article in our lounge. Your timing was so right!
V. L., United States
Thank you for the interesting information. I am 17 years old and work full-time. The article gave excellent advice on how to make my job more pleasant. Thanks!
E. A., Italy
A big thank-you for the article. I am currently in the second year of an apprenticeship and was going through the doldrums, not enjoying my job anymore. The article helped me to find pleasure in my work again.
I. F., Germany
Raves  I am 19 years old and have really enjoyed listening to techno music. But I was very pleased with the article “Young People Ask . . . Are Raves Harmless Fun?” (December 22, 1997) This is the first article I’ve seen that accurately describes this kind of music. I am especially grateful for the section “Are Raves Really for You?” By means of questions and scriptures, I was helped to arrive at a simple and logical conclusion.
A. P., Slovenia

