The Power of Advertising
A LONG time ago, a commercial television break would be introduced with the words, “And now, a few words from our sponsor.” Sponsors are companies that pay to have their products advertised. While the “few words from our sponsor” have become a deluge, sponsors still financially support the news and entertainment media—television, magazines, newspapers, and radio. Consequently, sponsors try to wield power over what appears in the media and what does not.
To illustrate: In 1993 a company that manufactures a German luxury car wrote to 30 magazines dictating that ads featuring their car should be presented “only in a proper editorial environment.” The letter explained that the magazine issues containing their ads should not feature any material critical of their car, German products, or Germany itself. Of course, it is not surprising that this company, which spends $15 million on magazine advertising, would expect “a proper editorial environment.”
It is also not surprising when magazines that advertise new bridal dresses do not accept ads for used bridal dresses or when newspapers that list real estate brokers do not tell you how to buy a house without one. Likewise, it should not surprise us when media that advertise cigarettes or lotteries do not criticize smoking or gambling.
Consumer Culture
The power of advertising, therefore, goes beyond the selling of goods. It promotes a consumer life-style, a global culture that centers on material things.
Is there anything wrong with that? It depends on whom you ask. Advertisers reason that people love to buy and possess things; advertising serves their interests. Moreover, they say, advertising creates jobs, sponsors sports and the arts, helps provide affordable media, encourages competition, improves products, keeps prices low, and enables people to make informed buying choices.
Others claim that advertising makes people restless and dissatisfied with what they have, nurturing and creating endless desires. Researcher Alan During writes: “Advertisements, like our age, are mercurial, hedonistic, image-laden, and fashion-driven; they glorify the individual, idealize consumption as the route to personal fulfillment, and affirm technological progress as the motive force of destiny.”
Its Power Over You
Does commercial advertising help shape what we are and what we want? Probably. However, whether that influence is great or small depends on other influences.
If we are guided by Bible principles and values, we will recognize that there is nothing wrong with possessing material things. After all, God blessed Abraham, Job, Solomon, and others with enormous wealth.
On the other hand, if we apply Scriptural principles, we will avoid the discontent of those who search for fulfillment and happiness in a never-ending quest for material things. The Bible’s message is not “Shop till you drop.” Rather, it tells us:
Trust in God. “Give orders to those who are rich in the present system of things not to be high-minded, and to rest their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment.”—1 Timothy 6:17.
Be content. “We have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out. So, having sustenance and covering, we shall be content with these things.”—1 Timothy 6:7, 8.
Be modest. “I desire the women to adorn themselves in well-arranged dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive garb, but in the way that befits women professing to reverence God, namely, through good works.”—1 Timothy 2:9, 10.
Know that godly wisdom is superior to wealth. “Happy is the man that has found wisdom, and the man that gets discernment, for having it as gain is better than having silver as gain and having it as produce than gold itself. It is more precious than corals, and all other delights of yours cannot be made equal to it. Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand there are riches and glory. Its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its roadways are peace. It is a tree of life to those taking hold of it, and those keeping fast hold of it are to be called happy.”—Proverbs 3:13-18.
Practice giving. “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”—Acts 20:35.
One could argue that this series of articles is in itself a kind of advertisement, one that “sells” the idea that spiritual values should not be pushed aside by material values. No doubt you would agree with that conclusion.
[Box on page 9]
Advertising God’s Kingdom
  What is one of the best ways to reach people with a persuasive message? The book Advertising: Principles and Practice says: “In an ideal world every manufacturer would be able to talk one-on-one with every consumer about the product or service being offered for sale.” True Christians have voluntarily been publicizing God’s Kingdom in this way for nearly 2,000 years. (Matthew 24:14; Acts 20:20) Why do not more businesses use this method of reaching people? The book explains: “It is very expensive. Calls made by salespeople can cost well in excess of $150 per call.” Christians, of course, “advertise” God’s Kingdom on a voluntary basis. It is a part of their worship.
[Pictures on page 8]
The Bible’s message is not “Shop till you drop”

