“Refreshing in This Turbulent World”
THAT is how 22-year-old Igor from Yugoslavia described the Watchtower magazine in a letter last year. He explained:
“I began reading the Watchtower magazine a couple of months ago. I am reading both new and older issues of The Watchtower (from 1991), and I like them very much. I think that a magazine like this is really refreshing in this turbulent world.
“The articles that you published about missionaries were especially interesting to me, and this is the reason I am writing to you. First, I am interested in knowing whether I could become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I must mention that I am a Catholic, but I think that your religion is much better than any other, particularly because no other religion is putting so much effort into spreading God’s Word.
“If the fact that I am a Catholic is not an obstacle, I am interested in finding out how I can become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I have just one desire. If it is at all possible, I would like to get baptized in Belgrade. If this is possible, please tell me when I can come and if there is any prerequisite for baptism. If my desire is not feasible, please give me information as to where I can be baptized and whom I can approach for that.
“Next, I would like to know how one can become a missionary. I would like to know if I can start with training for missionary service right after my baptism. Is it necessary to have a certain number of years in service? . . .
“Please take my letter seriously. I think that being a missionary is the best way of spreading the good news of God’s Kingdom.”
On page 2 of every issue of The Watchtower, the purpose of the magazine is explained: “It comforts all peoples with the good news that God’s Kingdom will soon destroy those who oppress their fellowmen and that it will turn the earth into a paradise.” If you would like a copy or would like to have someone call at your home to conduct a free Bible study with you, write to Watchtower, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201-2483, or to an appropriate address listed on page 5.

