Announcements
GAINING GOD’S REWARD BY ACTIVE TRAINING—1 Tim. 4:7, 8, NW.
What is the most essential training to which we should give attention? Plainly the Bible tells us: “Be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim. For bodily training is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” In obedience to this clearly expressed counsel all of Jehovah’s witnesses want to follow the example of the great Trainer, Christ Jesus, who is our model and teacher. Just as he displayed unquestioning godly devotion by faithful ministerial service, so it is with us today. In accord with his instructions to preach “this good news of the kingdom,” during February each one of us will display godly devotion by active participation in house-to-house work, offering a year’s subscription for the Watchtower magazine for $1. The excellent 96-page booklet What Do the Scriptures Say About “Survival After Death”? will be given free to each new subscriber. Share in this grand activity throughout the month and be richly rewarded.
YOUR PROSPECTS FOR THE FUTURE
Do you want proof for what you believe? Would you like to believe that you can live forever? Then you should read the outstanding Bible study aid You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World. Turn to page 367 and note the forty-two points of proof that some persons will escape this world’s end. Then follow each point carefully as, one by one, all unfold into one of the most dynamic and inspiring accounts of your prospects for the future that has ever been written. All establish on a firm Scriptural basis the hope of everlasting life on a beautified earth. Each prophecy considered sheds a little more light on God’s requirements for your survival and all will stimulate your desire to avail yourself of these provisions of Jehovah God for your safety. A sincere interest in you, the reader, and a desire to magnify Jehovah’s name have provided the stimulus for producing this astonishing record. Years of research furnish the factual background. The Bible is the authority. Send for your copy today without fail. It is only 50c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
March 10: May God Write on Your Heart? and Getting God’s Law on Your Heart, ¶1-3. Page 80.
March 17: Getting God’s Law on Your Heart, ¶4-21. Page 86.

