Announcements
REMAINING FEARLESS TO THE ACCOMPLISHED END
Today fear and anxiety grip nearly all of earth’s inhabitants as they look ahead to what is coming upon mankind. Foretold in Bible prophecy, the approach of the accomplished end of this present old world is marked with mounting troubles and woes, of kinds and intensity without parallel in human history. For these very days of uncertainty and insecurity Almighty God has decreed that a comforting, confidence-inspiring message be taken to all willing hearers. Support and strength can come only from the true Source: “God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear.” (Ps. 46:1, 2) To find this refuge, and to learn how to gain this strength, we must study God’s Word, both individually and with others, and then share in announcing Jehovah’s kingdom. Have you prepared to participate in this work during September, by fearlessly making known this good news in your neighborhood, offering the book “Let God Be True” and a 32-page booklet on a contribution of 35 cents? Report your activity as you help others in remaining fearless to the accomplished end.
“LET GOD BE TRUE”
In this day when honesty among men, high and low, is sadly lacking, great satisfaction results from knowing that humanity has one sure and trustworthy source of truth. That source is the true and living God, Jehovah. Accurate knowledge of him and his revealed purposes anyone can now gain through study of his Word, the Bible. Helpful for such Bible study is the book “Let God Be True”. In its 320 pages, basic truths and sound doctrines are made plain and understandable. God’s truth is clearly set forth; lies and errors of men and their traditions are boldly identified and dispelled. With a complete index of subjects and scriptures, this book (available in 26 languages) is sent, postpaid, on a contribution of 35c.
ADDITIONAL EUROPEAN CONVENTIONS
After the assemblies in London, Paris and Rotterdam, the president of the Society will serve a number of other assemblies. Listed below are the countries, cities, auditoriums, and dates:
Germany
Frankfurt/Main
Stadion
August 24-26
Denmark
Copenhagen
K. B. Hallen
August 31–September 2
Finland
Vaasa
Kaupungintalo
September 5-6
Helsinki
Rasastushalli
September 7-9
Sweden
Stockholm
Eriksdalshallen
September 14-16
Norway
Lillehammer
Idrettshallen
September 21-23
Austria
Vienna
Konzerthaus
September 28-30
Readers of The Watchtower are invited to attend. Information about the assemblies or rooming accommodations may be obtained by writing to the branch office of the Society for the country which you desire to visit. The addresses are listed in the back of the Yearbook and other publications of the Society.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 2: “Proclaim Liberty Throughout All the Land,” ¶1-24.
Week of September 9: “Proclaim Liberty Throughout All the Land,” ¶25-49.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear outside, because fear exercises a restraint. Indeed, he that is under fear has not been made perfect in love.—1 John 4:18, NW.

