The Watchtower
“THERE is a large building at 117 Adams street, Brooklyn, which the editor of Islaah visited last week. What he told us about it is as follows:
“This building belongs to Jehovah’s witnesses and is where the Awake! and Watchtower magazines are printed. It has nine stories, and thus is well equipped to prepare and publish those two magazines as well as other books which the directors of the movement think should be done so men might know that what they believe is the truth inspired by God in the Bible.
“Not being in position to discuss religious views, but only to describe what we have seen, we give the following points. On each floor there are various workers and the needed instruments and tools to accomplish different kinds of work. Not only did we see the latest modern machinery in operation, but we observed those young men working there in complete order, with joy for what they were doing. Yes, their love for their work and their wholehearted devotion to do it well and perfect it were things we felt the effect of more than the big machines which one looks at with admiration and awe.
“After this we visited another building called ‘Bethel’, located at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn. This is the home of those workers we saw at the ‘Watchtower’ building. We asked one of them about the wages they get, and he said $12 a month for each one, with his room and board. After having our supper we gave an elementary lesson in Arabic to some students who will go to Arabian countries to serve and witness to Jehovah, to whom they have consecrated their education, knowledge and efforts—even their lives.
“What amazes the visitor in both buildings is the spirit of satisfaction and contentment, rather the conviction that prevails over all of them. There you see doctors, nurses, lawyers, engineers, builders, cooks, translators of divers languages, and all kinds of workers going according to one system as happy children obeying the instructions of their parents—nothing worries them except doing the work they are given, every one within his capacity and with honesty and sincerity.
“Although these workers work in ‘The Watchtower’ and live in ‘Bethel’ (meaning ‘house of God’), yet there is no supervision over them whatsoever, no leader, no ‘great man’ to be extolled or honored, because they all believe that God is the best watcher and supervisor over them, and they ‘by their deeds’ are his best witnesses.”—From March 5, 1951, issue of Islaah, and written by the Roman Catholic priest who edits this Arabic triweekly, of New York city.

