Worldly Knowledge versus God’s
I finally arrived in New York city, and then by bus and taxi over to Paterson, New Jersey, and the home of my niece and her husband. I was anxious to give them a good witness concerning the kingdom of Jehovah; and after dinner, as we were all comfortably seated in their beautiful living room, the husband gave me the opening. So I told them of the three worlds, the Bible proof regarding the times in which we are living, that this gospel of the Kingdom had to be preached, about the kingdom for which all Christians had been praying, etc.
The next day we visited the new factory of the Watchtower Society and saw their new Bethel home. The four of us were simply overcome with amazement at the functioning of this factory. The husband, being an engineer himself, fully appreciated what a wonderful organization the Society has there. After completing the tour through the plant and returning to the office, he procured a number of Bible aids, including subscriptions for the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Next we visited the new Bethel home, which houses the Watchtower workers. The modern equipment in the kitchen, the laundry, and the beautiful murals were most impressive. I was never so happy in all my life as to see all these things myself, and to see the impressions they made on our party. I know that God blessed them with the privilege of receiving the truth.
This man is one of the famous doctors who gave Nuclear 238, the Atomic bomb, to the United States government. He cannot sleep nights for thinking how much misery his invention and discovery has caused. He is through with it all. He has received many honors from Congress, but knows now that he has been serving the Devil. From here on out he is going to study the Bible.
I asked him, “Can you see why these brothers and sisters, ministers all, of the gospel of the Kingdom, stand on the street corners, all over the world, with the Watchtower and Awake! magazines?” “Uncle John,” he said, putting his hands on my shoulders and looking me in the eye, “God grant that I myself someday in the near future may be good enough to secure this privilege, to be his servant in public. I have much to overcome, but I surely know that these people are blessed and true.”—J. J., Colorado.

