The Joy of Sharing God’s Truths
LAWYER USES THE BIBLE
In Rio de Janeiro, Guanabara, Brazil, a lawyer had an experience that brought him a great deal of joy. He related it to one of Jehovah’s witnesses: “I was visited by a couple who intended to get a separation on religious grounds. The husband was Lutheran, the wife, Baptist. At the direction of his minister, the husband wanted their children to follow his religion; the wife, also at the direction of her minister, insisted that the children be educated in the Baptist Church. It was really a big problem.”
The lawyer advised the couple to invite their respective pastors to visit his office the next day. The ministers stood firm for their requirements. They alleged: “There is only one way out: separation, otherwise the children will have to suffer for their parents’ mistakes.”
Opening the Bible, the lawyer showed the four of them that, according to God’s law, religious problems are not a valid ground for a legal separation; only adultery is. The couple agreed and thanked the lawyer for his Biblical advice. At this the Lutheran pastor exclaimed: “Doctor, I feel so insignificant that, being a minister, I appealed to man’s justice, whereas you, a lawyer, appealed to God’s justice. Where did you learn so much about the Bible?” The lawyer stated that he had learned it from Jehovah’s witnesses.
At this, the Baptist minister exclaimed: “Not with Jehovah’s witnesses?” The lawyer then assured him that in his search for truth he had inquired of many of the so-called wise ones in Bible knowledge of various religious denominations, but he had never had his questions answered until he met Jehovah’s witnesses. “Yes, they are the true disciples of Jesus Christ,” said the lawyer, “and my doors are always open to them.”
WALLS WITH EARS
A witness of Jehovah in New Jersey reports what happened when she was conducting a home Bible study with a lady in an apartment house. “One day after our study was over and I had left, the next-door neighbor visited the person I had just studied with. The neighbor explained that she had been listening to the Bible study through the walls! She had found it so interesting that she wanted to learn more about the Bible. She wondered if I would study with her also. I was told of this conversation when I returned the following week. After the study was over, I called on the next-door neighbor and arranged for a Bible study with her. I am overjoyed to report that she is progressing very well in Bible knowledge, and her sister is also showing interest, sitting in on the study.”
LIVING NOW WITH A HOPE
A witness of Jehovah who lives in Kentucky had this experience: “New neighbors moved in next door—a man and his 17-year-old son. Shortly after we had got acquainted, the boy was killed in an auto accident. Since the funeral was out of state, I offered to pick up the mail each day. I was elated to find that he subscribed for both The Watchtower and Awake! I joyfully awaited the opportunity to discuss Bible truths with him. Opportunity soon presented itself when he came to visit my husband and me. The subject of death came up and we pointed out what a wonderful resurrection hope the Bible offers. This was a new idea to him. We looked up scriptures in the Bible showing that man is a soul, that the soul dies and that man’s only hope is in a resurrection. He listened intently and it was in the early hours of the morning before he went home.
“The next morning and each evening that week he was back again with questions. I suggested he have a home Bible study, which he was eager to have. He has taken deep interest in the study and has been attending the Kingdom Hall regularly on Sunday. This man’s mother recently brought us great joy when she said: ‘I’ll be eternally grateful to you people for what you’ve done for my son. It used to be he’d get up in the morning and couldn’t eat. He’d say, What’s the use—I have no purpose for living now. But since he’s been studying the Bible with you, he can eat and, best of all, he has a hope for the future.’ Certainly Jesus Christ’s words at Acts 20:35, ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving,’ could never be truer.”

