
What Prayers Can Do for You

Faced with a serious illness, Pamela sought professional medical help. However, she also prayed to God for strength to endure her ordeal. Did prayer help her?




“During my cancer treatment, I often felt a sense of dread,” Pamela explained. “But when I prayed to Jehovah God, a feeling of calm came over me and I could think clearly. I still suffer from chronic pain, yet prayer helps me to maintain a positive outlook. When people ask me how I feel, I say, ‘I don’t feel well, but I am in good spirits!’”
Of course, we do not have to wait until a life-threatening crisis comes on us before we pray. All of us face challenges, large and small, and we often feel we need help to deal with them. Can prayer help?
The Bible says: “Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.” (Psalm 55:22) What a comforting thought that is! So how can prayer help you? When you pray to God in the proper way, he will give you what you need to deal with your challenges.​—See the box “What Prayers Can Bring You.”



What Prayers Can Bring You
Peace of mind





“Let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (Philippians 4:6, 7) When you pour out your concerns to God, he will help you to stay calm and act wisely under stress.
Wisdom from God





“If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching, and it will be given him.” (James 1:5) When we are under pressure, we do not always make the best decisions. If you pray for wisdom, God can remind you of the many helpful principles in his written Word, the Bible.
Strength and comfort





“For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.” (Philippians 4:13) Being the almighty God, Jehovah can give you the strength you need to deal with your challenges or to sustain you through your trials. (Isaiah 40:29) The Bible also calls Jehovah “the God of all comfort.” He can comfort us “in all our trials.”​—2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.


WILL YOU BENEFIT?
Jehovah, of course, does not force you to pray to him. Instead, he lovingly invites you to do so. (Jeremiah 29:11, 12) What, though, if in the past you felt that your prayers were not answered? Do not lose heart or give up. Loving parents may not help their children in the exact way or at the very moment that the children expect. Perhaps the parents have a better solution. One thing, however, is certain: Loving parents help their children.
Jehovah God​—the most loving of parents—​wants to help you too. If you carefully examine the guidelines we have considered and do what you can to put them into practice, God will answer your prayers in the best possible way!​—Psalm 34:15; Matthew 7:7-11.


