Announcements
● Literature offer for October: One-year subscription for either Awake! or The Watchtower or both, for contribution of $4.00 each. Six-month subscriptions to semimonthly magazines or yearly subscriptions to monthly magazines are $2.00. (There is no six-month subscription to monthly magazines.) November: The New World Translation with Peace and Security or any other older 192-page book, for contribution of $4.50. The brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for contribution of 30¢, especially to those with reading difficulties or where there are children. December: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for contribution of $2.50.
● With this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we are including the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1986. This will enable school overseers to become familiar with the instructions and make assignments well in advance.
● A new tract, Kingdom News No. 33, will be used in December during the campaign with the Creation book. Congregations may order this item in lots of 1,000 at a cost of $12.00 for 1,000 tracts. Publishers may obtain these at the congregation literature counter at 12 tracts for 15¢, 20 for 25¢, or 100 for $1.20.
● During their visits to congregations, circuit overseers will review points from the new Reasoning book at meetings for service.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—Large print (set of four volumes; congregation and public: $40.00; pioneers: $24.00) (individual volumes; congregation and public: $10.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—English
Volume #1 (Genesis-Second Samuel)
Volume #2 (First Kings-Song of Solomon)
Volume #3 (Isaiah-Malachi)
Volume #4 (Matthew-Revelation)
Congregations may now begin placing orders for the above items. These will appear as back ordered on congregation invoices until they are shipped in the near future.
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, regular edition (bi12)​—Danish
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—With References (Rbi8)—​Japanese
Aid to Bible Understanding, Volume 4 (Hem-Jez)​—Dutch
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth​—Hungarian, Malagasy
Bible Topics for Discussion​—Croatian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Second of Chronicles (set of two; congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $2.50)​—English

