Manifesting Spiritual Growth by Participating in Meetings
1 Spiritual growth to maturity is a desirable goal for all servants of Jehovah. Paul wrote: “Speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.” (Eph. 4:15) How, then, is spiritual growth attained? Paul mentions two things, namely, “speaking the truth” and “by love.” What else is needed?
2 It is evident that more than a heartfelt belief or faith is required, since Paul also wrote that “with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.” (Rom. 10:10) Are you giving evidence of spiritual growth by making a public declaration at the meetings? Can you improve your participation? Have you not found that you benefit more from the meetings when you participate?
ADVANCE PREPARATION
3 Personal study and advance preparation will help you to acquire the courage to speak. Prepare a number of comments on different paragraphs. Mark key words and make brief notes in the margins if necessary.
4 In your study and meditation, note cited scriptures that may be read or summarized and applied to the material. Consider how some points apply to our personal lives or to our ministry.
DURING THE MEETING
5 Having prepared beforehand, you can offer meaningful comments. Remember, “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) Know that others enjoy and benefit from your comments. Some have been helped to start commenting by letting the conductor know beforehand the paragraph(s) on which they are prepared to comment.
6 The initial comment in answer to a question should be brief and to the point. Such comments are much easier to make and easier for others to understand. Try commenting in your own words, instead of simply reading from the publication. This in itself will increase your understanding of God’s Word and will contribute to your spiritual growth.
CONDUCTORS CAN HELP
7 Conductors can do much to encourage better participation in meetings. Taking note of those who seldom comment and giving them a personal word of encouragement can be a great help. Conductors will want to keep their own comments brief and ask leading questions when it is necessary to bring out additional points.
8 May we all seek to laud Jehovah in the Christian congregation today by regular participation, thus manifesting our spiritual growth and inciting others to love and fine works.​—Ps. 35:18; Heb. 10:24, 25.

