Presenting the Good News​—With a Willing and Ready Spirit
1 Have you noticed how some people never lose their enthusiasm for the truth? Even after decades of faithful service they are still willing and ready to share the good news with others. All of us should strive to cultivate this same positive attitude. (1 Tim. 6:18; compare Hebrews 3:14.) Presenting the good news on every appropriate occasion demonstrates a ready and willing spirit.
2 During October, we will be offering subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! We will want to demonstrate a willing and ready spirit by offering the subscriptions not only from house to house but whenever possible.
ON EVERY OCCASION
3 All of us come in contact with people in various ways. In fact, our daily routine of life, from being pleasant neighbors to standing in line at the grocery counter, requires that we have dealings with those who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many of these occasions can provide us with a marvelous opportunity to share the good news with others. At times we may be hesitant about approaching people because we do not know what to say or how to initiate the conversation. Preparation and forethought are needed to turn everyday occurrences into opportunities to share the good news.
4 For instance, we may have a doctor’s appointment and know we will have to spend time in the waiting room. We could take along the latest magazines and be ready to discuss an article that might be of interest to someone we meet. In such a setting, we might begin by talking about how good it would be if sickness did not exist, and then tie in the hope of the Kingdom by sharing a specific point from The Watchtower or Awake! Depending on the circumstances and the interest shown, a subscription could be offered. If we are ready and willing to share our Bible-based hope, opportunities to help others learn the truth will not be missed.
5 Our young brothers and sisters can take the initiative to witness to fellow students and teachers. Some have used free class periods to good advantage. By having The Watchtower and Awake! visible on their desk, some have been approached by other students. Teachers also have noticed the literature and have shown interest. (Eccl. 11:6) During the month of October, why not be conscious of ways you can offer a subscription to your teachers and fellow students?
6 Those of us who have secular jobs may have the occasion to witness to fellow employees. One brother who was quite successful in obtaining subscriptions from fellow workers used a simple, direct approach, merely asking his co-workers if they enjoyed good reading material. If they answered in the affirmative, he would offer the subscription. Another brother noticed a fellow worker pray before eating lunch. He seized the opportunity to give a witness, and the man accepted the truth quickly. Later, this man served in one of the Society’s branch offices. Some brothers and sisters take literature to read during rest periods. By sharing what they are reading with fellow workers, they use the time to cultivate interest in the truth. In this way they have been able to obtain subscriptions. Again, the key is to maintain a willing and ready spirit, and be prepared to give a witness. Are you making use of Reasoning From the Scriptures on many occasions?
7 Can you think of additional settings where you could offer the subscription? Why not make an extra effort during the month of October to be conscious of speaking to others, having in mind the subscription offer?

