Publishing Salvation With Unique Magazines
1 The Watchtower and Awake!​—what unique and powerful magazines Jehovah has placed in our hands! The outstanding October issues are of particular importance because of the timeliness of special articles dealing with the subject of world peace and security. They are of added interest to us since we will be using these magazines extensively in field service during the October subscription campaign.
2 The exciting cover titles and the fact that the October issues of Awake! are in full color will lend immediate eye appeal and should stimulate our enthusiastic presentation of these magazines. The two Watchtower cover titles are “Peace and Security​—From This Source?” and “Peace and Security​—Through God’s Kingdom.” The October 8 Awake! cover title is “Peace​—Does Man Have the Answer?” and for October 22, “The UN​—God’s Way to Peace?” Timely articles on other subjects are also included in each magazine.
APPRECIATING THEIR VALUE
3 The value of a magazine can be measured by what it does for its readers. There are over 140 worldly magazines printed in English that range in circulation from 300,000 to over 17 million each issue. Among these are magazines that are saturated with pornography and obscenities. Some glorify the latest styles in clothing and grooming. Others exalt sports figures or TV and movie personalities. Some contain information of limited or questionable value. Many represent a direct attack on your spirituality.​—Eccl. 12:12; 1 Tim. 6:20, 21.
4 But Jehovah has provided a storehouse of valuable information in The Watchtower and Awake!, a supply of spiritual truths readily available to equip those who have been ‘enrolled as soldiers’ of Christ Jesus. (2 Tim. 2:4) Our unique warfare “against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places” requires weapons of a unique kind.​—Eph. 6:12.
5 None of the worldly magazines can compare in value with The Watchtower and Awake! When speaking to potential subscribers, we can highlight the contrast by referring to “The Purpose of The Watchtower” or “Why Awake! Is Published,” on the inside of the front cover. These are the only magazines on earth that publish salvation! We who are privileged to take their Bible-based message to the people are also in a class by ourselves​—a unique people. Notice what is stated about publishers of salvation at Isaiah 52:7.
SHARE IN PUBLISHING SALVATION
6 The lifesaving information published in The Watchtower is of immeasurable value to all honest-hearted people. This was illustrated in an outstanding way a few years ago by an experience from a village in West Africa. One of our brothers left a magazine in a building where it was found by the caretaker, who then announced to the villagers, ‘An angel of God has brought a message to the village.’ He took it upon himself to sell single pages of the magazine. An elderly man bought a page, and what he read aroused his interest in the Bible’s message. He soon began studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
7 World peace and security is a subject that is on the mind of millions of people today. The thought-provoking articles published in each of the October issues of The Watchtower and Awake! will help us to initiate friendly conversations for the purpose of giving a witness. As we offer subscriptions to these unique magazines during October, the people in our territory will have another opportunity to hear the message of salvation and perhaps learn of the only true Source of world peace and security.

