Announcements
● Literature offer for November: Three pocket-size books: Holy Spirit, Great Teacher and This Life for $1.00. Also, if congregations have any of the Man’s Salvation or Know Jehovah books in stock, you may include one of these in the combination for $1.00. December: New World Translation and a 50-cent book that congregation has in stock for $2.50. January: Watchtower subscription for $2.50 with one of the following books as a free gift: Great Teacher, Holy Spirit, Word of God or Man’s Salvation. February and March: Any of the 50-cent books in congregation stock except Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on James, Family Life, Truth or School Guidebook.
● The Society now has a limited supply of the following publications in grade-two English Braille: My Book of Bible Stories, (4 volumes) and Bible Topics for Discussion, (1 volume). The publications may be obtained on a free loan basis or purchased and kept permanently. A remittance should accompany orders if purchased. The book is $5; booklet, $1. Orders for Braille publications should be sent to the attention of the Society’s Braille Desk. They should not be included on congregation literature orders, nor should Braille publications be stocked by the congregation.
● Congregation secretaries should send the Pioneer Information Report form (S-207) to the Society immediately if they have not already done so. This must be sent even if there are no pioneers in the congregation.
● Yearbooks of previous years are available in the following languages:
1976: Dutch, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish
1977: Dutch, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, Spanish
1978: Dutch, English, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Spanish
Those who want copies of these older Yearbooks should order them through their congregation, at 15c each.
● New Publications Available:
Making Your Family Life Happy—Japanese
Is There a God Who Cares?—Gaelic
“Singing and Accompanying Yourselves with Music in Your Hearts” (Deluxe edition)—Dutch, Swedish
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
Listening to the Great Teacher—Korean
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
1978 Watchtower and Awake! bound volumes—Dutch
● On October 1, 1979, the Society mailed a letter to congregations with Kingdom Hall insurance through the Society. Congregation secretaries for these congregations will please consider the letter carefully and discuss it with the body of elders at the next elders’ meeting.

