Encouraging One Another to Be Strong in Faith
1 How strong is your faith? Can you see evidence that your faith is growing? (2 Thess. 1:3) Has it been your joy to observe others in the congregation growing strong in faith? Can you help toward strengthening the faith of some? Faith is essential to pleasing God. Indeed, none of us will be able to stand up under pressure and qualify for life everlasting unless we remain strong in faith.—Heb. 10:38, 39.
2 The basis for strong faith is accurate knowledge. (Rom. 10:17) All of us need, then, to have good study habits. Time needs to be “bought” from other activities and interests to meditate on what we read and hear. (Eph. 5:15, 16) If we get the sense of the truth, it will help us to be strong in faith.—Col. 2:7.
STRENGTHENING OTHERS
3 If we are strong in faith, this will put us in the best position to strengthen others. Take a personal interest in as many as possible in the congregation. (Phil. 2:4) Get to know them by name. Imitate Jesus in this regard. (John 10:3, 4) Without prying into their private lives, we do learn much about our brothers and their needs when visiting them in their homes, while associating at the Kingdom Hall, as well as while working with them in the field service.—John 10:3, 14.
4 We do not want to neglect any. It is easy to overlook the elderly, the sick, the young. Avoid the pitfall of being negative about and critical of the lax, the weak and those who complain. They are all our brothers. We have an obligation to help one another, don’t we?—Gal. 6:10.
5 An elder returned to an area where he had served previously. He asked about one of the faithful older ones who was serving vigorously when he was with the congregation some years before. Most had never met him since he had been confined to bed for some time. How encouraged this dear brother was when he received a visit from his concerned friend who remembered his faithful work. Do you visit the older ones in your congregation who are confined to bed, and so forth? No doubt if some were aware of such situations, even as in the case mentioned here, they would respond positively. Many times it does not take much time. A phone call could do it. A short visit and discussion on some clarification of a scripture in The Watchtower, or an experience we had or heard, can go a long way with some.
ALL CAN HAVE A PART
6 If you note that some are slackening their hand, try to help in a kindly way. Although the elders have the primary responsibility, the counsel to build one another up was directed to all Christians.—1 Thess. 5:11.
7 What are some ways you can help? Are there some in the congregation whom you can include in your family study? One older couple make it a point to invite youthful visitors to share with them in whatever they are doing. They might be preparing for the Watchtower study or the Theocratic School. They may just be catching up on some reading. Many are truly refreshed by stimulating, informal Scriptural discussions. Also, recreation together can prove to be faith-building if done in an appropriate manner.
8 Work hard to be strong in faith. This will enable you to strengthen your family and others. ‘Share your faith.’ (Philem. 5, 6) Encourage others to do likewise. Our lives depend on it.

