Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 4
 8 min: Song 17 and local announcements.
20 min: “Encouraging One Another to Be Strong in Faith.” Discussion of main article. Include audience by asking questions on highlights, putting main emphasis on Scriptures. Have several prepared to relate how they were encouraged by fellow worshipers, or have someone tell the results from efforts to help others in the congregation.
20 min: “Helping One Another (Part V): To Make Advancement.” Service overseer discusses article with audience. Have some publishers who have been assisted since this series began in July briefly relate the advancement they have noted in themselves in recent months. The service overseer should also commend the brothers for the efforts they have been putting forth in supporting this program to help others in the congregation. He can set before them further goals that they can concentrate on as they assist one another.
12 min: Service announcements. Invite audience to give experiences or comments on interest found on the first Sunday of each month when the special effort was made by the congregation in the house-to-house work. Song 16 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 11
 8 min: Song 55 and local announcements. Also give accounts report.
20 min: “What Sort of Persons Ought You to Be?” Talk on this theme with some audience participation. (Information taken from Saturday morning program, “Living Hope” District Convention, based on 2 Peter 3:11.)
“HOLY ACTS OF CONDUCT”: Accurate knowledge and faith needed to be ‘holy in conduct.’ (1 Pet. 2:2, 3) Not a matter of personal choice but a command. (1 Pet. 1:15, 16) What is “loose conduct”? (Licentious, wanton, vulgar, shameless conduct. See w73 9/15 p. 574.) What could be its effect on the congregation? (2 Pet. 2:1-3) One who practices such is worse off than before learning truth. Also stumbles others. (2 Pet. 2:17-22) Cannot excuse by saying: “It’s up to your conscience,” or “Others are doing it.” Some things clearly wrong. Must avoid.—1 Pet. 2:16.
“DEEDS OF GODLY DEVOTION”: One with godly devotion will revere what is holy, appreciate sacred things. Jesus was first human to develop godly devotion fully since Adam lost it in Eden. (1 Tim. 3:16) Godly devotion urgent now since system soon to end. (2 Pet. 3:12) Keep Jehovah’s day “close in mind” by our attitude, speech and preaching activity. Godly devotion not passive but active. Shown by one’s fully accomplishing ministry. Remember, benefits will come now and in future. (1 Tim. 4:8; Titus 2:11-13) Conclude by stressing need for all to make personal application.
25 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Being Versatile.” Chairman has capable young brother read paragraphs from seat in audience. Draws audience out with pertinent questions. Demonstrate from platform someone using current Topic for Conversation. Householder has death in family, or raises objection. Publisher continues with planned presentation. Chairman interrupts, asks audience if this could have been handled differently. Presentation repeated from point where objection was raised. This time publisher answers objection and concludes with either placing offer or arranging to come again. A couple of objections or circumstances encountered locally that would prompt an adapting of the presentation could be discussed. Ask for an experience or two illustrating how planned presentation was adjusted or other literature was offered to fit needs of householder. Urge the brothers to be prepared to make adjustments according to the circumstances encountered.
 7 min: Service announcements. Build up enthusiasm for support of special activity on Thanksgiving Day, November 22. Song 11 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 18
THEME: “Youths—Are You Involved?”
 8 min: Song 8 and local announcements.
30 min: “Youths—Are You Involved?”
(15 min.) Question-and-answer coverage of article on page 1. Have youths in audience read paragraphs. Make local application of points.
(10 min.) Enthusiastic discussion by chairman and two youths, perhaps a boy and a girl, giving reasons (especially spiritual ones) why youths should be involved in congregation activities. Both youths should speak from their hearts. The elder should be encouraging and positive, reflecting proper Scriptural understanding of the attitude adults should have toward youths.
(5 min.) Talk by chairman. Encourage youths and parents to regard sacred service above secular pursuits. Godly devotion along with self-sufficiency should be our aim. Careers in full-time service are to be highly esteemed. Youths can be and should be prepared for future privileges in Jehovah’s service, as well as for success in family life, if they take advantage of congregational provisions. Encourage auxiliary pioneering during school holiday.
15 min: Interviews and congregation discussion featuring how youths can be involved in congregation activities. Prepare interviews with local youths who are diligently participating in the congregation activities. Ask about their immediate and long-range goals in Jehovah’s service. Discuss with youths in audience some things they can do in congregation and in their own families to display spiritual progress.
 7 min: Service arrangements, including encouragement for adults to work with young people this weekend. Song 7 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 25
10 min: Song 111 and local announcements.
20 min: Review highlights in the November Our Kingdom Service. The elder handling this part should have brothers and sisters prepared in advance to make meaningful comments. In addition to asking for general comments on how they can use what they received in Our Kingdom Service for November, he can get comments on the following questions: (1) How will you use suggestions about helping pioneers, youths and elderly ones as you plan your field service activity? (See article on page 7.) (2) When we associate together, how could the suggestions on “Encouraging One Another to Be Strong in Faith” affect our conversations? (3) Which of the suggestions found in our Meetings for Field Service have worked effectively for you? (4) In what way have you been able to use the suggestions on being versatile in field service? (See “Presenting the Good News” article.)
20 min: Topic for Conversation and offer for December. Encourage all to be prepared as they go into field service during December. The offer will be the New World Translation and an older 50-cent book in stock. Have a publisher demonstrate the Topic for Conversation and the offer. Then have the audience give further suggestions on features of the New World Translation and portions of the book that they feel would appeal to householders. For example, you could ask: “How can we show that we believe God’s promises are sure and near to being realized?” Service overseer can inform publishers as to books available locally and suggest appropriate points that may be featured.
10 min: Service announcements. Build up enthusiasm for house-to-house work on the first Sunday in December. Briefly cover highlights in article “Public Talks for January.” Song 112 and prayer.

