Part 5—Helping One Another—To Make Advancement
1 Since July Our Kingdom Service has given suggestions on how experienced publishers can help those desiring assistance in field service. Those receiving assistance no doubt deeply appreciate the loving efforts in their behalf. Those giving this assistance have undoubtedly learned from the experience and feel even closer to those with whom they have worked.—Rom. 1:11, 12.
2 Are there any further ways that we can be of assistance to one another? Those working together can determine how long they will work as companions in service. After improving their ability to converse with people at the doors, some may request assistance in making return visits or in conducting studies. We are confident that those who can will continue rendering help. On the other hand, some who have been receiving help in a certain feature of field service may now be in a position to render assistance to others in their family or study group. We are confident that study conductors and service overseers will be pleased to give suggestions for your continued advancement.—1 Tim. 4:15.
3 All can share in helping others in field service in some way. It is a help just to be mindful of arranging to work with others. Those who are already regular and skilled in field service are encouraged when they have someone with whom to work. Regular pioneers and auxiliary pioneers are especially appreciative of this. Even if you are not able to give regular assistance to a particular person in your study group, could you invite others to work in the field with you? Could you take an older publisher, a teen-ager, or a sickly one on your study with you?
4 There may be those in the congregation who could make advancement if they were given just a little attention and encouragement. One older sister who had limited strength due to illness had a desire to pioneer. One of the traveling overseers took a little time to help her to organize her activity in a way that permitted her to spend a couple of hours in field service in the morning, then come home for rest. Later that afternoon, she completed her time in service scheduled for that day. She found this to be practical for her and easily exceeded her pioneer requirement. Regular or auxiliary pioneering has enabled many to make further advancement in their field service abilities. It has also enabled them to be of some assistance to more individuals in the congregation.
5 Invitations and practical assistance have been instrumental in helping a number of youths to improve in their service. Some have gone into the regular pioneer work or Bethel service. This was achieved because someone cared and took time to help them. The results are still evident since some of these former youths are now using what they gained to help others.—2 Tim. 2:2.
6 Helping others to make advancement is a continuing program. Intense love for others is the key to success. All will benefit since those who give to others gain an even ‘greater happiness.’—Acts 20:35.

