Youths—Are You Involved?
1 In connection with anything good, which do you prefer, being a spectator or a participant? You know that being involved in wholesome and exciting activities is much better than watching from the sidelines. Remember the fun and good exercise you had learning to play various games? As you increased your skill and ability, you increased your satisfaction and joy. Do you appreciate that your involvement in various congregational activities can bring you even greater joy and benefits?
2 Youths, you can help the congregation, and be helped by the congregation, if you become involved. One brother who in his preteens had involved himself in congregational activities was asked by a youth how he became a district overseer. After mentioning his home training and participation in congregational activities, he said: “At age 12 I was given my first assigned responsibility. Since then I have ‘always had plenty to do in the work of Jehovah.’”—1 Cor. 15:58.
WHY BE INVOLVED
3 Jehovah God wants youths to be involved in true worship. He purposed a place for young ones in his service. (Ps. 110:3; Matt. 19:14; 21:16) Youths, when you involve yourselves zealously in congregational activities, you share in the sanctification of Jehovah’s name, and your sincere example of faith incites others to glorify Jehovah God. Although there are many activities in life in which youths may be involved, serving Jehovah, the Universal Sovereign, surpasses them all. ‘So remove vexation from your heart, and ward off calamity from your flesh. Remember your Grand Creator in the days of your youth.’—Eccl. 11:9-10; 12:1; 1 Tim. 4:8.
4 Keep in mind that the novice who just learned to play the game cannot expect to be captain of the team; likewise, you youths must first become involved in basic Christian activities before you can properly expect to be given greater responsibility. (Luke 16:10) First, like the boy Jesus, go “on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.” (Luke 2:51, 52) Learn to read well. Apply yourself to your school studies in addition to concentrating your faculties on keeping up with your family and congregational studies. Make your advancement manifest in the Theocratic School by diligent and earnest efforts to make each of your assignments progressively better. Always take such assignments seriously and follow through on the personal counsel given to you by the school overseer. The young Christian Timothy was “well reported on by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium,” no doubt because he applied himself well in his family life and because he became involved in the Christian activities of the congregation.—Acts 16:1, 2.
5 Adults, encourage youths to be involved. Parents, train your children in a way that builds within them the desire to share in various activities of pure worship. Take the lead yourselves so that your sons and daughters will want to follow your fine example in supporting Christian meetings and activities alongside you.

