Parents​—Train Your Children to Preach
1 Our congregations are blessed with many children who have a sincere desire to serve God. (Eccl. 12:1) They are included among those invited by Jehovah to share in praising him. (Ps. 148:12-14) Hence, the day-to-day training that parents give their children should include instruction in how to share their faith with others in the Kingdom-preaching work.​—Deut. 6:6, 7.
2 Train Children in Progressive Steps: Children deserve to be trained at a very early age to accompany their parents in the ministry. Before going in service, prepare your children to participate in a meaningful way. Determine in advance what you expect them to do at the door. Very young children can give out tracts and handbills and invite people to the Kingdom Hall. Young ones who read well can be invited to read scriptures at the door. They can offer the magazines, using a brief presentation. As they gain experience, train them to use the Bible in their presentation. Many young publishers have started their own magazine route and regularly make return visits. It is best for a child to work with an adult rather than with another youngster. The adult can explain to the householder that the young one is being trained in the ministry.
3 One little girl asked the elders for their help so that she could qualify as a Kingdom publisher. Even though she was only five years old at the time and did not know how to read, she could present the Kingdom message effectively at the doors. She memorized the location of the scriptures, turned to them, asked the householder to read them, and then she gave the explanation.
4 Children should also be taught by parental example the value of having a good schedule for sharing regularly in the ministry. Parents need to establish a consistent weekly routine for service and stick to it, so that the children know what portion of the week is always set aside for the preaching work.
5 When children are trained from a tender age to love and enjoy the ministry, they will be motivated to reach out for greater privileges in the future, perhaps including the pioneer service. (1 Cor. 15:58) All of us should encourage the children in our midst to make good progress as praisers of Jehovah.

