Youths​—What Are Your Spiritual Goals?
1 Jehovah knows how important meaningful work and attainable goals are in bringing happiness. (See Genesis 1:28; 2:15, 19.) Today, Jehovah has given his people the assignment to preach and to teach. We also have the ultimate goal of attaining everlasting life in Paradise. Along the way, we need to set progressive spiritual goals if we are to avoid misdirecting our energies and resources.​—1 Cor. 9:26.
2 Realistic Goals for Young People: Youths ought to have theocratic goals that are within reach according to their individual capabilities. (1 Tim. 4:15) Some very young ones have achieved the goal of reciting the books of the Bible even before they learned to read. Through the family study, children learn to prepare for meetings so that they can meet the goals of making meaningful comments and enrolling in the Theocratic Ministry School. When children accompany their parents in field service, they learn to have a part in giving a witness as they progress toward the goal of becoming unbaptized publishers. Parents should keep before their young children the goal of dedication and baptism.
3 If you are a teenager, what do your spiritual goals include? “Remember, now, your Grand Creator” by focusing on the really important goals in life. (Eccl. 12:1; Ps. 71:17) Why not auxiliary pioneer during the months you have time off from school? Have you thought about taking up the ministry full-time as a regular pioneer? What about learning a new language so that in the future you could assist a foreign-language group or congregation in your area or somewhere else? Many who are now serving at Bethel or as traveling overseers or missionaries set special full-time service as their goal when they were still in school. Why not do the same yourself?
4 While still of tender age, strive to imitate Jesus’ example. Even at the young age of 12, he spoke freely about spiritual matters. (Luke 2:42-49, 52) Setting beneficial goals for yourself to do personal study, to read the Bible daily, and to fellowship regularly with mature Christians at meetings and in service will help you acquire the skill to teach others about God’s Kingdom the way Jesus did.

