The “Divine Teaching” District Conventions
ALL those desiring to be taught by Jehovah keenly look forward to the “Divine Teaching” District Conventions. The four-day program will highlight significant aspects of Scriptural teaching that safeguard Christians in these times of growing personal problems and world turmoil. The program will help them to withstand firmly ‘whatever is in opposition to healthful teaching’ and to be better teachers of God’s Word.​—1 Timothy 1:10.
What fine examples we have to imitate! The Greatest Teacher is none other than Jehovah God himself! Thus, Elihu rightly said to Job that Jehovah “is the One teaching us more than the beasts of the earth, and he makes us wiser than even the flying creatures of the heavens.” He also asked concerning Jehovah: “Who is an instructor like him?” (Job 35:11; 36:22) God is referred to at Isaiah 30:20 as the “Grand Instructor.”
Second only to Jehovah as a teacher is Jesus Christ. He was known as the “Teacher” and as the “Instructor,” being referred to as such some 50 times in the Gospels. In spite of his many sensational cures and other miracles, Jesus was not known as the Physician but as the Teacher, the Instructor.​—Matthew 8:19; Luke 5:5; John 13:13.
Most fittingly, Jesus taught his disciples and apostles to be teachers as he was. We can see this from Matthew 10:5 to 11:1 and Luke 10:1-11. Shortly before ascending to heaven, Jesus gave his disciples the noted teaching commission recorded at Matthew 28:19, 20. The book of Acts, as well as the inspired letters that follow it in the Christian Greek Scriptures, relate how zealously, skillfully, and faithfully Jesus’ early followers carried out this teaching commission.
This teaching work is more urgent today than ever before. We are living in the last days of this system of things, and because of that, lives are involved. For people not to share in the sins of Babylon the Great and receive part of her plagues, they must be taught and helped to come out of Babylon and take their stand for Jehovah and his Kingdom.​—Revelation 18:4.
To aid all of Jehovah’s Witnesses in their efforts to carry out their teaching commission, Jehovah through his organization has provided the “Divine Teaching” District Conventions. These four-day conventions will begin in the Northern Hemisphere in the early summer. May each dedicated servant of Jehovah make certain that he attends at least one of these conventions, being present and attentive from the opening song and prayer on Thursday afternoon until the closing prayer on Sunday afternoon.

