From Our Readers
Bringing Phobias Under Control  While I was reading the articles on phobias (July 22, 1998), I felt as if a comforting arm were being put around me. At last, someone understood the living nightmare my wife has endured all her life. Social phobia has caused her untold misery. I never fully understood what she was going through. Her sheer terror of public speaking, using the telephone, interacting with others, as well as her blackouts and panic attacks—all these symptoms were described in your articles. It was as if all the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle suddenly fell into place. Many people have badly misinterpreted the panic and terror my wife suffers and have seen it as rudeness or antisocial behavior. It is my hope that such ones will read these very fine articles.
M. C., Scotland
My son, who is only ten, was diagnosed with agoraphobia earlier this year. It has been a very difficult struggle. There were two things that I really loved about the articles. The first was the section “Men ‘With Feelings Like Ours.’” This really drove home to my son that he isn’t alone. The second was the thoughtful way the articles were written. They did not condemn or belittle, but they were written with love, kindness, wisdom, and then more love.
K. J., Australia
I thought these articles were good because they focused attention on what a person can do. You explained the basic steps that make the control of phobias possible. This helped me to feel that I can get the help I need and make progress.
J. I., Japan
This was the first time I have really felt understood. I cannot describe how good it is to know that Jehovah understands the suffering that a social phobia can cause. The articles also helped my friends to understand more clearly what I go through.
G. O., Germany
I was amazed by the empathy you show for those who, like me, suffer from social phobias. These articles were just what was needed. What courage it gave me to know that others have the same problem! I am ready to roll up my sleeves and beat this phobia.
S. D., Italy
Why Can’t I Concentrate?  I wept with joy when I read the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Can’t I Concentrate?” (July 22, 1998) I am 18 years old and serve in the full-time ministry. I was concerned because I could not concentrate, and this is important in order to be able to help people in the field ministry. I had got to the point of feeling depressed because I could not remember and analyze things. It is true, as the Bible says, that Jehovah provides food at the proper time.
A. R. C. R., United States
Tips for Travelers  One tip that is missing from “Tips for Travelers,” in the article “Dengue—A Fever From a Bite” (July 22, 1998), is to use a mosquito net at night, preferably one that has been treated with an insecticide.
I. H., England
We appreciate the reader’s comments. For malaria prevention, this tip is especially useful. (See “Awake!” of July 22, 1997, page 31.) However, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the mosquito that causes dengue fever “prefers to feed on humans during the daytime.” It bites most frequently “in the morning for several hours after daybreak and in the late afternoon for several hours before dark.” Hence, using mosquito netting at night may not be very effective in preventing this particular illness.—ED.

