Fighting a Relentless Foe
“THIS was the biggest trial of my life,” said Elizabeth. “To be on my feet again is wonderful. I feel as if I have a new lease on life. I can now smell the roses!” This 42-year-old woman had conquered a foe said to cause more suffering than any other mental disorder​—depression.
Alexander was not as fortunate. This 33-year-old became very depressed, lost his appetite, and wanted to be by himself. “He felt like the whole world had come down and that nothing was worth living for anymore,” explained his wife, Esther. “He believed he wasn’t worth anything.” Convinced that he would never get better, Alexander plunged to his death in suicide.
Both Elizabeth and Alexander were among the reported 100,000,000 people worldwide who each year develop clinically recognizable depression. One out of every four Americans and one out of every five Canadians experience a major depressive episode during their lifetime. Depression is also reported to be a common ailment in Africa, and it is increasing in the Federal Republic of Germany. So chances are you may have a friend or a relative who is or has been a victim.
Alexander’s wife, who did all she could to help her husband, warns: “When someone talks about being depressed and feeling worthless, take it seriously.” Severe depression is thus more than a passing mood or just a case of the blues. It can be a killer, a relentless foe that can cripple and maim. Being able to recognize it could mean the difference between life and death.
“A Plague in My Brain”
All of us are subject to painful losses, frustrations, and disappointments. Sadness is a natural response. You close down emotionally, lick your wounds, and eventually begin to cope with the reality of the changed situation. You hope for a better day tomorrow and soon begin to enjoy life again. But in cases of major depression it is different.
“For eight months no shopping trip, nothing, made me feel better,” said Elizabeth. Another sufferer, Carol, added: “It was like a plague in my brain, like a terrible cloud hanging over me. You could give me a million dollars, and it wouldn’t stop the awful feelings.” One man said that ‘you feel as though you’ve put on smoke-colored glasses​—everything looks unattractive. Also, the glasses have magnifying lenses, so that every problem seems overwhelming.’
Depression is a spectrum of emotions ranging from feeling sad to becoming hopeless and suicidal. (See box on page 4.) The number of symptoms, their intensity, and their duration are all factors in pinpointing when the blues become major depression.
Not Always Easy to Identify
Depression is often difficult to identify because the sufferer may also have physical symptoms. “My legs stung, and at times I had pain all over. I went to many doctors,” said Elizabeth. “I was convinced that they were overlooking some physical illness and that I was going to die.” Like Elizabeth, about 50 percent of depressed patients who seek medical help complain of physical rather than emotional symptoms.
“Usually, they will complain of headache, insomnia, anorexia, constipation, or chronic fatigue,” writes Dr. Samuel Guze, head of the Department of Psychiatry of Washington University in St. Louis, “but will say nothing about feeling sad, hopeless, or discouraged. . . . Some depressed patients seem unaware of their depression.” Chronic pain, weight loss or gain, and a diminished sexual desire are also classic symptoms.
Dr. E. B. L. Ovuga of Umzimkulu Hospital, Transkei, South Africa, reports that while depressed Africans rarely report feelings of guilt or worthlessness, they do complain of overactivity, withdrawal, and body pains. A 1983 report by the World Health Organization found that the vast majority of depressed persons studied in Switzerland, Iran, Canada, and Japan all had the same basic symptoms of joylessness, anxiety, lack of energy, and ideas of insufficiency.
Alcohol and drug abuse, as well as sexual promiscuity, are just some of the ways in which some try to cover depressed feelings. Yes, “even in laughter the heart may be in pain.” (Proverbs 14:13) This is especially true of youths. “Adults look depressed, but if a depressed child walks into a room, you would not notice a thing,” explained Dr. Donald McKnew of NIMH (National Institute of Mental Health) in an interview with Awake! “That’s why childhood depression went unrecognized for so long. But as soon as you talk to them about it, they will pour out their depression.”
Yet, the 1980’s have seen significant advances in understanding and treating depression. The mysteries of brain chemistry are being unraveled. Tests have been developed to identify certain types of depression. The fight has been augmented by the use of antidepressant medications and nutrients such as certain amino acids. Additionally, short-term talk therapies have been effectively used. According to NIMH scientists, between 80 and 90 percent of all victims can be helped substantially with appropriate treatment.
But what causes this disabling emotional disorder?
[Chart on page 4]
The Spectrum of Depression
Simple Blues                Major Depression
Mood
Sadness, normal grief       Overwhelming hopelessness
Self-pity, discouragement   Feeling of worthlessness
Self-blame and guilt        Destructive guilt and self-blame
Able to find some pleasure   Find no pleasure, no longer care
Thinking
Remorse or regret           Thoughts of suicide
                            Hard to concentrate
Duration
Brief duration (few days)   Prolonged duration (two weeks or more)
Physical Symptoms
Normal functioning          Constant fatigue; unexplained aches
Slight physical problems    Changes in eating and sleeping habits
(temporary)                 Inability to sit still, pacing,                             handwringing
                            Slowed speech or body motions

