From Our Readers
My Life With Hemophilia
I must express how touching I found John A. Wortendyke’s account “My Life With Hemophilia.” (June 22, 1987) The amount of faith that he showed in Jehovah God is truly amazing. I am at present studying the Bible with the Witnesses, and reading about John has made my own problems seem small in comparison and has made me determined not to falter in my service to God.
A. C., England
Of all the wonderful experiences in your magazine, this has got to be the most touching, faith-strengthening article I’ve ever read. I would somehow like to tell John Wortendyke that my prayers are with him and his courageous family! As I read the article, I could feel my stomach muscles tighten every time he would have another bleeding episode. This is an experience I will keep in mind whenever I suffer sinus headaches, migraines, or attacks of arthritis!
D. S., United States
Africans Drinking Milk
Your article “Will Africa Ever Be Free From Hunger?” was particularly enlightening. (March 8, 1987) However, please be informed that your cover photo of the youngster with an apple and a glass of milk is not what we want to see in Africa. At least 70 percent of the world’s black population is lactose intolerant. We will not do service to the native Africans by encouraging them to drink milk.
G. H., M.D., Hawaii
Our correspondent in South Africa states: “We checked with several Africans, and they said they had all drunk milk as children. The use of cattle and their milk has been important in the lives of black people of southern Africa from before the days of European settlement. In fact, the Zulu language has a word, ‘ukukleza,’ that describes the practice African herders have of milking a cow straight into their mouth. Of course, the situation may be different in other parts of Africa.”​—ED.
Breaking Free From Drugs
I wish to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Break Free From Drugs?” (September 22, 1985) Some time ago, I suffered illness due to anxiety and stress, and my doctor prescribed a minor tranquilizer for me. I soon felt much better and was grateful for the medication. Later, after learning of the dangers of these drugs and realizing that I no longer required it, I decided to stop taking it. After four and a half years of dependence on it, I knew there would be some withdrawal effects. But by constantly applying the appropriate guidance and counsel in the article, I finally succeeded.
G. O., England
What Is Happening to Our Forests?
Thank you for the issue on “What Is Happening to Our Forests?” (June 22, 1987) Having to get ready for an oral examination in geography on the ecological problem, I used these articles, which were of great help. And I obtained a good result in the test. I have used articles published in Awake! before for school research. Heartfelt thanks!
G. C., Italy

