Are You Planning to Attend?
ATTEND what? One of the most signal events of our time—the “Everlasting Good News” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Though the full significance and impact of this assembly may not yet be readily apparent since it has not yet convened, its uniqueness and importance should be. It is unique in that the assembly will travel around the world in ten weeks, stopping at twenty-four different cities! It is important because it will meet vital spiritual needs in these last days when “critical times hard to deal with” face each and every one of us.—2 Tim. 3:1.
Times hard to deal with pose problems that threaten our present and future happiness. Yet the Son of God, Jesus Christ, confidently declared: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.” (Matt. 5:3) Jesus’ words hold true even in these hard-to-deal-with times.
We can be certain about this: Jesus meant that if we are truly conscious of our spiritual need we will not only realize its importance, but we will do something about it! We will put forth vigorous personal efforts to care for our spiritual needs, though it cost us something, though it require advance planning and preparation.
Those who are truly conscious of their spiritual needs will put forth the most earnest effort to attend the “Everlasting Good News” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses as it comes to a city in their country or locality.
The assembly begins in Milwaukee, Wisconsin (June 30-July 7), goes to New York city (July 7-14), then to London (July 14-21) and continues, moving around the world, stopping at such other cities as Melbourne, Australia (August 16-20), Auckland, New Zealand (August 21-25), and Honolulu, Hawaii (August 28-September 1). The assembly will stop not only where English is the main language but in many countries, such as West Germany, Italy, India, Burma, Thailand, Japan and Korea. From Korea the assembly moves to Hawaii and then to Pasadena, California, where it concludes September 1-8.
Though the assembly program will last for eight days in Milwaukee, New York, London, Stockholm, Munich, Milan and Pasadena, it will vary somewhat in length in other cities; but at whatever assembly you attend, your spiritual needs will be cared for, stimulating spiritual food will be given, as well as help in solving problems.
Yes, how to cope with problems—this will receive much attention by the assembly program. Problems caused by pressure from an unbelieving world, settling difficulties in Christian love and keeping proper balance in your life will all be satisfyingly considered. Many problems, some peculiar to women, some to men, some to youth, will be discussed on the program. What can be done, for instance, about the many problems facing Christian youths in school as they strive to remain unspotted from the world? (Jas. 1:27) What conduct is expected of Christian youths?
Those who are married or contemplating marriage will receive helpful counsel that can influence their entire future life. Also much beneficial counsel will be given those whose homes are divided religiously and those who are single.
Every aspect of the Christian ministry will be considered. This will be of special interest to all of Jehovah’s witnesses, also to persons studying with them in preparation for the ministry.
The assembly’s program will provide scientific confirmation of the Bible, also facts that will equip Bible believers to prove to any honest inquirer that the Bible is indeed the inspired Word of God. How can you find greater enjoyment and reap greater benefits from your Bible reading? The assembly’s program will answer.
So much more spiritual stimulation and help will be provided at this assembly that you will have to be there to realize the vast scope of its value to you. You will want to encourage others, too, to attend, so they will not miss the inspiring address, to be given on the climactic day, “When God Is King over All the Earth.”
Urge others to attend, but by all means care for your spiritual needs in these critical times that provoke problems hard to deal with. Being conscious of your spiritual need, you will do something positive about it. The best thing you can do this year is to attend the “Everlasting Good News” Assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses, earnestly endeavoring not to miss a single session of this momentous Around-the-World Assembly.

