Did Jesus Christ Really Rise from the Dead?
Many doubt that he did. But do they doubt with good reason?
THE Bible is a book filled with many promises regarding the future. For you to be able to have faith in these promises it is necessary to have faith that its historical features are true—that the things it tells about actually happened.
But in view of the unusual nature of some of the things it records many have doubted that they actually did occur. Among such things is the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Can you have faith that this miracle actually took place? If you can, then it will strengthen your faith in other miracles recorded in the Bible as well as in its promises regarding the future, such as that pain and death will someday be no more.—Rev. 21:4.
Typical of those who deny that Jesus Christ actually did rise from the dead is Marcello Craveri, an Italian doctor of philosophy. In his book The Life of Jesus (1967) he says: “It is obvious that the whole story of the Resurrection and the apparitions belong to the category of miracle inventions.” According to him, “ancient and modern students of Christianity agree” that the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead did not really take place.
Does this dogmatic statement mean that there actually is proof that Jesus Christ did not rise from the dead? Are ancient and modern students of Christianity really in agreement that the resurrection of Jesus belongs to the category of miracle inventions? Not at all! Consider the evidence.
RESURRECTION COMPATIBLE WITH SCIENCE
A common objection to Christ’s resurrection is that since modern man does not see persons rise from the dead, no one has ever risen from the dead. But is this a sound objection? Is it impossible for one who acknowledges the existence of a Supreme Being to believe that Christ’s resurrection took place? Is such a miraculous event really unscientific?
Observe what the noted scientist Victor Hess, the discoverer of the cosmic ray, once stated: “I must confess that in all my years of research in physics and geophysics I have never found one instance in which a scientific discovery was in conflict with religious faith. It is sometimes said that the ‘necessity’ of the ‘laws’ of nature is incompatible with . . . miracles. This is not so . . . Many of our physical laws are, in fact, merely statistical statements. They hold for the average of a great number of cases. They have no meaning for an individual case. Modern scientists are fully aware of these limitations in their description of physical processes. Must a scientist doubt the reality of miracles? As a scientist I answer emphatically: No. I can see no reason why Almighty God, Who created us and all things around us, should not suspend or change—if He finds it wise to do so—the natural, average course of events.”—The Faith of Great Scientists, edited by W. Howey, page 10.
So the mere fact that men on earth today have not seen God raise people from the dead does not at all argue that in times past he did not see fit to raise his Son, Jesus Christ, from the dead. And why did God see fit to do so? For one thing, to reward Jesus for his faithfulness to death. And, too, because only a resurrected Jesus could bring to fruition God’s purposes for which Jesus had come to earth and had died a sacrificial death.—Phil. 2:5-11.
It is not as though Jesus was the first and only one to be raised from the dead by the power of God. The Bible tells us that Jehovah’s prophets Elijah and Elisha each raised a person from the dead. (1 Ki. 17:17-24; 2 Ki. 4:32-37; 8:5; 13:20, 21) And the Christian Greek Scriptures (“New Testament”) also tell of other resurrections, performed by both Jesus and his apostles.—Matt. 11:5; Luke 7:11-16; 8:41-56; John 11:1-46; Acts 9:40; 20:9-12.
JESUS FORETOLD HIS RESURRECTION
We have seen that the resurrection of Jesus Christ is within the realm of possibility. We cannot deny God the privilege of making exceptions or changing the natural course of events, and he has done so time and again. Let us, then, consider the evidence for Jesus Christ’s having been raised from the dead.
To begin with, Jesus himself repeatedly foretold that he would be raised from the dead. Early in his ministry he referred to it, saying: “Break down this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” “He was talking about the temple of his body.” (John 2:19-21) He also said that as Jonah was in the belly of a huge fish for three days he would be in the heart of the earth for three days. And subsequently on at least five different occasions he told his disciples that he would rise from the dead. (Matt. 12:39, 40; 16:21; 17:1-9, 22, 23; 20:18, 19; 26:31, 32) How can we understand all these plain statements if Jesus was not actually raised from the dead? Was he or were his disciples dupes or perpetrating a fraud?
Adding still more weight to the authenticity of Christ’s resurrection is the fact that, although he had so plainly forewarned his disciples of his martyr’s death, they were greatly distressed when it took place. (Luke 24:21) And although he had repeatedly foretold that he would be raised from the dead, they did not expect it. Had they expected it, would his women disciples have gone to his tomb on the third day further to embalm his body with spices?—Luke 24:1.
THE HISTORICAL RECORD
All four Gospel accounts tell of the fulfillment of Jesus’ words that he would be raised on the third day. The apostle Matthew reports that first an angel appeared and announced Christ’s resurrection to women two of whom Matthew named, that Jesus later appeared to these and that still later Jesus appeared to his disciples in Galilee.—Matt. 28:1-20; Mark 16:1-8.
The physician Luke additionally tells of the resurrected Jesus comforting two of his disciples on the way to Emmaus, of another appearance to his disciples in Jerusalem and of his disciples seeing him borne up into heaven out of their sight.—Luke 24:1-53.
The apostle John gives us still more details about Jesus’ appearances after his resurrection. He tells of Jesus’ encounter with Mary Magdalene, of his appearing twice to his apostles and that at the second time Thomas was present and was convinced. This might be said to underscore the genuineness of Jesus’ resurrection, as well as the firm conviction of the Bible writers that Jesus really did rise from the dead. It was as if Thomas were to speak for all sincere doubters of Christ’s resurrection in the years to come. (John 20:1-29) John also tells of Jesus’ appearance at the sea of Galilee, on which occasion he asked Peter three times whether he loved him or not.—John 21:1-24.
Additionally, the book of Acts tells us that Jesus “was taken up, after he had given commandment through holy spirit to the apostles whom he chose. To these also by many positive proofs he showed himself alive after he had suffered, being seen by them throughout forty days.” How much more emphatic, how much more convincing could the record be—“by many positive proofs he showed himself alive after he had suffered”? All of this emphasis carries added weight when we note that it is made by an educated physician who would be the first to question the raising of one from the dead.—Acts 1:1-9.a
CHRIST’S RESURRECTION IMPARTS POWER
The change that came over Jesus’ little band of followers might be said in some respects to be the most powerful of all testimony to Jesus’ resurrection. It transformed frightened and puzzled men into bold and fearless evangelizers, ready to lay down their lives for their beliefs!
Such conviction and power are not born of hallucinations nor are they begotten by chicanery. That change was due to the fact that Jesus really did rise from the dead, as well as being due to God’s outpoured spirit, which came through Jesus, enabling the apostle Peter to preach: “Jesus the Nazarene . . . you fastened to a stake by the hand of lawless men and did away with. But God resurrected him by loosing the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held fast by it.” And again Peter said on that occasion: “This Jesus God resurrected, of which fact we are all witnesses.”—Acts 2:22-33.
Peter might be said here to have set the pattern for his future preaching. Thus when a crowd of people gathered in amazement at his healing a man who had been crippled from birth, Peter told them that this miracle had been performed by the power of Jesus, whom they had killed. “But God raised him up from the dead, of which fact we are witnesses.” There was no doubt in his mind. Jesus’ resurrection was a fact; he and others were witnesses of it. (Acts 3:12-15) And when before the Jewish supreme court, to testify by what power they had performed this miracle, Peter again testified to Jesus’ really having risen from the dead, saying: “Let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom you impaled but whom God raised up from the dead, by this one does this man stand here sound in front of you.” Yes, this very miracle testified to the fact that Jesus had risen from the dead.—Acts 4:10.
Shortly thereafter when the apostles were again apprehended and brought before the Sanhedrin, Peter again stressed Jesus’ resurrection: “The God of our forefathers raised up Jesus, whom you slew . . . God exalted this one as Chief Agent and Savior to his right hand . . . And we are witnesses of these matters.”—Acts 5:30-32.
When the apostle Peter preached about Jesus to Cornelius and his household, Peer stressed the same truth: “God raised this One up on the third day and granted him to become manifest, not to all the people, but to witnesses appointed beforehand by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after his rising from the dead.” Again it might be asked, Did Peter and his fellow apostles eat and drink with a hallucination? Or was Peter an outright impostor?—Acts 10:38-42.
The apostle Paul followed the example of Peter in his stressing the resurrection of Jesus in his public ministry, as can be seen from Acts 13:30-37; 17:31. How firm was his conviction that Jesus was indeed raised from the dead is apparent from his words at 1 Corinthians 15:3-8: “For I handed on to you, among the first things, that which I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried, yes, that he has been raised up the third day according to the Scriptures; and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. After that he appeared to upward of five hundred brothers at one time, the most of whom remain to the present, but some have fallen asleep in death. After that he appeared to James, then to all the apostles; but last of all he appeared also to me as if to one born prematurely.”
That all this evidence is irrefutable is recognized not only by Christian ministers with faith in God’s Word but also by others. For example, there is Dr. J. N. D. Anderson, dean of the faculty of law at the University of London and director of its Institute of Advanced Legal Studies. This world-recognized legal authority once noted, as reported in the London Observer:
“To consider the accounts of the six ‘New Testament’ writers as fabrication would really be an impossible position. Think of the number of witnesses, over 500. Think of the character of the witnesses, men and women who gave the world the highest ethical teaching it has ever known, and who even on the testimony of their enemies lived it out in their lives. Think of the psychological absurdity of picturing a little band of defeated cowards cowering in an Upper Room one day and a few days later transformed into a company that no persecution could silence! . . . It seems to me almost meaningless to talk about legends when you are dealing with eyewitnesses themselves.”
Yes, if by the mouths of two or three reliable witnesses a matter is established as a fact, how well established is the fact that Jesus Christ really did rise from the dead! Men who fabricate falsehoods are devoid of such a ring of truth as that evinced by the apostles Peter and Paul in preaching Christ’s resurrection.
In view of all the foregoing, do you have good reason for exercising faith that Jesus Christ really did rise from the dead? You most certainly do. The conclusion is inescapable. It should truly be strengthening to your faith to find one of the most unusual and most strongly disputed events mentioned in the Bible to be factual. Because Jesus was raised from the dead you can come to God in prayer, asking forgiveness for your sins, and you can pray in faith for God’s kingdom to come. And what can that mean to you? Everlasting life in a Paradise earth when there will be no more sorrow, pain or death.—Matt. 6:10; 1 John 2:1; Rev. 21:4.
[Footnotes]
Note also that when choosing a successor to Judas, Peter stipulated that it had to be one who had been “a witness with us of his resurrection.”—Acts 1:20-22.

