





QUESTION 10
How Can the Bible Help Me?

WHY IT MATTERS
The Bible says that “all Scripture is inspired of God.” (2 Timothy 3:16) If this is true, then the Bible can give you the direction you need.



WHAT WOULD YOU DO?

Imagine this scenario: David is driving in an area where nothing looks familiar. The street signs and landmarks show that he is not where he should be by now. David realizes that he is lost. He must have taken a wrong turn at some point in his journey.
If you were David, what would you do?



STOP AND THINK!

You have several options:
              Ask for directions.

               Consult a map, or use a GPS.

               Keep driving, hoping that somehow you will find your way.


Obviously, Option C is the least effective.
Option B has an advantage over the first. After all, a map or a GPS will be at hand throughout the journey, helping you to guide your course.
The Bible can help you in a similar way!
This best-selling book can
  guide you through life’s problems

  help you to learn about yourself and become a better person

  show you how to have the best life ever





ANSWERING LIFE’S BIG QUESTIONS

From the moment we can talk, we ask questions.
Why is the sky blue?

What are the stars made of?


Later we begin to ask questions about the world around us.
Why do bad things happen?

Why do people die?


What if the answers to those questions have been in the Bible all along?
Many people say that the Bible is full of myths and legends, that it’s outdated, or that it’s just too hard to understand. But is the Bible really the problem, or is what people have heard about the Bible the real problem? Could they be misinformed?
For example, people think that the Bible says that God controls the world. But how could that be? This world is out of control! It is full of pain and suffering, sickness and death, poverty and disaster. How could a loving God be responsible for all of this?
Would you like to know the answer? What the Bible says about who controls the world may surprise you!
Likely you noticed that the advice found in this brochure is based on the Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses are convinced that the Bible is a reliable source of guidance. That’s because it is “inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight.” (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) You owe it to yourself to examine this ancient​—yet modern—​book!



DISCOVER MORE!





Watch the video Why Study the Bible? at www.jw.org.


