VOL. XVII. MARCH 1, 1896. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 38 

Views from the Tower 39 

The Memorial of Our Lord's Death 42 

Gold Tried in the Fire 43 

Bible Study: Lord, Teach Us to Pray 45 

Bible Study: "That Servant" 47 

Bible Study: Review 47 

Encouraging Letters 48 

page 38 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



READ THIS AND ACT AT ONCE! 



THE Postoffice Department has for years given us more or less 
trouble and expense by narrow interpretations of the liberal laws 
made by Congress, to foster the cheap circulation of good literature 
among the people. Up to the present time we have succeeded in getting 
our rights; but now we are menaced with an order which prevents 
us from mailing back issues of the Old Theology Tracts at the cheap 
or "pound" rates, while novels and trash in general are unhampered. 

The present liberal law was evidently designed by Congress to facilitate 
and increase the circulation of legitimate literature of all kinds. The 
effort of the P.O. officials evidently is to restrict and hinder it in every 
possible manner. The fact is, that the P.O. Department has not quite 
paid expenses lately, because of the enormous charges paid to the railroads; 
and rather than reduce the R.R. rates pro rata to the increase 
of mail matter, it is the dear public that is inconvenienced and made to 



pay extra, by ruling that if it wants many extra copies for friends it must 
pay extra rates, because these are henceforth in violation of the spirit and 
intent of the law, to be ruled against as "reprints." 

We learn that a bill is soon to come before Congress relating to 
"Second Class Mail Matter;" and we request that EVERY READER 
OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and also every friend of the cause it represents, 
residing within these United States, do something suggested 
below for its relief, immediately, at a cost of four cents and a little time 
and ink. Our request is that you (subscribers), with as many friends 
of the cause as will join, each send four postal cards: one addressed to 
the Congressman representing your district, another each to the two 
Senators from your State, and the fourth to Hon. Wm. L. Wilson, Post 
Master General. Address them all to Washington, D.C. 

Please write in substance the following on each of the above mentioned 
cards, signing your name. You will need to get large Postal 
Cards and to write a small hand in order to get this on. Otherwise 
write letters. 

Honorable Sir:— As my representative, I ask your influence on 
the subject of "Second Class Mail Matter," so that Religious Matter 
(including tracts, etc.) be given every advantage of the Act of Congress 
of July 16, 1894; and that every hindrance to the printing 
(and mailing at pound rates) of back numbers be removed while said 
publication continues to issue at least four numbers per year. 

Yours Resp'y, . 

Where there are a number of friends at one place it would do 
equally well to start four papers with the above letter and get all the 
friends to sign each of them. 

Join with us also in prayer to God, daily, for at least one week from 
the time you receive this TOWER, that he will preserve to us this "door" 
of opportunity for service, until all of his antitypical Israel shall have 
been sealed with the Present Truth, intellectually,— "in their foreheads." 
-Rev. 7:3. 



R1940 : page 39 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



OUR Lord declared that his mission, and that of his 
gospel, was "to preach the gospel to the meek, to 
bind up the broken hearted." And under his commission 
the gospel is no longer to be confined to Israel, the natural 
seed of Abraham, but may now be preached "to every 
creature," that whosoever "hath an ear to hear" may 
hear. He clearly announced, however, that only a limited 
class was intended to be drawn to him, and received by 
him as disciples in this age, saying:— 

"No man can come to me, except the Father which 
hath sent me draw him. ...Every man therefore that 
hath heard and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto 

R1941 : page 39 



me." "All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; 
and him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out." 
-John 6:37,44,45. 

If all Christian people understood and remembered 
these inspired words of their Master, many of their missionary 
efforts would differ greatly from the present methods. 
If they understood these Scriptures they would be in better 
condition to realize that this Gospel age is not the only 
age of salvation and drawing, but that by and by, in the 
Millennial age, Christ will draw all men unto himself 
(John 12:32), after the same manner that the Father now 
draws a few, "a little flock," of a special class, and presents 
them to Christ. This would help them over their 
great delusion that the "undrawn" and "uncalled" 
(Acts 2:39) of the present time, the vast majority of the 
human family, are not reprobated to an eternity of torture, 
but will be given a fair and gracious trial for life in a coming 
"day of judgment" when the Father-drawn "little 
flock" shall, with Christ, be their gracious and merciful 
judges as well as their kings and priests.— 1 Cor. 6:2; 
Rev. 1:6. 

But not knowing the Scriptures and the plan of God 
sufficiently, they have a zeal that is not according to 
knowledge, and are attempting to bring to Christ now 
those whom the Father has not drawn. Much better would 
it be that much of the present mission work should wait a 
few years longer, until the body of Christ, the Church, 
shall be "lifted up" and associated with the head in the 
glory and power of the Millennial Kingdom, and then share 
in the drawing which shall exert an influence for good upon 
"all men." (But this will not be an irresistible influence, 
even as the present drawing of the Father is not 
irresistible.) 

A Brother in the truth, residing in Cape Colony, South 
Africa, sends us a clipping from the Natal Mercury, which 
tells of a Missionary Meeting held in the Presbyterian 
church there, at which the following statement was made: 
"There are still eight hundred and fifty millions of people 
unevangelized, over two hundred millions being in Africa. 
The heathen have increased during the last one hundred 
years over two hundred millions, and the Christians to the 
extent of three millions. The heathen rate of increase 
was thus seventy times greater than the Christian. More 
zeal for foreign missions is now shown than at any past 
period, but there is need for these increasing a thousand 
fold." 

From early life our sympathies for the heathen and 
for those who give their lives to serve them have been 
very strong; and they will always continue so. Yet, even 
as a child, we wondered why God seemed so indifferent to 
the welfare of the masses of the human family. Now, thank 
God, the light of divine truth shining forth shows us that 
all of the race of Adam were redeemed with the precious 
blood of Christ, and that in God's due time Christ, as the 
"true Light," shall enlighten every man that has come into 
the world. (John 1:9.) We see now that God's people have 



R1941 : page 40 

not studied his Word with sufficient care, and hence the 

distress and confusion of many zealous souls today as they 

note the failure of their hopes and efforts. They first overlooked 

the fact that the Gospel is only "unto as many as 

the Lord your God shall call;" and that no man can come 

to Christ except the Father draw him; and that the Father 

is not drawing all men, but is leaving the vast majority to 

be drawn similarly, and by other means, by Christ and 

his Church, in the next age. Thus, by getting false 

ideas of their own, to the effect that God had commissioned 

them to do all the drawing and converting in the 

present age, many are led to doubt and trouble of soul. 

And finding that they cannot accomplish what they had 

hoped, some lower their standard of righteousness and 

acceptableness with God, and conclude that the future 

companions of the "little flock" in heaven will be millions 

and billions of the most degraded savages; saved, not by 

faith, but by their ignorance. 

Others charge the failure upon God's plan or upon his 
Church for not doing the impossible. Note the unscripturalness 
and unreasonableness of the following verses of a 
hymn sung at a Missionary Meeting of the Christian 
Alliance, held a few weeks ago in Montreal, Canada, sent 
us by a Brother in the truth who was present, but who 
could not join in the song. 

"A hundred thousand souls a day 
Are passing one by one away, 

In Christless guilt and gloom; 
Without one ray of hope or light, 
With future dark as endless night, 

They're passing to their doom." 

"They're passing, passing fast away, 
A hundred thousand souls a day, 

In Christless guilt and gloom. 
O Church of Christ, what wilt thou say, 
When in the awful judgment day 

They charge thee with their doom?" 

It is blasphemous to charge that God has made the 
everlasting bliss or pain of billions of his creatures dependent 
upon impotent fellow creatures. As Peter said to 
the Jews who crucified Jesus, so we can think of many of 
those who sang, "I wot that in ignorance ye did it." 

We do feel a very warm love for those who are specially 
spending themselves in any department of the Lord's 
service, at a cost of discomfort and self-denial whether at 
home or abroad, as missionaries or colporteurs, or otherwise. 
If the good accomplished is small so far as the 
heathen are concerned, it has undoubtedly been large so 
far as some of the missionaries themselves, and some of 
those who paid their expenses, are concerned. 



Now, however, the Lord points us to the fact that 
"harvesting" is the special work in order, and we advise 
all who have the Lord's spirit and his truth to rejoice 
through their tears over their failure to convert the world, 
and to look up and see the rainbow which God hath set 
for us, promising that after the "elect" church has been 
called, drawn, chastened, taught and polished, she, with 
her Lord and Redeemer shall be the great light— the Sun 
of Righteousness which shall "draw," "bless" and "heal" 
all for whom there could be any hope. If our past efforts 
did not save the world from eternal torment, let us thank 
God that there was no such danger as we had apprehended, 
and let us the more appreciate our Creator and his perfect 
rule of love and justice. If we did not convert the 
world, let us thank God that we did "witness," as he declared 
we should do, and that in so doing we were blest. 
And let us quickly wipe our tears and rejoice in the present 
truth; let us enter the harvest work of perfecting holiness 
in ourselves and others of the saints, and preparing 
for the marriage of the Lamb.— Rev. 19:7. 



Recently the French Representative at the Papal court 
was recalled. This means the severance of a long standing 
friendship. Now we get the following in the same 
direction. 

"A cable to the New York World of Jan. 26 states 
that Premier Bourgeois of France has announced the introduction 
of a bill 'to separate church and state,' and that 
he will make vigorous war on Roman Catholic monasteries, 
convents and other religious houses. Money left to members 
of religious societies by bequest, for the use of such 
societies, shall be confiscated to the use of the natural 
heirs. It is hoped,' says the premier, 'to cripple 
the church as a political machine, and render innocuous 
the Pope's influence in France.' Religious houses holding 
millions in money will be required to make returns of their 
wealth to the government, preparatory to the imposition of 
a tax on such property." 

The Roman Catholic clergy have been giving support 
to representatives of monarchy, and the Pope now 
claims that this has been in violation of his recommendations. 
At all events a desperate struggle between the 
French party in power and the Roman church is begun, 
and both will use every measure to win. Knowing the 
resources and intrigues of priestcraft, we fear for the safety of 
the Republic, unless it modifies its plans. The French 
are mostly Catholics, and have been used for centuries to 
having the churches, clergy, etc., supported by government 
money; and now, under the new laws, if executed, they 
will be obliged to pay their own priests, or have none; and 
their superstitions respecting "holy water," "holy candles," 
"masses," etc., etc., are so deeply grounded that they are 
still considered necessities to them, which probably will 
not be relinquished readily,— especially while the priests 



are among them to threaten them with hell and purgatory. 



It is remarkable that while Catholic countries are 
striving to get rid of Catholic domination, Protestant 
countries are welcoming the Church of Rome. For instance, 
Norway, that has been ultra-Protestant, to the degree that 
fifty years ago Romish Priests could not enter the country 
under pain of death, is now undergoing a reaction, and 
recently, in Christiansand, when a large church edifice and 

R1941 : page 41 

hospital were dedicated, thousands of Protestants, including 
the officials of the province, were present. The same 
is true in Scotland. In Glasgow, where a Roman Catholic 
church edifice was unknown a century ago, there are now 
about twenty of them. 

The fact is that where Papacy predominates and has 
the control it is terribly corrupt, so as to become a stench 
even to the worldly masses; but where she is in the minority 
she is under such crafty management that to the worldly 
she appears "as good as any," and indeed is preferred 

R1942:page41 

sometimes because of her greater power over her more 
superstitious votaries. 



Rev. C. H. Sprecher, in a recent sermon, said:— 
"With characteristic openness to western ideas, the 
Japanese received our religion with our civilization. But 
these sprightly people introduced innovations. They rebelled 
against our denominationalism. Christian missionaries 
have had to drop very generally denominational 
names. Most of the churches call themselves United 
churches or Associated. They would not even take the name 
of Congregational churches. 

"They also look with little favor upon the abstruse 
doctrines of systematic theology. They talk of the Christianity 
of Christ, and of the religion of Jesus, pure and 
simple, as the faith which they want and which is suited to 
their nation." 



Thos. Edison, the inventor and electrician, of Phonograph 
and Telephone fame, has been experimenting with 
the new light "X Rays" and has succeeded in taking a 
photograph through oak eight inches thick. But, as suggested 
in our last issue, Theosophists and others are claiming 
the new discovery as a part of their deception outfit. 
The Scriptures forewarn us that Satan will bring to bear 



strong delusions in this our day. Thank God, they shall 

not deceive "the very elect." Obedience, faithfulness to 

the end, is the condition upon which we may make our calling 

and election sure. In other words, if we are faithful 

to the Word and Spirit of the Lord he will carry us 

through. 



A new lymph treatment for all germ diseases is announced 
in New York. The antitoxine is of mineral and 
carbolic acid compound, called Aseptolin. Great things 
are hoped for it as an arrester of diseases. No doubt recent 
discoveries are but preparations for the Millennial blessing, 
so that when, twenty years from now, the times of restitution 
shall be fully ushered in, and none except wilful sinners 
will die, it will not appear so strange to mankind, and still 
leave room for faith respecting the real source of all 
blessings. 



Baron Hirsch, a Jew, four years ago undertook the 
colonizing of Russian Jews in Argentine Republic, S.A., 
setting apart ten million dollars for the purpose. A recent 
official report shows that two million dollars have been 
spent, and that only twelve hundred and twenty-two families 
have been located in Argentine; and for the present no 
new settlers are being forwarded from Russia. On the 
other hand, without this special aid about thirty thousand 
Russian Jews came to the United States during last year 
alone. 

In our issue of December, 1891, we gave a copy of a 
letter which we sent to Baron Hirsch on the subject of Jewish 
colonization, recommending a plan for the autonomy 
of Palestine and the turning of immigration thither. Some 
such plan, we believe, will soon be adopted, and the land 
of Palestine be thrown open, not merely to Russian Jews, 
but also to Austrian, Hungarian, German and French Jews; 
all of whom will surely be persecuted in the near future to 
dislodge them and cause them to return to Palestine, as 
foretold in the Scriptures. 



At the State Convention of the New Jersey Young 
Men's Christian Association, in session at Jersey City, 
Feb. 14, its President, Elijah S. Cowles, suggested the introduction 
of pool and billiard tables to the Y.M.C.A. 
attractions for young men. A few members from the 
southern part of the State protested, and one of them said 
that he had formerly been a saloon-keeper, and gave it as 
his opinion that it was useless to hope to lead young men 
to heavenly things by the aid of the billiard table. To 
clinch the argument in favor of billiards the South Jersey 
Delegates were escorted to the People's Palace, an auxiliary 



to the Tabernacle Church, and there were shown billiard 
and pool tables, with boys playing about them. 

Comment on this is almost unnecessary. "Lovers of 
pleasure more than lovers of God," is written all over this 
and the various "Church entertainments," minstrels, etc. If 
the contention were proved true, that men and boys are kept 
out of saloons by this means, still there is no excuse for associating 
with these things the name of Christ's Church, nor 
of calling such things young men's Christian associations 
and amusements. 

Let us ever remember that morality is not synonymous 
with Christianity. The Christian is one who has passed 
through the strait gate and into the narrow way of self-denial 
—one who, having taken up his cross to follow his 
Lord, has left all for this blessed service. Such have other 
uses for their consecrated time and talents than killing 
them in playing even innocent games. As the poet says, 
"We are living, we are dwelling, 

In a grand and awful time: 
In an age on ages telling, 
To be living is sublime." 

The steward of God's favors who hides his talent in 
the earth, or in a billiard parlor, or in business, or in pride 
and show, will be termed a "wicked and slothful servant," 
and only those who have used, and thus increased their 
talents, will hear the longed-for words,— "Well done, 
good, faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord."— 
Matt. 25:23-30. 



R1942:page42 

THE MEMORIAL OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 



FEW and simple are the memorials of the true Church 
in contrast with those of heathendom and formalistic 
nominal Christendom. Instead of the numerous fast 
and feast days and weeks, we have only three memorials: 

(1) Baptism, the symbol of the death and burial of 
the already justified human will into the will of God in 
Christ. 

(2) The Memorial Supper, emblemizing the literal 
breaking of our Lord's body and shedding of his blood 
(his death as "the man Christ Jesus" at Calvary),— and 
reviving our covenant to "be dead with him" that we may 
also live with him," to "suffer with him" that we may also 
be glorified together." 

(3) The memorial of our Lord's resurrection on the 
First-day of the week, now commonly called Sunday. 

Our Lord instituted all three beautiful, yet simple, 
memorials. His baptism was different from the baptism of 
John, preached to Jews only, a "baptism unto repentance;" 
for he had no sins to repent of. His was the first baptism 



of the new order, symbolizing the death of the will of a 
justified human being, already acceptable to the Father, 
and full submission to God's will, a full surrender, complete 
consecration.* It took the place of "John's baptism." 
-Acts 19:3-5. 

Our Lord instituted the observance of the first day of 
the week, in the same manner that he instituted the Memorial 
Supper and Baptism; namely, not by command, but by 
example. He met with the disciples on the first day of 
the week, immediately after his resurrection; with Mary 
near the Sepulchre, with Simon Peter, with the two who 
went to Emmaus, and with the ten disciples in the upper 
room. (John 20:1,14,19; Luke 24:13-31,34,36.) Then 
he waited another week, and again appeared to them on 
the eighth day, probably meaning the day after the seventh, 
the first day of the week. (John 20:26.) The disciples 
seem to have expected something of the kind and had 
come together, and thereafter remembering the opening of 
their eyes of understanding to know him, that it was in 
connection with the "breaking of bread," they afterward 
not only met regularly on the first day, but regularly had 
a simple meal together, called "breaking of bread." This 
some in our day have mistaken for a commemoration of the 
Last Supper. The two, however, were totally different;— 
the one commemorating the death, and the other celebrating 
with joy the resurrection. The first day of the week 
was not only honored as the memorial of our Lord's resurrection 
and manifestation and communion, but was again 
marked by divine favor at Pentecost, and became the memorial 
of the outpouring of the holy Spirit.— Acts 2:1; 
20:7; 1 Cor. 16:2. 

Our Lord instituted the Memorial Supper after, and to 
take the place of, the Jewish Passover supper. The killing 
of the Passover lamb was to be done on the fourteenth 
day of the first month of each Jewish year, in commemoration 
of the deliverance of Israel's firstborn from the last 
plague of Egypt, and subsequently the deliverance of the 
entire nation from slavery. Our Lord was himself the 
antitype of the Lamb. His Church is the antitype of the 
spared firstborn of Israel; and the near approaching "restitution," 
in which all who love God will be delivered 
from the slavery of Sin and Death under Satan, will be the 
antitype of the deliverance of the nation. 

The Memorial Supper, with its unleavened bread and 
wine, representing the flesh and blood of the Lamb of God, 
whose sacrifice takes away the sin of the world, making 
reconciliation for iniquity, was intended to keep fresh before 
the memory of the Church of the firstborn the remembrance 
of her purchase price, and to pledge her to 
fellowship in the sufferings of Christ. (1 Cor. 10:16,17; 
11:26.) It was instituted, therefore, in the same night 
in which our Lord was betrayed, in the same day in which 
he was crucified (the Hebrew day counting from six p.m. 
until six p.m.). 

It was not the intention of our Lord to commemorate 
the feast of Passover, which began on the 15th of Nisan 



and lasted for an entire week, but merely to give us a 



*See TOWER for June 15, '93,— "Baptism and Its Import." 

R1943 : page 42 

memorial of his death on the 14th of Nisan. So far from 
being a feast of rejoicing, it was an occasion of sorrow 
and perplexity to the early Church. Jesus himself was 
"exceeding sorrowful." 

Seeing that this Memorial celebrates the antitype of 
the killing of the Passover lamb, we can see that it is properly 
celebrated on its anniversary,— not monthly, quarterly, 
weekly nor daily, but yearly,— and properly at the 
same time of the year at which our Lord died, and at which 
he instituted the memorial. This was the custom of the 
early Church, which reckoned its date according to 
the Jewish method of reckoning time. The first deviation 
from this was by the churches represented by the 
Bishop of Rome, which substituted, appointed and observed 
the nearest Friday, when the 14th of Nisan fell on some other 
day, as it most frequently did. This was the origin of "Good 
Friday," and the third day following was known as Passover 
Sunday, and later as "Easter Sunday." Later, by the 
decree of the Council of Nice (A.D. 325), and still later 
under the revision of the calendar by Pope Gregory XIII. , 
the so-called Catholic churches have been brought into 
practical agreement, and annually fix dates for "Good 
Friday" and "Easter Sunday." 

For the past twenty years we who are seeking the "old 
paths" (Jer. 6:16) have celebrated the Memorial Supper 
upon its anniversary, as reckoned according to the Hebrew 
usage, which was recognized by our Lord and the Apostles. 
Theirs is an easy and simple method. They begin their 
year (Nisan being their first month) with the new 

R1943 : page 43 

moon at the Spring Equinox and on the night of the 14th, 
at six p.m., commences the 15th, which is the first day 
of their Passover feast— Exod. 12:2. 

This year the Equinoxial moon, or month Nisan, begins 
March 15th; hence its 15th day or the beginning of the 
Hebrew Passover week will be on the 29th. The 14th of 
Nisan, on which they killed the Paschal lamb, the anniversary 
of the death of our Lord, "the Lamb of God," will be 
March 28th, beginning, according to Hebrew reckoning, on 
the 27th at sundown. Since our Lord instituted the Memorial 
on the evening preceeding, we celebrate it 
correspondingly. 

Following this honored custom, therefore, the Church 
at Allegheny will meet on the evening of March 27th, at 
8.00 o'clock, to commemorate the greatest transaction 
known to mankind. As heretofore our services will be 



very simple, consisting of praise, prayer, a review of the 
significance of the emblems and the realities celebrated, 
partaking of the emblems, "Passover-bread" (i.e., unleavened 
bread), and "fruit of the vine." (For "fruit of 
the vine" we prefer unfermented grape juice or raisin juice 
rather than wine, because if the liquor habit has a hold 
upon any one we would avoid the temptation to such- 
adding a spoonful of wine for the sake of those who consider 
that nothing but wine would fill the prescription, 
"fruit of the vine." As for the unleavened bread, what is 
needed can readily be purchased from almost any Hebrew 
family; if not, "soda crackers" or "water crackers" are 
an unleavened bread, and will serve every purpose.) 

The special feature of the occasion is the heart communion 
with the Lord, facilitated by the appreciation of 
the significance of the emblems revealed in the Word. They 
are to be appreciated, not only as representing our Redeemer's 
sacrifice, but also as representing our privilege of 
fellowship with him in suffering for righteousness' sake, as 
members of his body, the Church,— our individual share 
in it. The cup of blessing for which we bless God,— is it 
not a participation of the blood of Christ? The loaf 
which we break,— is it not a participation of the body of 
Christ?" (1 Cor. 10:16,17.) Concluding with an appropriate 
hymn of praise we seek to avoid conversation, 
and to perpetuate the "communion" by thoughts respecting 
the great event just commemorated, and to follow our 
Lord reflectively to Gethsemane, and the day following to 
Calvary, thinking meanwhile of how little we are able to 
do to show our love for him, and resolving to be more 
jealously careful in the use of every hour and every mite 
of influence in his service. 

Any friends who trust in the "precious blood" will be 
cordially welcome to meet with us. We advise, however, that 
brethren and sisters, so far as possible, should not desert 
little groups at home to enjoy the privileges of meeting with 
a larger company. Where two or three meet in the Lord's 
name he blesses them. Let each one be thoroughly willing to 
sacrifice his own preferences in the interest of the fellow-members 
of the body of Christ. This is being broken for 
others, as set forth in the preceding quotation, and the 
results are always blessed. 

Remember all the dear flock of the Lord, not forgetting 
us, here, at Allegheny, in your prayers, and we will 
remember you all. 

Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation. 

Let each one be on guard against the wiles of the devil. 
Remember that we near the anniversary not only of our 
Lord's sufferings, but also of Judas' treachery and false 
kiss, and question "Is it I?" Let each one examine his 
heart and see that it is in such an attitude of love and devotion 
to the Lord, and to every member of "his body," 
that he can have communion with the Lord and all who 
are truly his. In any other attitude there is danger that 
Satan "enter in." (Luke 22:3.) "The last state of that 
man is worse than the first."— Matt. 12:45; Luke 11:26. 



R1943 : page 43 

GOLD TRIED IN THE FIRE. 



"I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the 
fire, that thou mayest be rich."— Rev. 3:18. 

IN OUR study of the typical tabernacle, which was a 
shadow of good things to come, we have seen that 
everything inside the tabernacle was made of gold. The 
boards of which the tabernacle was constructed were overlaid 
with gold. The furniture also was of gold. There 
stood the golden candlestick, the golden table, the golden 
altar of incense, the golden ark of the testimony and the 
golden cherubim. Gold was also prominent in the typically 
glorious robes of the high priest. The fringe upon the upper 
robe was of golden bells and pomegranates; the texture 
of the ephod was interwoven with golden threads, and it 

R1944:page43 

was fastened on the shoulders with golden clasps; and 

upon his head was the golden crown, upon which was inscribed, 

"Holiness to the Lord." 

All this was in striking contrast with the metals used 
elsewhere about the structure, its typical significance here 
being that all within "the Holy," which represented the 
present condition of truly consecrated believers, and within 
the "Most Holy," which represented the glorious 
condition of the Church triumphant, pertains to the divine 
nature, gold being a symbol of divinity. All who are 
privileged to enter the antitypical Holy and Most Holy 
are also to be, as Peter tells us, "partakers of the divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) They are members of the body of the 
great Highpriest whose divine nature was symbolized in the 
gold of the typical highpriest's typically glorious garments. 

It is in harmony with this same symbolic meaning of 
gold, that the Revelator says of the heavenly city, the New 

R1944 : page 44 

Jerusalem, "And the city was pure gold [a divine institution], 
...and the street of the city was pure gold [all its 
highways are of divine appointment]." (Rev. 21:18,21.) 
And the Psalmist, referring to the privileged class who, 
when glorified, shall constitute that heavenly city, government 
or kingdom of God,— the members of the body or 
bride of Christ, partakers of the divine nature,— says, 
"Upon thy right hand did stand the queen, in gold of Ophir. 
...Her clothing is of wrought gold."— Psa. 45:9,13. 
It is to the same apt symbolism that our Lord also refers 



in addressing his people in our text,— "I counsel 

thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire." These words, 

be it remembered, are not addressed to the world, but to 

the Lord's people, justified and consecrated. (Rev. 1:1; 

3:14.) This call is an exhortation to them to faithfully 

fulfil their covenant, to submit themselves fully and unreservedly 

to the discipline of the Lord, which is necessary 

for their perfecting in holiness, and for making them ready 

to reign with him as his bride and joint-heir in the glory 

of the divine Kingdom. 

Not until we lay hold by faith upon the exceeding great 
and precious promises— of joint-heirship with Christ in his 
coming Kingdom and glory— which promises lead us to 
fulfil their conditions of consecration and self-sacrifice even 
unto death, is there any of the "gold" of the "divine 
nature" in us. This treasure can be purchased only at the 
cost of entire consecration or sacrifice of all that we have, to 
Christ. Previous to our justification by faith in Christ we 
had nothing to sacrifice, all that we had being under condemnation; 
but, being justified, we may present our bodies 
living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, and our reasonable 
service. Thus the treasure of the new, divine nature, 
the gold, is given us. Thus we "buy" the gold. 

But we have this treasure in the earthen vessels, and 
there is consequently much of alloy mixed with it. 
Hence the necessity that the gold be cast into the crucible 
for refining. And if we would purchase the "gold tried 
in the fire," it must be at the cost of faithful and constant 
submission to the discipline of the Lord in the fiery trials 
which are necessary to consume our dross and refine our 
gold. Wherefore Peter says, "Beloved, think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, as though some 
strange thing happened unto you." (1 Pet. 4:12.) And 
Paul reminds us of the counsel of wisdom (Prov. 3:11,12; 
Heb. 12:5-8),— "My son, despise not thou the chastening 
of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; 
for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 

Peter also reminds us that the trial of our faith is 
much more precious than that of gold that perisheth, and that 
the end sought through such trial is that we may be "found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ." (1 Pet. 1:7.) It would be idle for any of the 
Lord's consecrated people to hope to be made meet for the 
glorious inheritance of the saints without the refining processes 
of fiery trial; for Paul tells us that "the fire shall 
try every man's work, of what sort it is." "If ye receive 
not chastisement [discipline, fiery trial], whereof all are 
partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons." (1 Cor. 3:13; 
Heb. 12:6-8.) And through the Prophet Isaiah 
the Lord tells his spiritual Israel, as well as his typical 
fleshly Israel, "I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely 
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy sin." (Isa. 1:25.) 
The Prophet Malachi, making special reference to 
the last days of this age, the days of the Lord's presence, 
and the great refining work to be accomplished then, says, 
"Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall 



stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and 
like fullers' soap. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier 
of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and 
purge them as gold and silver."— Mai. 3:2,3. 

Fiery trials are therefore to be expected by all of the 
Lord's people, especially in this day of the Lord. As surely 
as we are sons of God we shall have them; and when they 
come we should promptly recognize their mission to us and 
see that we are exercised by them unto godliness, sobriety 
and deep and fervent piety. "Now no chastening [discipline] 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: 
nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby."— 
Heb. 12:11. 

It is in the school of experience that we learn our 
most valuable lessons; and the ripest saints, in whom we 
find the deepest sympathy, the most patient forbearance, 
and the most tender helpfulness and consideration, are 
those who have been through the fire of affliction, and who 
have been rightly exercised thereby. It was when the 
cross grew heaviest and the clouds were darkest, and when 
the tempest was highest, that the Master's presence was most 
sensibly realized, and the blessed lessons of faith and trust 
and of the Lord's tender, personal love were sealed upon 
the hearts of the disciples. It is under such discipline that 
the soul is mellowed to a loving submission that calmly says, I 
can do all things, bear all things, through Christ who strengtheneth 
me. As gradually the dross of the old nature is consumed, 
and the gold becomes more and more manifest, these 
precious souls become ever dearer to their loving Lord. So 
dear are they to him that in every affliction he is near with 
his grace to sustain and his presence to cheer; and the 
deepest shades of sorrow become memory's most hallowed 
resting places, where the Day Star shines the brightest. 

Whenever a new trial is presented to the Christian, if 
he will but call to mind this precept of the Lord, "I counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire," it will stimulate 
courage, nerve to patient endurance, and quicken to 
self-sacrifice. "Gold tried in the fire!" How can it be 
tried without the crucible and the flame? How otherwise 
can the dross be eliminated? There is no other way. 
"Wherefore, think it not strange:" let the fire burn; let 
the dross be consumed; and see to it, beloved, that in the 
heat of the flame you remove not the "living sacrifice" 

R1944 : page 45 

from the altar. Remember that the eye of the great 
Refiner is upon you; and as the refiner of gold watches 
the metal in the crucible to see his image reflected in it, so 
the Lord, the great Refiner, has his eye upon you. He is 
watching to see how the precious metal of your character 
reflects his image. Or, in plain language, in every trial 
he watches to see what influences control our actions, 
whether they be influences of present advantage, or worldly 
policy, or personal friendship, or earthly loves— of husband, 



or wife, or children, or houses, or lands, or whether they 
be honor among men, or love of ease, or love of peace at 
any cost; or whether, on the other hand, we are controlled 
by the naked principles of truth and righteousness; and 
whether we will defend these principles with zeal and 
energy at any cost of labor or suffering, or both, and so 
fight the good fight of faith to the bitter end— even 
unto death. 

Those who do so, reflect the Master's image. Like 
him they are loyal to God, loyal to the principles of truth 
and righteousness, brave, obedient, faithful. These are the 
overcomers. They overcome by faith; for without a strong 
reliant faith they could not thus endure hardness as good 
soldiers, and pursue to the end a course which is continually 
against the current of the old human nature. Faith 
buckles on the armor of God and goes forth to the battle 
with firm and steady tread, quickened by the inspiring 
melody,— 

"Awake my soul, stretch every nerve, 

And press with vigor on; 
A heavenly race demands thy zeal, 
And an immortal crown." 

The Christian course of self-sacrifice cannot be one 
of ease and continuous smooth-sailing and peace. There 
may be a calm now and then, but storms and battles are 
the rule; and he who courts ease and peace at the expense 
of the principles of truth and righteousness, or who is so 
indifferent to the value of those principles as not to study 
to discern them in order to defend them, is not a faithful, 
overcoming soldier of the cross. 

"Ne'er think the victory won, nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous work will not be done till thou hast gained thy crown. 

Jesus said, "Think not that I am come to send peace 
on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I 
am come to set a man at variance against his father, and 
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law 
against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be they 
of his own household. He that loveth father or mother 
more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth 
son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And 
he that taketh not his cross and followeth after me, is not 
worthy of me." "If any man come to me, and hate not 
[i.e., and love me not more than*] his father and mother 



*See EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT-foot note. 

R1945 : page 45 

and wife and children and brethren and sisters; yea, and 
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. ...Whosoever 
he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he 
cannot be my disciple. ...He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear."-Matt. 10:34-38; Luke 14:26,33,35. 
Oh, how necessary is the hearing of faith to the victory 



of faith— to that victory which makes every other love 
subservient to the love of God, which makes every other 
interest bend to the interests of his great work, and which 
cheerfully sacrifices every other interest to the interests 
which center in Christ and in his coming Kingdom. The 
ear of faith must be attuned to the melodies of divine 
truth if the soul would catch its blessed inspiration; and 
the eye of faith must discern the symmetry of truth and 
the beauty of holiness, if the soul would be filled with a 
burning zeal for God— for his truth and his righteousness. 
But let the soul be thus inspired with deep and abiding 
love for the melody of truth and the beauty of holiness, 
and filled with a holy zeal for God, then everything else 
takes a secondary place, and we have the victory by faith 
in every encounter with the enemy. The soul thus stayed 
upon God can always trustfully sing,— 

"If on a quiet sea toward home I calmly sail, 

With grateful heart, O God, to thee, I'll own the favoring gale. 

But should the surges rise, and rest delay to come, 

Blest be the tempest, kind the storm, which drives me nearer home. 



R1945 : page 45 

LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY. 

-MARCH. 15.-Luke 11:1-13.- 

Golden Text.— "Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye 
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you."— Luke 11:9. 

THE first suggestion of this lesson is the inquiry, Why 

did the disciples ask the Lord to teach them how to 

pray? were not the Jews a praying people, and were not 

the prayers of the righteous acceptable to God from the beginning 

of the world? Yes, the Jews were a praying people, 

and their prayers, when devout and sincere, and in harmony 

with the expressed will of God, were acceptable, and were 

answered. So also were the prayers of others before the 

Jewish age began. Adam communed with God in Eden 

until sin separated him from God and he was cast out of 

Paradise. After he had sinned, he heard and promptly 

recognized the voice of God as he and Eve walked in the 

cool of the day. They feared the voice then because they 

had sinned, but their prompt recognition of it indicated 

that it was familiar to them, and that often before they had 

delighted to hear it. 

The first act of God's mercy after the penalty had been 
pronounced, and the promise had been given of a coming 
deliverer— "the seed of the woman"— was to clothe each 
of the penitent pair with a garment of skins, provided by 
a sacrifice, which prefigured the sacrificed "Lamb of God 
that taketh away the sins of the world." We confidently 
say the penitent pair, because had they been rebellious and 



defiant, instead of penitent, God could not have dealt thus 
mercifully and kindly with them. He would not have 
forced them to wear the typical robe, nor have rewarded 

R1945 : page 46 

them with the hope of a future deliverance. Evidently they 
still had faith in God, and repented that they had hearkened 
to the voice of the tempter and forfeited the divine favor 
by disobedience; and they were anxious to find some way 
of return to that favor, since God in his mercy had given 
them a ray of hope which lifted them out of the slough of 
despair; and they desired, if possible, to have some recognition, 
some way of access to God, to reassure their hearts 
from time to time that they were not cast off forever. Such 
reassurance of hope for the race was given in the institution 
of the typical sacrifices, which began in the clothing of 
Adam and Eve in the skin of the sacrificed animal, the robe 
thus provided typifying the imputed righteousness of the 
sacrificed Lamb of God, Christ Jesus. 

So we find those descendants of Adam who had respect 
to the will and promise of God offering to God acceptable 
typical sacrifices in harmony with his arrangement, thereby 
expressing both their faith in the promise, and their desire 
for full harmony and communion. Thus Abel and Seth 
and all the godly ancients sacrificed; and through these 
typical sacrifices they approached God, they walked with 
God, and had the evidence in their own hearts that they 
pleased God, as it is written,— "By faith Abel offered... 
sacrifice... by which he obtained witness that he was 
righteous, God testifying of his gifts. By faith, Enoch, 
...before his translation had this testimony, that he 
pleased God. By faith, Noah. ..became heir of the 
righteousness which is by faith."— Heb. 11:5-8. 

Thus there was a typical justification and way of access 
to God open to faithful individuals long before the law of 
Moses instituted the typical national sacrifices, which brought 
that people, as a nation, near to God and secured a measure 
of his temporal favor to them, which, in turn, were also 
typical of the greater favors to come by and by, when the 
typical sacrifices should give place to the antitypical sacrifice, 
the real sin-offering which takes away the sin of the world, 
which the blood of bulls and goats could only prefigure, 
but could never accomplish. 

With the typical adoption by God of Abraham's family 
and the institution by the law of Moses of the typical 
national sacrifices, the privileges of approach to God 
through these, and of communion with him, was systematically 
taught by the law and the prophets. Consequently, in 
the nation of Israel we have multiplied instances of earnest 
and believing prayer; and instances, too, thank God, of the 
gracious hearing and answering of their prayers. And not 
only so, but some of the believing Gentiles, seeing what 
God had wrought in Israel, believed on him, and also 
caught the spirit of prayer; and, though unjustified even 
typically by the typical sacrifices, their prayers were heard, 



and God kept them in remembrance until the time appointed 
for his favor to turn to the Gentiles. 

Of this class were Cornelius and his friends (Acts 10). 
Of Cornelius it is said that he was a "devout man, and one 
that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms 
to the people, and prayed to God alway." And when the 
time arrived, when, consistently with his plan, God could 
answer the prayers of Cornelius, he did so, saying, "Cornelius, 
...Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a 
memorial before God;" and shortly after the great blessing 
came in abundant measure. Praise the Lord! "A bruised 
reed he will not break, and smoking flax he will not quench." 
Wherever there is a humble, contrite, faithful heart, God's 
love takes cognizance of it, and in his own good time and 
way confers his blessing. If their prayers cannot be immediately 
answered, they are not forgotten, but are kept as 
memorials until the right time comes for their answer. 

Therefore it was not because the disciples had never 
been taught to pray to God, that they inquired of Jesus as 
to the acceptable way; but, perceiving his intimate communion 
with God, and that God always promptly heard 
and answered him, they evidently felt that there must be 
something in his manner of approach to God which secured 
such prompt recognition and answers, and they would know 
the secret of his power. The secret of his power with God 
was in the fact of his full and complete harmony with the 
will of God; and this likewise is the secret of power among 
all of God's people. True, we, being imperfect, cannot 
say, as did he, "I do always those things that please him" 
(John 8:29); but, realizing our imperfection, we can come 
with humble confessions of our shortcomings and with faith 
in his love and mercy to be exercised toward us in his own 
appointed way. And then we are acceptable in the beloved 
One. 

Jesus taught us how to pray by a simple illustration 
which shows (1) The proper reverential attitude of the believer 
toward God,— "Our Father which art in heaven, 
hallowed be thy name." (2) A full acquiescence in, and 
perfect accord with, the will of God for the blessing of the 
whole world through the coming Kingdom of Christ, which 
is also a recognition of the preparatory redemptive work by 
his sacrificial death— "Thy Kingdom come." (3) The 
earnest desire that the will of God may be done in earth as 
it is done in heaven. (4) An expression of our dependence 
upon God for the supply of our daily needs, with an acknowledgement 
that we do not need luxuries, but will be 
content with the "bread and water" assured through the 
Prophet. This may also be considered a petition for the 
bread of life for our spiritual sustenance— "Give us this 
day our daily bread." (5) Request for forgiveness of sins 
in his own appointed way (through Christ), at the same 
time impressing upon ourselves the necessity for exercising 
toward others the same spirit of forgiveness, and stating 
that we have thus forgiven all our debtors— "Blessed are 
the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy." (6) Earnest 
desire for his assistance in the hour of temptation or trial, 



that we may not be overcome by it, and thus led to sin and 
thus brought under the power of the Evil One— "Abandon 
us not in temptation [or trial], but deliver us from 
evil." This implies a determination to resist sin, as well as 
a leaning upon God for assistance. Such must be the attitude 
of the soul in every approach toward God in prayer. 

R1946 : page 46 

Verses 5-13 are blessed assurances of our Heavenly 
Father's love and solicitude for us, which should fill our 
hearts with the deepest gratitude and responsive love, and 
which should strengthen our faith and our earnest desire to 
come often to his footstool and tarry long in his presence, 
assured that if we come in the frame of mind indicated by 
our blessed Lord, we shall never be turned away empty; 
"for every one that asketh [thus], receiveth; and he that 
seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be 
opened." And the thing received will be neither harmful 
nor useless. It will not be a stone for bread, nor a serpent 
for a fish, nor a scorpion for an egg; but it will be something 
good and wholesome; for the Lord "knows how to 
give good gifts unto his children." Christian, we need not 
tell you this: you have proved it well. And yet, praise the 
Lord! we have not exhausted his bountiful grace. "Still 
there's more to follow." "Ask, and it shall be given you: 
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you." "Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may 
be full." The thing we need most, for which our Father 
is most pleased to have us seek and pray, is the spirit of his 
holiness.— Verse 13. 



R1946 : page 47 

"THAT SERVANT." 

-MARCH 22.-Luke 12:37-48; Matt. 24:42-51.- 

THIS lesson, from Matthew's account (Matt. 24:42-51), 

was treated in our issue of April 1, '95. We 

have no further comment to make except upon one point: 

"that [special] servant." In our examination of this text we 

seem to have treated the term "that servant" as though the 

Spirit had erred in saying "that servant" when it meant servants 

(plural), and we applied it to all true servants of God. 

Since then we have been met from various quarters with 

objections to so general an application, and the suggestion 

that it would be wrong to allow modesty or any other consideration, 

good or bad, to warp our judgment in the exposition 

of the inspired Word; to which proposition we agree. 

God evidently has some purpose in all that he has caused to 

be written for our admonition; and faithfulness as servants 

requires that we deliver to the household the Lord's word, 

as he gives it. 



Being unable to answer the objections and arguments 
raised, we candidly present them to the "fellow-servants" 
and to the "household" of faith as part of the Lord's message: 
the subject being forced upon us by its recurrence in the 
International S.S. Lessons, as well as by inquiries by letter. 
Let each "fellow servant" and each member of the "household 
of faith" use his consecrated judgment in accepting 
or rejecting this exposition, or any other exposition we may 
ever offer, according to his ability or inability to recognize 
in it the voice of our great Shepherd. 

The objection urged is that the Lord's words clearly 
mention and distinguish between his "household" (his faithful 
people in general), the "fellow servants" (plural), 
and "that servant" specially indicated as the Lord's agent 
in dispensing present truth as food to his "fellow servants" 
and the "household." It is admitted that in many Scriptures 
the consecrated are addressed individually when all of 
a class are meant,— as, for instance, "To him that overcometh 
I will grant to sit with me in my throne." This, 
according to the rules of language, means— "To each one 
who overcomes," etc. And in the texts under consideration, 
it is held that if neither the "household" nor "fellow 
servants" were mentioned, it might be questionable whether 
the expression "that servant" referred to one or to all faithful 
servants; but that when "that servant" and "his fellow servants" 
and the "household" are all mentioned in one connection, 
and in contrast, it would be a perversion of the rules 
of language and interpretation to mix and confound that 
which the holy spirit has so emphatically marked as distinct. 
It is further urged that to apply the term "his household" to 
nominal Christian professors in general could not be correct, 
because the "meat in due season" is intended only for the 
Lord's truth-hungry, "watching" people; and hence among 
these must be sought the "household" to be fed, the 
"servants" (plural) to do the feeding, and "that servant" 
at whose hands our present Lord will dispense the food to 
"his fellow servants" for "the household;" and who thus 
is constituted a general steward, overseer and dispenser of 
the Lord's "goods." 

It is urged, further, that the manifest fulfilment of this, 
during this "harvest" and time of the Lord's presence, should 
assist in the correct understanding of the promise; and that 
when we see things come to pass we should be able to recognize 
them whether we discerned their meaning in advance 
or not. Indeed, the demonstration seems to have 
forced the true interpretation, rather than that an interpretation 
led to the fulfilment;— which makes the matter really 
the stronger, now that it is seen. 

It is further suggested that whoever occupies the position 
of "that servant" occupies a place of special danger, 
as well as of special privilege; that only by humility and 
faithfulness can he continue; and that, although not so 
stated in the Scriptures, it may be inferred that if the 
chosen one should fail, another would be chosen to be "that 
servant" or steward through whom the Master would continue 
to supply the "meat in due season" to those deemed 



worthy to continue at his table. 

We submit the argument without comment. 

It is well to notice that these words are not a parable, 
but an explanation of a parable (Luke 12:41) recorded in 
preceding verses (36-40). The parable had set forth the 
fact that the "powers that be" (ecclesiastical, social and 
political) would be unaware of our Lord's second advent 
when it would take place; and that the times and seasons 
were kept secret specially on their account; because if they 
were fully convinced of the great events of that time, and 
their own dissolution to make ready for the Kingdom of 
God, the "new heavens and new earth," they would alter 
their course from fear, to perpetuate the present imperfect 
order, and to hinder the establishment of the better Kingdom. 
In view of this, our Lord indicates the necessity for 
faithfulness and watchfulness on the part of his servants, 
that they may be in such condition as to be quickly and 
readily made aware of the presence of their Master, while 
"the powers that be"— the present householder— sleeps in 
ignorance of the true state of affairs, and dreams of his own 
greatness and prosperity. The parable enforces the necessity 
that all of God's faithful servants be constantly prepared 
and ready, so that as soon as the "knock" is given, they 
may recognize it, and open their hearts and minds to the 
fact of the Lord's presence, and, as his "household," all sit 
down to enjoy the meat in due season which he will then 
serve, through his visible, human agencies. 

After hearing the parable, and perceiving that only the 
faithful were to know of the matter, Peter was perplexed, 
and wondered whether the Lord meant that "all [faithful 
brethren]" would sit down to meat and be served by the 
Master, or whether only "us [the twelve];" for he had 
already discerned that the Lord had some special favors for 
"the twelve" alone. Of course, if Peter had known that 
the parable would not be fulfilled for over eighteen hundred 
years, after all the twelve would have died, he would not 
have asked the question in that form. But our Lord, without 
correcting his error, explained this feature of the parable 
for our information. His answer in verses 42 to 48 (and 
Matt. 24:44-49) declares that while He will be the real 
Provider and Servant, yet the food will be dispensed through 
a steward to "fellow servants" and the "household" in 
general. 

The word "ruler" in verses 42,44 and Matt. 24:45,47, 
of the common version, does not properly express the 
thought of the original: the Revised Version is preferable: 
"set over his household to give them meat" as a "steward," 
not as a lord or master— rather a general servant, or servant 
of all. 



page 47 

REVIEW-MARCH 29. 



Golden Text— "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall 
the Son of man also confess before the angels of God."— Luke 12:8. 

This will be the blessed reward of faithful loyalty. The 
opposite will be true of all the disloyal.— "But he that 
denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of 
God."— Verse 9. 



R1946 : page 48 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



page 48 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Please send me an outfit of tracts 
suited especially for introduction. I agree with you fully 
in the proposition that the printed page should accompany 
the public declaration of truth; but in this country we cannot 
sell DAWNS nor take subscriptions to the TOWER till we 
have evangelized gratuitously. Hence I cannot hope to 
sell very many; but will use them to the best advantage. 

The Lord has been prospering our little effort exceedingly 
this winter. I baptized four new converts to Christianity 
recently, and expect soon to baptize a community of 
ten or fifteen aged persons, who were Methodists until present 
truth reached them. Opposition and persecution increase 
as signs of progress of the truth are manifested. 

We have ordered our church work; that is, we have 
recognized an "elder" and two "evangelists," and have arranged 
to give attention to particular features of the work 
at stated Sundays, with other regulations along this line. 

Your brother in Christ, C. A. McCLUNG. 



R1946 : page 48 

Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I am truly 
thankful to both the Lord and yourselves for the good that 
you by the grace of God have done me through MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Experience, as 
well as the Word of God, teaches us that we are living in 
perilous times, in a time that tries men's souls. And while 
it is true that the light shines from God's Word much more 
clearly than ever before, some who have received present 
truth to some extent are getting it mixed with spiritism and 
other false "isms." 

When the Bible says "try the spirits" (1 John 4:1), 



does it mean we should investigate spiritism? 
J. E. CHAMBERLIN. 
REPLY:— When Satan and his present spurious Spiritism 
shall be bound and deceive the nations no more, there will 
no doubt be some communication established between the 
spirit-beings constituting the glorified Church, the Kings 
and Priests, and the world of mankind progressing in righteousness 
and restitution; just as there was communion between 
God and his creatures in Eden. But nothing of this 
kind should be expected now. The Church from first to last 

R1947 : page 48 

is to "walk by faith, not by sight." The body of Christ in 
the flesh is to have spiritual communion only with its Head, 
the Lord and with him only in prayer. We are specially 
warned, too, that Satan may even endeavor to counterfeit 
the Lord; and we are warned against those who claim to 
see him in the secret chamber (in seances), and are told 
that his revelation or manifestation in his day will, on 
the contrary, be "as the lightning"— really as the sunlight 
—filling the whole world with knowledge, light, truth. 
This scripture applies to the glorified members of the body 
as well as to the Head, Christ Jesus.— Matt. 13:43. 

The scripture which says, "Try the spirits, whether 
they be of God," refers to doctrines, as is clearly indicated 
by the context. Furthermore, there is in the character and 
personal bearing of all spirit-mediums that which should impress 
unfavorably every child of God, who knows what to 
regard as the spirit (disposition) of Christ. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his;" and such 
will never be used as his mediums of communication.— 
EDITOR.] 



AN EXPLANATION. 



In our issue of Feb. 1, '92 we published the following 
letter:— California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write to tell you 
how exceedingly interested I have been in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. III., which I spied out in a book store in Los 
Angeles. I enclose 50 cents, for which I would like you to 
send me, at once, VOLS. I. and II. of the series. I would 
also much like a sample or two of your paper— ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER-for if it is what I expect it to be, after 
DAWN VOL. III., I shall at once become a subscriber. VOL. 
III. is already circulating among my friends. 

Yours in the waiting for Christ's Kingdom, 

PASTOR FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH. 

Our correspondent requested that until otherwise notified 
his correspondence be considered confidential; and 



therefore when shortly afterward we received a letter from 
Rev. Mr. Reed, Pastor of the First Baptist Church of Los 
Angeles, stating that he had been considered the writer of 
this letter, and requesting that we make known the name 
of the writer, we replied that we were not at liberty to reveal 
his identity. We also stated that he was Pastor of the 
First Baptist Church of a neighboring city who had "spied 
out" the book while in Los Angeles; and we remarked 
that we thought the wording of the letter sufficient to show 
this, since a resident of L.A. would have said "this 
city." We did not therefore see any necessity for publishing 
Dr. Reed's denial, which he was abundantly able to do, 
and did do, through the Minister's meeting, and various of 
the religious press. 

Notwithstanding this explanation, Dr. Reed and 
others have continued to make capital out of the letter, 
accusing us of various dishonorable and unchristian 
motives and acts. We therefore have pleasure in publishing 
herewith a later communication from the writer of the 
aforesaid letter, which we trust will set the matter right before 
all who have been misinformed on the subject. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reply to your request 
regarding the letter published in the TOWER of Feb. 1, '92, 
and signed "Pastor First Baptist Church," while I was in 
California, I may say I have nothing to retract from what I 
then said, but regret to learn from you that any one else 
has suffered in any way as the supposed writer of the letter 
in question; and though I have since left California and the 
Baptist ministry, I have no hesitation in acknowledging 
the authorship, if it will relieve another from a false 
imputation. 

Yours in Christian fellowship, 

Jan. 27, '96. W. DE RONDEN POS. 



page 49 