VOL. XXII. APRIL 1, 1901. No. 7. 
CONTENTS. 



Patience as an Element of Character 115 

The Hour of Temptation Upon the 

Whole World 117 

Trials of the Passover Season 120 

Poem: "So As By Fire" 120 

"He that Liveth and was Dead" 121 

"He Poured Out His Soul Unto 

Death" 121 

"The First-Fruits of Them That 

Slept" 124 

"Behold, I am Alive Forever More" 125 

Bishop Ryle's Millennial Creed 128 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



REMEMBER the memorial of "Christ our Passover" on its 
anniversary, the night of April 2nd. "As often [yearly] as ye 
do this, do it in remembrance of me,"— "The Lamb of God 
who taketh away the sin of the world." 

Those who precede the supper and follow it by special 
watching and prayer will surely be specially blessed. 

ALTHO the mail-thief who has for three years past been 



stealing letters at the Allegheny postoffice has been caught, we 
still advise that all remittances be sent us in the form of postal-notes 
or bank -drafts. To send money unregistered is to tempt 
men to steal. 

THE EDITOR will attend a One-Day Convention at Wheeling, 
W.Va., on Sunday, March 24. Friends residing near W. 
will be cordially welcomed by the Wheeling Church; and are 
requested to introduce themselves by name and postoffice address 
to the Editor. The morning session will be held at W. 
C.T.U. Hall, 1229 Market st. The afternoon session will be 
publicly announced for Odd Fellows' Hall, cor. 12th and Chap line 
streets. 

WE HAVE plenty of the Missionary Envelopes now. Post-paid 
25 cents per hundred. $2.00 per thousand. 

MARRIED SISTERS will favor us, if when writing they always 
use the same initials. If one time they sign their own and another 
time their husbands' initials it is confusing. 

REGARDING YOUR WELCOME LETTERS. 

Friends writing to us either on doctrinal questions or business 
matters will please remember to make each letter complete 
in itself. Do not trust to our remembering the contents of previous 
letters; for where so many are involved this is impossible. 



R2790 :page 115 

PATIENCE AS AN ELEMENT OF CHARACTER. 

"Because thou hast kept the word of my patience I will also keep thee 
from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world to 
try them that dwell upon the earth."— Rev. 3:10. 



WE WILL not here discuss this verse from the 
standpoint of its application to the Philadelphia 
epoch of the Church's history, but will content 
ourselves with examining the principles implied in its 
statement, believing, as we do, that the Lord's dealings 
with his Church throughout this Gospel age follow 
the same lines, are in harmony with the same principles. 
Whatever condition, therefore, would be acceptable 
and pleasing to the Lord as respected the 
Philadelphia epoch of the Church's history would be 
acceptable and pleasing to him in respect to ourselves 
and all others of his people during this age. 

Special stress, we see, is laid upon patience— 
"the word of my patience," or, the patience which 
my word inculcates. Examining the word critically 
we find that two quite distinct words in the Greek are 
translated by our English word patience in the New 
Testament; the one is makrothunia (Heb. 6:12; 
James 5:10; Acts 26:3): this is the word which in 



a general way corresponds to the common thought of 
patience, as we speak of it connected with every-day 
affairs of our lives; it means merely long-suffering, 
and, indeed, makrothunia is generally so translated 
throughout the New Testament. (Rom. 2:4; 9:22; 
Eph. 4:2; Col. 1:11; 3:12; 1 Tim. 1:16; 2 Pet. 3:15, 

R2791 :page 115 

etc.) But this is not the word used in our text, 

nor the word generally translated patience throughout 

the New Testament, viz., hupomonee. 

This word, hupomonee, has a much deeper and 
fuller significance than attaches to our English word 
patience. It signifies rather constancy,— the thought 
being an endurance of evil in a cheerful, willing, patient 
manner. It represents, therefore, an element of 
character, and not merely a temporary condition or 
restraint of feeling or action. For instance, a worldly 
man might have a great deal of patience in connection 
with the prosecution of his business;— he might be 
very attentive to his customers, very obliging, very 
painstaking, and show no dissatisfaction in connection 
with the inconsiderateness of his customers; and "patience,' 
in its ordinary sense, might be ascribed to his 
conduct. But the word in our text rendered patience 
signifies such a development of heart and character as 
manifests itself in an endurance of wrong or affliction 
with contentment, without rebellion of will, with full 
acquiescence in the divine wisdom and love, which, 
while permitting present evils, has promised to overthrow 
them in God's due time. We believe it will be 
profitable for us to examine carefully this element of 
Christian character, of which our Lord speaks in such 
high commendation, that recognizing it clearly, we, 
as his followers, may attain to it more completely, and 
thus have his more abundant approval. 

Since our text mentions this patient endurance as 
being the Lord's "word" or teaching, let us glance 
backward to the Gospel narrative, and note the Lord's 
use of the word in his teaching. Twice it is recorded 
as a part of his utterance. In Luke 8:15, in the parable 
of the sower, we read: "That [sown] on the 
good ground are they which in an honest and good 
heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth 
fruit with patience [with cheerful endurance, constancy]." 
The thought here is that in order to be of 
the fruit-bearing class which the Lord will approve 
and accept to his Kingdom, it is necessary to do more 
than to receive the word of his testimony, even tho 
we receive it with joy— for that class in the parable is 
represented by the stony ground, which at first gave 

R2791 :page 116 

evidence of great fruitfulness and vigor, but which, 



when the sun of persecution arose, withered, because 

of lack of depth of soil. That stony, shallow soil represents, 

the Lord explains, a class of hearers who rejoice 

greatly in the truth, but do not endure, such as 

cannot withstand persecution or opposition, but wither 

under it, become discouraged. Such cannot be of the 

Kingdom class, all of whom must be overcomers. 

In this parable our Lord shows us that patient endurance, 
constancy, is the final test, following after the 
readiness of preparation to receive the seed; following 
after the seed has been received and has sprouted; 
following after love and hope and joy and faith have 
caused it to spring forth and to give fruitage. Patient 
endurance, then, is necessary, in order that the 
grain may be developed and thoroughly ripened, and 
made fit for the garner. Ah! how important patient 
endurance seems to be, in the light of this our Lord's 
word— cheerful endurance; for we cannot suppose that 
he who judges the thoughts and intents of the heart 
would be pleased with his children, even if he saw 
them enduring much for his sake, if they endured in 
an impatient or dissatisfied or unhappy frame of mind. 
They would not, in that event, be copies of God's 
dear Son, our Lord, whose sentiment is expressed in 
the words, "I delight to do thy will, O God!" All 
of the Royal Priesthood are sacrificers, as was the 
Chief Priest, our Redeemer and example, who offered 
up himself: we, as the under priests, have also 
presented our bodies living sacrifices, and are to lay 
down our lives for the brethren— in the service of the 
truth. And God, who accepts these sacrifices through 
the merit of Christ, informs us that he appreciates or 
loves the cheerful giver, those who perform their sacrifices 
of a willing heart, cheerfully. And this thought, 
be it noted, is in the Greek word we are considering. 
It is cheerful endurance, patient endurance, that is 
commended. 

The other instance in which our Lord used the 
word during his ministry is recorded in Luke 21:19. 
He had just been telling his followers what they must 
expect as the result of being his disciples during the 
present time, when sin abounds, and when Satan is 
the prince of this world— they must expect tribulation, 
opposition from various quarters; but he assures 
them that they would nevertheless be fully and completely 
under divine care and protection, even tho the 
persecutions would be permitted to reach and to affect 
them. Then follow the words, "In your patience [patient 
endurance, cheerful constancy] possess ye your 
souls." 

Our faith and trust in the Lord and his gracious 
promises for the future life are to be so strong that 
they will more than counter-balance the oppositions 
of the world, of false brethren, and of Satan's blinded 
servants;— so much so that these persecutions will be 
recognized and rejoiced in as the agencies of divine 



providence in chiseling, shaping and polishing us as 
the living stones for the glorious Temple which God 
is constructing. And viewing our trials from this 
standpoint we can indeed possess our souls, our lives, 
and enjoy them, even amidst tribulation, with cheerful 
endurance, constancy. Yea, we may realize that the 
soul, the real being, to which God has given the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the future, 
cannot be injured by the persecutions of the flesh, nor 
by anything that men can do to us, so long as we are 
faithful to the Lord, accepting the persecutions with 
cheerful constancy, as the ministrations permitted of 
his providence for our ultimate good. 

THE NECESSITY FOR PATIENT ENDURANCE. 



Here the question properly arises, Why is this 
so? In what sense is such endurance necessary? We 
answer that it is one of the conditions which God has 
attached to the call to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, 
and the wisdom of this is manifest when we consider 
the work to which we are called— the work of blessing 
all the families of the earth, as God's Millennial 
Kingdom, under and in joint-heirship with our Lord. 
That will be a great work, and it is eminently proper 
that the Lord should demand that those whom he 
would account worthy of it shall not only appreciate 
his goodness and his character, and prefer these to 
sin and iniquity, but that they should demonstrate 
their thorough loyalty to these principles to the extent 
of a joyful willingness to suffer on behalf of 
right, to endure patiently. A transitory endurance 
of one or two or three brief trials would not prove the 
person to have established character for righteousness; 
but a patient, cheerful endurance even unto death, 
would prove and demonstrate such a character. 

We might illustrate this with the diamond. Suppose 
that we were able to make diamonds out of some 
plastic material, so that they would have the full diamond 
measure of brilliancy; and suppose that they 
became hard, but not so intensely hard as the diamond, 
would they have the value of the diamond? By no 
means. And so with the Christian; if we should suppose 
him possessed of every grace of character that 
could possibly belong to the sons of God except this 
one of firmness, of endurance, he would not be fit to 
be numbered amongst the Lord's jewels. Hence the 
Lord's demand is that the quality of firmness, cheerful 
endurance of whatever his providence may permit, 
shall be a characteristic of all those who will be fit for 
the Kingdom. 

This importance of endurance in the Christian 

R2791 :page 117 



character is fully borne out by the Apostle Paul's use 
of the word; for on more than one occasion he ranks 
it as above and beyond Love, which we have seen is 
the "mark" of character for which we are to run,— 
the mark of the prize. For instance, in writing to 
Titus (2:2), enumerating the characteristics of the 
advanced Christian, the Apostle uses the following 
order: "Vigilant, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in 
charity [love], in patience [patient, cheerful endurance]." 
Tho we have all the other qualities, this 
final test of patient, cheerful endurance must be passed 
before we could be accepted of the Lord as members 
of the "very elect." 

Again, in writing to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:10) 
respecting himself, the Apostle again puts this quality 
of patient endurance in the place beyond Love saying, 
"Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, patient 
endurance." 

It may be asked, How can this quality rank 
higher than love, if love is the fulfilling of the Law, 
and the mark of the prize of our high calling? We 
reply, that patient endurance does not merely come in 
at the close of our race, but is requisite all the way 
along the race course. We need this cheerful endurance 
of the earliest trials in the Christian way, and 
as we speed along in our race for the mark the spirit 
of cheerful endurance should be growing stronger and 
stronger at every step of the journey. It is with us 
at the first quarter mark, and at the second quarter 
mark, and at the third quarter mark, and still with 
us at the fourth quarter mark, the mark of the prize, 
perfect love. And when we have reached this mark 
of the race in which we love not only our friends, but 
our enemies, it is required of us that we shall stand 
up to the mark faithfully, cheerfully, patiently enduring 
the tests which the Lord will even then see proper 
to let come upon us. Hence it is that the Apostle 
exhorts us, "Having done all, stand"— endure. Having 
reached the "mark," "Let patient endurance have her 
perfect work," or "perfect her work." Let patient 
endurance demonstrate, not only that you have the 
character, the qualifications of love, demanded in the 
race for the prize, but also that you have it as an 
element of character, deep-rooted, immutable, so that 

R2792:page 117 

you can endure oppositions cheerfully. 

Ah yes! we can see now a reason for the Lord's 
arrangement that we should have our trial as the 
Master had his, under an evil environment— that we 
might not only have the qualities of character, but 
have them rooted, grounded, established, and that all 
this should be demonstrated and proven by our cheerful 



endurance of whatever divine providence shall see 
best to permit to befall us. 

INSPIRED APPLICATIONS OF PATIENT-ENDURANCE. 



Everything that will enable us to see the importance 
of this quality of patient, cheerful endurance will 
be helpful to us. Therefore let us notice some other 
instances in which this word is used in the New Testament. 
The Apostle Paul says, "But ye have need 
of patience [cheerful endurance, constancy] that after 
ye have done the will of God [reached the mark] ye 
might receive the promise." (Heb. 10:36.) Here, 
again, we see that it is not merely to do the will of 
God that is the test, but, that after having attained 
to that point, that mark of character in our hearts, in 
our wills (if only partially in the flesh) we should, by 
patient endurance, establish God's righteous will as 
the law of our hearts, the rule of life under all circumstances 
and conditions. Then, and not till then, will 
we be in the heart condition of fitness for the Kingdom. 
The Apostle James (1:3) says: "The trying 
of your faith worketh patience [patient endurance];" 
that is to say, if our faith stands the trial it will work 
this character of patient endurance; of course, on the 
other hand, if we do not attain to patient endurance, 
it will mean that our faith has not stood the test satisfactorily, 
that we are not fit for the Kingdom. 

Thus we see clearly that a great mistake has 
been made amongst Christian people in general in 
supposing that religion is merely a thing that is to be 
gotten as an answer to prayer, or by going to a mourners' 
bench, or standing up for prayer, or in response to 
some human or divine appeal— as one would get a 
dollar and put it into his pocket. On the contrary, 
repentance of sin and acceptance of Christ, in faith 
unto justification, is only the beginning and not the 
end of the Christian way. The next step is consecration, 
and this also, is far from the end; it is merely 
starting in the school of Christ, having our names enrolled 
as those who desire to be pupils, and to be 
taught of God to cultivate the fruits and graces of the 
spirit. All these things are necessary, but much more 
is necessary; we must go on and on, not only to the 
attainment of the faith and the love, but also to the 
demonstration of character as expressed in his word, 
patient endurance. 

The Apostle Paul exhorts, "Let us run with patience 
[cheerful constancy, patient endurance] the 
race set before us in the Gospel." (Heb. 12:1.) As 
already observed, the race must be run with this constancy 
if we would reach the "mark," and after reaching 
the mark the position can only be maintained by 
the grace of constancy, patient endurance, that having 



done all, we may stand. 

THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION ABOUT TO COME UPON 
THE WHOLE WORLD. 



We are not to understand our Lord's words to 
mean that he kept those of his people designated as 

R2792:page 118 

the Church at Philadelphia from all trials and temptations: 

quite to the contrary, we may be sure that 

trials and temptations have been the portion of the 

Lord's people throughout the entire age. As the 

Apostle Peter said to some in his day, "Think it not 

strange concerning the fiery trials which shall try you, 

as tho some strange [new] thing happened unto you." 

(1 Pet. 4:12.) Trials must be the portion of all who 

would be "overcomers." How else could they overcome 

if they had no trials to overcome? The Church 

represented as belonging to the Philadelphia period 

had these common or general trials; but the Lord 

proposed to spare them from certain special trials that 

were about to come upon the whole world. We are 

not of the Philadelphia epoch, but of the Laodicean 

epoch, which goes into these trials, and to our understanding 

this "hour of temptation," which is to try 

all people of the world, is already here, we are already 

in it, and it forms part of the testing of our 

endurance. 

But tho our Lord does not preserve the Laodicean 
stage of his saints from going into the trouble, we 
may be sure that those who keep the word of his patience 
now will have his keeping power, as promised to 
the Laodicean saints: "I stand at the door and knock; 
whoever hears my voice and opens to me I will come 
in and sup with him and he with me." This is the 
special reward of those who are running the race 
with patient endurance in the present time, in the 
Laodicean period; while it was not our privilege to 
escape the hour of temptation, it is our privilege to 
have a counter-balancing special blessing as a result 
of living in the time of our Lord's parousia (presence). 
We may have his fellowship, his instruction, his dispensing 
of spiritual food which is now "meat in due 
season," in a manner and to a degree which none of 
the faithful of past periods enjoyed these. But as we 
might expect, this greatest favor is correspondingly 
offset by the subtilty and severity of the trials of this 
hour of temptation coming upon the whole world. 

If ever patient endurance was necessary it is necessary 
now; if ever it was true, "In patience possess 
ye your souls," it is so now. Those running the race 
acceptably, and possessing this patient endurance, will 



be able "to stand in this evil day," and no others will 
be able to stand; for, as the Apostle says, the fiery 
trials of this day shall try every man's work of what 
sort it is. — 1 Cor. 3:13. 

The hour of temptation seems to bear specially 
upon and test this point of patient endurance, and 
throughout the civilized world we find this quality of 
patient endurance becoming more and more scarce. 
Whether we can compare conditions of today with 
those of fifty years ago, or forty, or thirty, or twenty, 
or ten years ago, according to our experience in the 
matter, we will see that willingness to endure at all 
is growing more and more scarce. Nobody wishes to 
endure anything— for righteousness' sake, for Christ's 
sake or for anybody else's sake, and if endurance even 
be necessary it is generally with very much of impatience, 
very much more of complaint, etc., than 
formerly. And this general tendency of the civilized 
world to non-endurance and impatience, necessarily 
has its bearing and influence upon all who are seeking 
to walk in the narrow way, going against the current 
of public sentiment and custom; the stronger 
that current the greater their difficulty, and only by 
divine grace can progress be made. 

This necessary divine grace is granted to us 
through a knowledge of the divine plan, and is withheld 
from those who are not walking close to the Lord 
in the footsteps of Jesus. It is for this reason that 
we see a growing disposition toward impatience, non-endurance, 
amongst the professed followers of Christ. 
It is at the bottom of the mob violence which in 
Europe is kept down by military force, but which in 
this country is manifesting itself in repeated instances 
of lynching, etc., which proclaims with loud voice 
impatience as the growing sentiment. The same wrong 
condition is illustrated in the recently inaugurated 
attack upon illegal liquor selling in the State of Kansas, 
in which those who love righteousness and hate 
iniquity have participated, not discerning the instructions 
of the Lord's Word respecting patient endurance 
of evil, until his time shall come for the rectification 
of the same;— by the establishment of the Kingdom, 
the binding of Satan, and the subjugation of all evil. 

Indeed, we may expect the growth of this spirit 
in Christendom— the feeling that in the past they 
have been too patient, not sufficiently aggressive— the 
feeling that if they had taken matters into their own 
hands long ago the world might have been converted 
ere this. But those who have kept the Lord's word 
of patient endurance, and who have sought from him 
the needed wisdom from on high, that is first pure, 
then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy and 
good works, and patient endurance, have learned that 
he has a due time in which his purposes shall all be 
accomplished; and learning this has assisted them in 
cultivating patient endurance as their Lord endured 



the opposition of evil, its malignity, its spite, its falsehoods, 
its persecution— enduring all this cheerfully, 
patiently, as unto the Lord— realizing that it is the 
program which the Lord has not only permitted, but 
permitted for wise purposes in connection with the 
call and preparation of the "little flock" who shall 
be joint-heirs with Christ, their Lord, in the 
Kingdom. 

R2792:page 119 

The Apostle counsels us respecting this hour of 
temptation into which we have just entered. Its besetments 
and trials will be various, and some of them 
will be subtle; so deceptive that all who are not 
thoroughly rooted and grounded in the truth will be 
carried away from the sure foundation (the ransom) 
by the false arguments and sophistries of those whom 
Satan is now permitted to use as his agents in trying 
all them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth. 
Amongst these, no testing seems much more subtle 
than that of Christian Science, which, backed by the 
Adversary's power, is enabled to promise its perverts 
that if they will affirm an untruth and stick to it they 
shall have the reward of relief from certain pains and 
ailments, and those who have not learned to patiently 
endure whatever the Lord's providence shall permit, 
will be ready to accept almost any relief which the 
Adversary may bring to their attention. And as they 
learn to deceive themselves in respect to pain and sickness 

R2793 :page 119 

and gradually to pervert words from their real 
meaning, they finally become so confused in their 
minds that truth appears to them to be falsehood, and 
falsehood appears to them to be shining truth, on 
every subject involved. 

They are led into this partly through curiosity. 
It seems so strange to hear anyone say, "There is no 
death, all is life! there is no pain, all is health! there 
is no evil, all is good!" They say to themselves, Altho 
we know that these are inconsistent statements yet we 
are curious to know how people reason them out,— 
what is their philosophy? This is just what the Adversary 
desires— to attract their attention, that step 
by step he may then lead them from one falsity to another, 
until the whole brain and conscience are subverted; 
rewarding them with physical relief— small 
recompense! They have accepted darkness for light, 
and light thereafter will appear to them darkness. 
Why? How? Because, first, they are unwilling to 
patiently endure, and because, secondly, they would 
not receive the truth, so far as they saw it, with a 
proper constancy. They would not receive the truth 
in the love of it, and hence were ready to exchange 



that which they valued too lightly, either in the quest 
of curious information, or for the sake of physical 
healing of troubles which, if endured joyfully, might 
have worked for them great blessing. 

The hour of trial is not coming alike upon all; 
for all Christendom is not upon the same plane of development, 
mental, moral, physical, spiritual. The 
trial, as it is coming upon Christendom in general, is 
pictured by the Apostle in his letter to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:1-5). 
He here delineates certain characteristics 
of this hour of temptation, otherwise called the 
great "time of trouble" coming upon the world; and 
from his prophetic delineation we see that selfishness 
will be at the bottom of the matter, and that impatience 
will be its weapon. The Apostle says, "This 
know also, that in the last days perilous times shall 
come; men shall be lovers of their own selves; covetous, 
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, 
truce-breakers, false accusers [enticers to strife], incontinent 
[not under restraint, impetuous], fierce, despisers 
of those that are good, traitors [cannot be 
trusted, would sell out their best friends for selfish 
considerations], heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof." 

In his letter to the Thessalonians (2 Thess. 2:9-12) 
the Apostle gives some further intimations respecting 
the peculiar trials of this hour of temptations, which 
has come upon the whole world, but which has not 
yet reached its intensity, and which probably will not 
reach that intensity in all respects for some years, but 
which is already working, and sifting, separating,— 
because the judgment begins with the house of God. 
He says, speaking of Satan as the prime mover in 
the evils of this present time, and especially active in 
this hour of temptation with which this age shall 
close, that his effort will be "with all power and signs 
and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness 
in them that perish." Then he explains 
to us the reason why it will be so, saying, 
"Because they received not the truth in the love of it, 
that they might be saved. And for this cause God 
shall send them strong delusion that they should believe 
a lie, that they all might be condemned who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in 
unrighteousness." 

God's promise is the foundation upon which all 
that we hope for, either of character or coming glory, 
is built. Let us prize this truth so that we will not 
compromise it in any sense or in any degree; let us 
not only hold the truth in the letter but in the spirit;— 
in the love of it, because it is true, as well as because 
it is beautiful and grand. Holding it thus we will be 
careful that no one shall twist it for us or pervert it, 
and equally careful that we do not handle the word 



of God deceitfully ourselves, to the blinding of our 
own eyes of understanding, and thus to our own 
hindrance. And let us ever remember the importance 
of patient endurance, that we may not only cultivate 
the Christian graces, and practise them, but that we 
may take joyfully the trials, persecutions or difficulties 
which our Lord may see proper to permit to come 
upon us for our testing and for the development of 
this character which he explains to us is of paramount 
importance, and without which perfect love could 
neither be attained nor maintained. 

R2793 : page 120 

SPECIAL TRIALS OF THE PASSOVER SEASON. 



Years ago we called attention to the fact that as 
the Passover season brought to our dear Lord the 
sorrows and trials of Gethsemane and Calvary, and was 
a time of sifting and testing for Judas and Peter and 
all the Lord's followers, it would appear to be a time 
even yet in which our Adversary, Satan, is granted 
special license to test and prove the Lord's people. 
And as we get farther and farther into "the hour of 
temptation which shall try all them that dwell upon 
the earth," we expect these testings to be specially 
upon "the house of God"— the consecrated. 

Through the mails we learn of the struggles and 
tears and prayers of many,— some because of their 
own weaknesses and frailties, and some because of the 
frailties of others, and some because of earthly burdens 
which they can neither overcome nor cast fully upon 
the Lord. But while sympathizing with these and 
counselling them as best we can, we remember the 
Master's words, "Blessed are those who weep now, 
for they shall rejoice," and our heart is specially 
solicitous for those whose letters give evidence that 
they are in temptation, but realize it not;— those who 
are being swallowed up of ambition or business or 
other "cares of this life and deceitfulness of riches"— 
spiritual or temporal; and with those specially, whose 
love for the truth seems to grow cooler instead of 
hotter each year, and who see less and feel less than 
they did years ago. We say to ourself, these are like 
the apostles,— sleeping while they should be watching 
and praying, and the hour of trial will find them unprepared; 
while some who are weeping and striving 
are more like our Savior at Gethsemane, and like him 
will be strengthened for the hour of trial. 

Nor can we pray the Lord not to permit these 
trials of faith and patient endurance; for we recognize 
that the "very elect" must be a tried people, because 
of the very object of their election,— that they 
may be joint-heirs with Christ in the long-promised 



Kingdom that is to judge and bless the world 
during the Millennium. As the Apostle says, these 
"fiery trials must try you." It is a matter of must, 
of necessity, as respects all who would be graduated 
from the present school of Christ to a share in his 
glorious Kingdom,— that they must pass the 
examination. 

Ah, if we could but keep this thought before us 
continually, how it would nerve us to will and to do 
the Lord's good pleasure— enduring faithfully and 
cheerfully whatever our loving Master sees best to 
permit, knowing that thus he is working out for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. From 
this standpoint 

"How light our trials then will seem! 

How short our pilgrim way! 
The life of earth a fitful dream, 

Dispelled by dawning day! 

"Then peace, my heart! and hush my tongue! 

Be calm, my troubled breast! 
Each passing hour prepares thee more 
For everlasting rest." 
Let us each, dear brethren, be very solicitous for 
ourselves and for each other; and counting the prize 
set before us in the gospel as superior to all else, as 
the Apostle says, "Let us fear, lest a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it." Let us so love all the 
Lord's children that their welfare will be our chief 
concern, and this will mean our own spiritual health. 
Yet we must not permit our love even for the brethren 
to hinder our confidence in the Lord's love and wisdom 
in respect to his terms in the choice of his Bride;— 
even tho the sittings should take from us some, whose 
fellowship we dearly cherish. 
"Why should an anxious load 

Press down thy weary mind? 
Haste to thy Heavenly Father's throne 
And sweet refreshment find." 



R2794 : page 120 

"SO AS BY FIRE." 



"I sometimes feel so passionate a yearning 
For spiritual perfection here below, 

This vigorous frame with healthful fervor burning 
Seems my determined foe. 

"So actively it makes a stern resistance, 
So cruelly it sometimes wages war 



Against the higher spiritual existence, 
Which I am striving for. 

"It interrupts my soul's intense devotions; 

Some hope it strangles at its very birth 
With a swift rush of violent emotions 

Which link me to the earth. 

"It is as if two mortal foes contended 
Within my bosom in a deadly strife; 

One for the loftier aims Jesus intended, 
One for the "Mammon" life. 

"And yet I know this very war within me, 

Which brings out all my will-power and control; 

This very conflict yet through Christ shall win me 
The loved and longed-for goal. 

"And when in the immortal ranks enlisted, 
Sometimes I wonder if we shall not find 

That not for deeds alone, but also what's resisted, 
Our places were assigned." —Selected. 



R2794 : page 121 

"HE THAT LIVETH AND WAS DEAD." 

-LUKE 24:1-12.-APRIL 1 .- 

"Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become 
the first-fruits of them that slept."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

ON NO Christian doctrine does there seem to 

be a greater confusion in all denominations 

than on the subject of this lesson— the resurrection 

of the dead— the resurrection of our Lord. Nevertheless, 

as with one voice, all Christendom unites in 

declaring that our Lord's resurrection was an indispensable 

necessity to our salvation, in this agreeing 

perfectly with the plain statement of the Apostle, "If 

Christ be not risen then is our preaching vain, and 

your faith is also vain;. ..ye are yet in your sins. 

Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are 

perished." (1 Cor. 15:13-18.) How strange that 

a subject of so vast importance as this should be so 

obscure! How strange that, recognizing its importance, 

thinking minds should treat it so lightly, and 

be willing to accept theories respecting it, the absurdity 

of which are manifest to all upon the mere statement 

of them ! 

For instance, it is the generally accepted theory 
that only the body dies— that the soul, the real, intelligent 
person or being, does not die, but merely is 
liberated to a higher condition of life the moment the 



body dies. Now, if we apply this theory to our Lord's 
death and resurrection how absurd it appears, and 
how absurd all the various theories would be that are 
built upon it: (1) If merely our Lord's body died, 
and if our Lord himself were released thereby and 
became instantly more alive than ever before, wherein 
would be the consistency of the claim that without 
his resurrection he had perished, and all hopes built 
upon him and his work had perished? It would be 
unreasonable to make such statements if the premises 
assumed were correct. (2) It is the claim of the 
majority of Christian people that our Lord Jesus was 
the Heavenly Father, Jehovah, and that he merely 
assumed to be, and took the title of the Son, when in 
reality he was as much the Father as he was the Son 
—that he was really both. 

Those who hold this view are forced thereby to 
suppose that the Lord himself never died, else the universe 
would have been without a Master for a time; 
and to be consistent this same error must needs claim 
that the whole work of Christ Jesus was a farce, a 
pretence, that Jesus really was the Heavenly Father 
all the time, and wore a body of flesh just as we do a 
suit of clothes; that he caused this body of flesh to 
pretend to pray to himself, and pretend to agonize 
with strong cryings and tears to the Father, really 
himself; that he let the body of flesh go on to the 
cross and pretend its groans and its crying, "My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" that he let 
the body be buried, and pretended for the time to be 
unconscious, while really he was experiencing none 
of these things that appeared, but was as omniscient 
and omnipotent as ever; that by and by he revived 
the body and took up the flesh and bones, etc., into 
heaven as an everlasting evidence of the deception he 
had performed upon mankind; taking a body of flesh 
into spiritual conditions, where it would be totally 
out of place and inappropriate to the environment. 

All this theorizing, so common amongst Christian 
people, is absurd in the extreme, totally contrary to 
the teachings of our Lord's Word, as well as repugnant 
to reason and common sense. This entire illogical 
theory is built upon and made necessary by two 
fundamental errors; first, a failure to see the sense in 
which the Father and the Son are one— that they are 
not one in person, but in harmony, in spirit, in will, 
as the glorified Church also must eventually be One 
with the Father and with the Son, as our Lord's own 
lips declared, "That they all might be one; as thou, 
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may 
be one in us." Secondly, the theory that the dead 
are not dead, but more alive than ever before. Can 
any one dispute that if the dead are not dead there 
are no dead ones, and to speak of a resurrection of 
dead ones would be an absurdity? 

But when we take the Scriptural account the 



whole subject becomes clear and plain. Jesus was 

the honored Son of God— "the only begotten of the 

Father"— "the beginning of the creation of God." 

To him had been given, while he was in glory with 

the Father, the privilege of becoming man's Redeemer, 

and he had accepted the service gladly: "for 

the joy that was set before him," he left the condition 

of glory, was made flesh, endured the cross, despising 

the shame, and ultimately received the exaltation to 

the divine nature, and joint-heirship through his resurrection. 

The taking of human nature was necessary, 

because it was a man that had sinned, and as by 

a man came death, by a man also must the resurrection 

of the dead be secured. (1 Cor. 15:21.) Only 

the sacrifice of a perfect life could redeem the original 

sinner, Adam, and his children, who shared his penalty. 

This was the necessity for our Lord's earthly 

existence and for his death, as the Apostle explains. 

-Heb. 2:14. 

"HE POURED OUT HIS SOUL UNTO DEATH." 

-ISAIAH 53:12.- 

Those who claim that our Lord himself did not 
die, but that merely his flesh died, are totally unable 
to answer or harmonize the Scriptural declarations on 
this subject, which are most pointedly to the effect 

R2794 : page 122 

that "he poured out his soul unto death;" "he made 
his soul an offering for sin." It was Adam's soul 
(being, existence) that came under the sentence of 
death through disobedience. It was not merely a sin 
of his body, but, as the Scriptures declare, "The soul 
that sinneth, it shall die." It was Adam's soul that 
needed to be redeemed, and not merely his body, because 
if the soul were redeemed God could give it a 
new body as it pleased him. God's proposition is not 
to give back, atom for atom, the same bodies that 
moulder into dust. On the contrary, it matters little 
what becomes of these mortal bodies, for it was not 
these that were redeemed, nor these that are to be restored. 
It was the soul that needed redemption; it 
was the soul that was redeemed; it was the soul of 
our Lord Jesus that was given as a ransom price for 
the soul of Adam; and the result is that the souls of 
Adam and his posterity are all guaranteed a 
resurrection. 

This central thought of the resurrection is wholly 
overlooked by Christian people in general, who leave 
the soul out of the question,— out of redemption and 
out of the resurrection, whereas it is the all-important. 
It is because the Apostle Paul recognized this matter 
so clearly that he stated himself so positively on this 



subject in his great chapter on the resurrection, 1 Corinthians 15. 

He recognized that it was Christ's 

soul that died— that his very existence had ceased in 

death; that not merely his body, but himself, was absolutely 

dead three days, and this is our Lord's own 

statement, "I am he that liveth and was dead." He 

does not say, I am he who lived always and who 

never died, but whose body died for the brief space of a 

few hours. It was because Christ's soul (being) was 

dead that the Apostle could declare that unless his 

soul, being, were made alive again by a resurrection 

there could be no hope in him as a Savior and a Life-giver 

—there could be no hope of his ever exalting his 

Church to joint-heirship with him in his Kingdom nor 

of his and their blessing all the families of the earth 

during a Millennial reign of righteousness— if he were 

dead, extinct, if he had not risen from the dead. 

R2795 : page 122 

The Apostle Peter also marks this point well, that 
it was the soul of Christ that was dead— that went to 
hades, the grave, the state or condition of death. Note 
how the Apostle Peter, on the day of Pentecost, quoted 
from the inspired prophet David, the words, "Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in hell [Heb. sheol, Gr., hades, 
English, the state or condition of death]." Peter informs 
us that the prophet spoke not of his own soul, 
but of Christ's soul, that it was not left in hades— 
that, on the contrary, it was raised up from the dead 
on the third day. (Acts 2:27,30-33.) Whoever 
sees that it was our Lord's soul that went into the 
state of death can see abundant evidence for all the 
stress which the apostles in their writings lay upon 
the fact of his resurrection. If Christ be risen it is an 
evidence of divine favor, and divine favor is an evidence 
of his perfection— that he did the work of sacrifice 
which he undertook, and in a manner acceptable 
to the Father; and these things being true, it follows 
that his exaltation to the Father's right hand of 
power means that we have in this a full assurance of 
faith that all the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God to the world and to the Church, centered 
in him, shall have a fulfilment in due time. 

As an illustration of the confusion which generally 
prevails on this subject by reason of false premises 
above criticised, note the following statement by a 
leading commentator, discussing this subject, and 
published widely in comments on this lesson. He says: 
"The resurrection of Jesus is the crowning proof that 
he is the Son of God. If he could not conquer death 
and come back from heaven he could not prove that at 
first he came from heaven!" Such is the ridiculous 
position into which ordinarily intelligent men are led 
through building upon false theories. 

The Scriptures nowhere intimate that our Lord 



Jesus did or could raise himself from the dead. If it 
were merely his body that had died, and if he were 
more alive than ever, of course he could just as easily 
quicken his own body that had died as he could quicken 
the body of Lazarus, and it be no more of a miracle, and 
no more of a proof. But if, as the Scriptures declare, 
it was his soul that died then he was wholly dead, and 
could have no power whatever to resuscitate himself. 
To this the Scriptures agree, declaring in so many 
words that "God the Father raised him from the dead." 
(Gal. 1:1.) Nor is this an exceptional statement of 
the matter. It is the united testimony of the Scriptures, 
in proof of which note the following: Acts 2:24,32; 
3:15; 4:10; 10:40; 13:30,34; 17:31; 
Rom. 4:24; 8:11; 1 Cor. 6:14; 15:15; 2 Cor. 4:14; 
Eph. 1:20; Col. 2:12; 1 Thess. 1:10; Heb. 13:20; 
1 Pet. 1:21. 

Our Lord's figurative statement, "Destroy this 
Temple and in three days I will raise it up," is not to 
be understood as in conflict with the above literal 
testimony. "He spake of the temple of his body"— 
"which temple ye are"— the Church. (John 2:21; 
1 Cor. 3:16.) Our Lord was living in the end of the 
fifth (thousand-year) day, and on the seventh (thousand-year) 
day "early in the morning," the Church, 
which is his body, is to be delivered by him from the 
power of death, and thus be made sharer in "his 
resurrection"— the first resurrection.— Phil. 3:10; 
Rev. 20:4,5. 

Neither are we to understand our Lord's words, 

R2795 : page 123 

"I have power to lay down my life and I have power 
to take it again" (John 10:18), as meaning that he 
could have any power whatever during the interim of 
death. Rather, we are to understand this in harmony 
with the many plain statements of the apostles under 
the inspiration of the holy spirit, to mean that our 
Lord had authority or commission from the Father to 
make the declaration that tho he would lay down his 
life he would receive it again— this authority, assurance 
to this effect, I have received it from my Father. 
So understood, the whole matter is clear. So understood, 
the doctrine of the resurrection becomes next 
in importance to the doctrine of the ransom, and 
really a part and parcel of it; for as we have already 
seen, for our Lord to have died and not to have risen 
from the dead would have meant no hope for those 
whom he had promised to deliver, and whom the 
Father had promised he should have authority to deliver 
from the power of death by a resurrection through 
judgments.— John 5:28-30. 

"IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE THAT HE SHOULD BE 
HOLDEN OF DEATH."-ACTS 2:24. 



It was not possible, because he had kept the divine 
law perfectly, and thus, according to divine arrangement 
and promise, he had accomplished two things: 

(1) The giving of the ransom price for the human family; 

(2) the attestation of his own fidelity and his worthiness 
of high exaltation to the divine nature and glory 
—"that all men should honor the Son even as they honor 
the Father." (John 5:23.) The same justice which 

had operated for four thousand years against Adam and 

his race because of transgression was now operative on 

behalf of Jesus for his deliverance from death, into which 

he had voluntarily gone as man's redemption price. 

When we come to see matters from the divine standpoint 

and arrangement we can well rejoice that the 

Father's character is unchangeable, and our Lord's 

resurrection becomes an evidence, or, as the Apostle 

says, an "assurance," of the carrying out of every 

feature of the divine plan, all of which centered in 

him and was made dependent upon his faithfulness 

even unto death, even the death of the cross. (Acts 17:31.) 

Now we know that he is the antitypical 

Seed of Abraham, approved of God, through whom 

all the families of the earth are to be blessed. Now 

we know that the Church of this Gospel age is called to 

be the Bride, the Lamb's wife, just as Rebecca was 

called to be the wife of the typical Isaac, and to be 

his joint-heir in the Kingdom and joint-participator 

with him in the carrying out of the promises and oath 

of God made to Abraham. "If ye be Christ's then 

are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise" 

—that in this seed all the families of the earth 

shall be blessed. -Gal. 3:29. 

Coming to the narrative of our Lord's resurrection 
from the standpoint above set forth, realizing 
that all of our hopes of life eternal are dependent upon 
it, we come to it with much more and much deeper 
interest than we could approach it from any other 
standpoint or theory. And we are to remember that 
the disciples and followers of Jesus were Jews, and 
that the heathen philosophies had not yet made great 
inroads upon the people, to mislead them into thinking 
that the dead were not dead. As a people they 
believed the dead were dead, and placed their hopes 
in a resurrection. Thus it was when Jesus comforted 
Martha and Mary respecting their brother; he said 
not to them, Your brother is alive, but, "Thy brother 
shall rise again," clearly implying that he was not 
alive then in any sense of the word. Their answer 
was in accord with this: "I know that he shall rise 
again at the last day"— in the end of this age, in the 
great Millennial age of resurrection, lasting a thousand 
years. But Jesus, being the one who possesses the 
resurrection power, even then suspended temporarily 



the power of death, restoring Lazarus again, and 
thus illustrating the resurrection power which will be 
used in much fuller measure and degree, and generally, 
when the due time shall come, and "all that are 
in the graves shall hear his voice and come forth." 

Similar were the views on this subject held by 
the apostles and others. They believed that whether 
or not Jesus was the Messiah, as they previously supposed, 
but as had seemed to be disproved by his ignominious 
death at the hands of his enemies, nevertheless 
he was a holy man, and they trusted that in 
due time under the divine arrangement, according to 
the promise to Abraham, he, as well as all the dead, 
would rise again. Great must have been their surprise 
when they learned through the angel messengers who 
sat at the tomb that the Lord was risen, was no longer 
dead. 

The women, whose office it was to complete the 
work of embalming the body of Jesus, went very 
early in the morning of the first day of the week, 
"while it was yet dark," to perform their loving 
service. Our Lord was crucified on Friday, the sixth 
day of the week, and buried probably about four 
o'clock. This left no opportunity to complete the 
embalming arrangements, because, as Jews under the 
Law, they were obliged to keep the seventh day 
(Saturday) as a rest day, and in it do no work of any 
kind; but the seventh day closed at sundown, and we 
may presume that immediately the preparation of 
spices began, and that all arrangements were completed, 
and that they were on their way to the sepulchre 

R2795 : page 124 

as early as possible. We may assume that it was 
not the custom to embalm all the dead. Evidently 
Lazarus had not been so embalmed in death. (John 1 1:30.) 
And since the embalming process was only partly 
perfected on the evening of the burial, the women 
were in haste, as soon as the Sabbath was over, to 
complete their service, not realizing how unnecessary 
were their labors— not thinking for a moment of the 
Lord's resurrection. No doubt it was in order to 
better inculcate this lesson, and to prepare them for 
seeing Jesus, that the angels appeared and drew their 
attention to the fact that Jesus had foretold his crucifixion, 
and also his resurrection on the third day. 

Infidelity has objected that the accounts of our 
Lord's resurrection given by the four Evangelists are 
not exactly alike; but we answer that this is another 
evidence that there was no collusion amongst the 
apostles in respect to their statements of the Lord's 
words and doings, and these subsequent scenes. Their 
testimony, therefore, should be considered really 
stronger than if they had word for word declared the 



R2796 : page 124 

same thing. The fact is that each tells the story from 

his own standpoint, and, like any matter, it may be 

viewed from different standpoints, and the facts, related 

in somewhat different language and order, need 

not be understood to conflict. Rather, we are to understand 

that all the various things declared took 

place, and to do our best to find the order in which 

they occurred. 

Nor is it unusual to find differences of opinion 
respecting many things in the testimonies of unimpeachable 
witnesses; for instance, there is a dispute 
to this day as to what hour the battle of Waterloo occurred, 
altho tens of thousands of men took part in 
it. "Two armies beheld the battle of Waterloo, but 
who can tell when it began? At ten o'clock, said the 
Duke of Wellington. At half past eleven, said General 
Alava, who rode beside him. At twelve, according 
to Napoleon and Druet; and at one, according to 
General Ney." We do not think of impeaching the 
credibility of any of these witnesses. Rather, we are 
to suppose that they all may have been correct in that 
the battle began in some places sooner than in others. 
Some would regard the battle as beginning with the 
first skirmish, and others probably ignore those skirmishes 
and speak of the time when the armies fully met 
in the clash of battle. We are to use similar reasonable 
judgment in considering the testimony of such 
unimpeachable witnesses as were the apostles— men 
who not only hazarded their lives, but sacrificed all of 
their earthly interests in the service of him whom 
they declare to us arose from the dead on the third day. 

We might remark incidentally that the terms, 
"on the third day," and three days and nights, according 
to Jewish usage, would properly be applied to 
portions of three twenty-four-hour periods, and did 
not imply three full days and three nights. That the 
apostles so understood their own words is evident, for 
they made no effort to harmonize the statements, as 
they surely would have done had there been any conflict 
between them. Some earnest people, failing to 
realize this fully, have written books endeavoring to 
prove that our Lord was crucified on Thursday afternoon, 
but they seemingly overlook the fact that even 
then they could not count three full days and three 
full nights, and that unless they accepted the 
view that a part of three days is what is meant 
they would be forced to suppose that our Lord was 
crucified on Wednesday afternoon, in order to have 
the three full days, and in that event it would not be 
true that our Lord arose "on the third day," but on 
the fourth day. Furthermore, unless it be conceded 
that our Lord was crucified on Friday, the sixth day, 
too late to complete the embalming which would be 
hindered by the seventh day, no excuse could be 



found for the women coming early on the first day of 
the week with the spices to complete the embalming. 
If our Lord had been crucified on Thursday afternoon 
there would have been all day Friday in which they 
could have completed the work of embalming. 

Dr. Abbott points out that the Christian observance 
of Sunday is of itself a strong testimony in support 
of our Lord's resurrection. He says: "A singular 
and significant testimony to the truth of the resurrection 
is afforded by the change in the Sabbath day. 
It was changed, not by any express command in the 
New Testament, but by the almost universal consent 
of the Church, which could not endure to observe as 
a day of joy and gladness that on which Christ lay in 
the tomb, nor forbear to mark as a weekly festival 
that on which he arose." 

"THE FIRST-FRUITS OF THEM THAT SLEPT." 



Our Golden Text calls attention to the fact that 
our Lord in his resurrection became the first-fruits of 
them that slept— the first-born from the dead. After 
God gave the promise to Abraham that in his seed all 
the families of the earth should be blessed, it was the 
custom of Israelites to speak of their dead as not dead, 
not extinct, but as asleep— waiting for resuscitation, 
resurrection. They realized that such a resurrection 
was unquestionably implied, tho not actually stated, 
in the promise made to Abraham. For how could all 
the families of the earth be blessed until the ransom 
price was paid, a resurrection provided for, that the 
curse of death might be rolled back from off the race? 
Again, as our Lord declares, the intention of God to 
resurrect the dead was shown in his declaration to 

R2796 : page 125 

Moses at the bush, that he was the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob, etc., for if they were dead, extinct, 
without hope of a resurrection, God would never 
speak of them in this manner. (Mark 12:26,27.) 
Israel in general, therefore, had come to speak of the 
dead as asleep, waiting for Messiah and the work that 
he should do, which would culminate in resurrection; 
hence the common use of the words sleep and slept in 
the Old Testament when referring to the deceased. 
The Apostle informs us that some endured torture 
for their faithfulness to the Lord, in hope of a better 
resurrection— a more favorable condition, when the 
resurrection time should come.— Heb. 11:35. 

Our Lord also used this expression, "sleep," in 
respect to the dead, declaring that Lazarus slept, and 
that he went to awaken him out of sleep. (John 11:11.) 
Practically the whole world of mankind has gone 



down into this sleep, and it is called a sleep, instead 
of being called death, extinction, because in the divine 
plan, through the redemption, a provision has 
been made that "all that are in their graves shall 
come forth" at the word of their Redeemer, in the 
morning of the Millennial age. The "little flock" of 
"overcomers" who pass their judgment or trial now 
satisfactorily, come forth to life and joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom; the great mass of mankind, blinded 
by the Adversary, to a greater or less extent, will 
come forth, subsequently, to enlightenment,— when 
Satan shall be bound, to deceive them no more,— that 
they may have an opportunity of coming into harmony 
with God and forming characters in accord with the 
laws of his Kingdom, and so doing that they may 
have life everlasting. 

Our Lord was the first-fruits of them that slept 
—none preceded him; hence the awakening of Lazarus 
and of the daughter of Jairus and the son of the widow 
of Nain were not full and complete resurrections. 
Had they been such our Lord's resurrection would 
not have been the first— he would not have been "the 
First-born from the dead." His being born from the 
dead signifies that he was lifted fully and completely 
out of death conditions to the perfection of life, which 
was not the case with the others— they were merely 
awakened and left in the dead state with the remainder 
of the human family. The Church of Christ, his 
body, is to share with him in "his resurrection," "the 
first resurrection," a complete and instantaneous lifting 
out of the state of death into the perfection and 
completeness of glory, honor and immortality, which 
God has provided for them who follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, his joint-heirs. These are all called 
the "first-fruits unto God of his creatures." (James 1:18.) 
The after-fruits of God's great plan will be 
developed during the Millennial age, yet there shall 
not enter into the approved condition any who will 
not use the means then within their grasp. 



R2796 : page 125 

"BEHOLD, I AM ALIVE FOREVER MORE."-REV. 1:18. 

-JOHN 20:1 1-18.-APRIL 14.- 

NOT only was it necessary that Christ should rise 

from the dead and become alive forevermore 

in order to accomplish the great work planned 

of God and foretold in the prophets, and secured by 

his own sacrifice, but it was necessary also that indubitable 

proofs of his resurrection should be given 

to his disciples, for themselves and for us through 

them. The necessity for this lay in the fact that in 



the divine plan this Gospel age was marked out to be 
a Faith age— for the selection of a special little flock, 
able, like father Abraham, to walk by faith and not 
by sight. But faith, in order to be faith, and not 
merely credulity, must needs have some reasonable 
foundation upon which to build its superstructure; 
and it was to provide this foundation for faith that 
our Lord remained with his followers for forty days 
after his resurrection, before ascending to the Father, 
—as the Evangelist declares, "He showed himself 
alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being 
seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things 
pertaining to the Kingdom of God."— Acts 1:3. 

The disciples realized that great events were 
transpiring, tho how great and momentous was their 
character, they but slightly comprehended. They 
knew that their hopes as respects an earthly Kingdom, 
and their Master as an earthly Lord, had failed. They 
had vague, indefinite hope that all that he had said 
to them would in some manner have a fulfilment, 
but how or when or where, was beyond their conception. 
They knew not that a change of dispensation 
was occurring;— that the rejection of Israel after the 
flesh, and the calling of a new Israel after the spirit, 
was commenced; and that they themselves were 
amongst the first thus privileged to pass from the relationship 
of servants of God to that of sons.— 
John 1:12. 

As yet they knew nothing about spiritual things, 
not having been begotten of the holy spirit to sonship 
and the knowledge of things to come, Jesus not yet 
having been glorified, and it being impossible for the 
holy spirit of adoption to come upon them until after 
his sacrifice for sins had been presented in the 

R2797 : page 126 

Most Holy, and accepted of the Father. They knew 

not that the new Kingdom was to be a spiritual one, 

and that Christ, its Head, must pass from fleshly 

conditions to spiritual conditions in this resurrection, 

even as he had foretold, saying, "Flesh and blood 

cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." They had much 

to learn, but they had a great Teacher, and, as we 

shall see, his arrangements for their instruction were 

specially adapted to their conditions as natural men, 

to give them such foundation of knowledge and experience 

as would subsequently be helpful to them 

when they should be begotten of the holy spirit at 

Pentecost. 

The Apostle informs us that Christ was "put to 
death in flesh and quickened (made alive) in spirit" 
(we give a literal translation). The Apostle's words 
being true, those who declare that our Lord arose 
from the dead a fleshly being at the time of his ascension 
are grossly in error. Indeed, it is evident that 



they have misconceived the entire subject of the atonement, 
for if our Lord, as the man Christ Jesus, gave 
himself a ransom, he could not be restored to manhood 
in a resurrection, without annulling the ransom 
—taking back the price he had paid for our sins. The 
Scriptural thought is that as man had sinned, and 
been sentenced to death, it was necessary that the 
Redeemer should become a man and should give his 
manhood as the ransom-price for Adam and his race; 
and the Scriptural declaration is not that this ransom 
price was taken back, but that God raised him from 
the dead a new creature of a new nature,— not in 
flesh, not in human nature, but in spirit, a spirit being. 
-1 Pet. 3:18. 

The Apostle Paul agrees with Peter's testimony, 
that Jesus was quickened in spirit, saying that Jesus 
was "declared to be the Son of God with power, according 
to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection 
from the dead" (Rom. 1:4); and again, the same 
Apostle, describing the first resurrection, in 1 Cor. 15:42-45, 
says: "Thus also is the resurrection of the 
dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; 
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; 
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown a natural [animal] body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." The Apostle elsewhere declares that the 
Church's highest ambition is to be a partaker in this 
first resurrection, which he denominates "his resurrection," 
the Christ-resurrection, the resurrection to 
spirit conditions, which came first to our Lord Jesus, 
and in which all of his body, his Bride, is to have a 
share. -Phil. 3:10; Rev. 20:6. 

There can be no question that the Apostle, in 
this description of the first resurrection, means us to 
understand his words just as they read— whoever interpolates 
and adds to the Word of God, and declares 
that it was sown a natural (animal) body and raised 
a natural (animal) body, and subsequently changed 
to a spiritual body, wrests the Scriptures to his own 
injury, to the darkening of his own understanding of 
the divine plan. In the same connection the Apostle 
declares that that body which thou sowest is not 
quickened, but in the resurrection God giveth it a 
body as it hath pleased him, to every seed his own 
body— in the resurrection, not after it. (1 Cor. 15:35-38.) 
If the Church belongs to the spiritual seed, 
to which is to be given the spiritual body in the resurrection, 
then unquestionably the Lord Jesus, the Head 
of the Church, belongs to the same spiritual seed, and 
accordingly God gave him a spiritual body in his 
resurrection. Likewise, in a succeeding verse, the 
Apostle declares that our Lord at his resurrection became 
the second Adam, and then contrasting this 
second Adam with the first, he says, "The first man 
Adam was made a living soul [an animal or earthly 
being]; the last Adam was made a quickening [life-giving] 



spirit [being]. "~1 Cor. 15:38-45. 

The lessons to be learned by the Lord's immediate 
followers would necessarily be much more difficult 
to them than to us; because we have been begotten of 
the holy spirit, and are thereby enabled to appreciate 
spiritual things. To meet the exigency it was necessary 
that our Lord, the spirit being, should be present 
with them for forty days,— invisible, as spirit beings 
are always invisible to men, unless through the operation 
of a miracle. It was necessary for them to know 
of his resurrection in order that they should have 
faith in his message, and act accordingly, as he desired; 
yet, had he appeared to them in the glory of 
his spirit being, opening their eyes to see the supernatural 
splendor as he showed himself in vision to 
John on the isle of Patmos, his face as lightning, his 
arms and his feet shining like molten brass in the furnace 
—the effect would have been to terrorize them, 
and their natural minds would have been unable to 
link such manifestations with their Lord, recently 
crucified; neither would he have had opportunity, 
under such conditions, to have given them instructions, 
for they could not have received them by reason of 
terror. 

It was necessary therefore, that our Lord, a spirit 
being, should manifest himself, as he had in the long 
past manifested himself to Abraham and Sarah, and 
as angels, under divine commission, had done on sundry 
occasions— as a man. (Gen. 18:1.) He must 
lead their minds step by step, and their thoughts link 
by link, from the cross and the tomb to an appreciation 
of his present exaltation as a spirit being, respecting 
which he himself explained to them, contrasting 
it with his previous condition, "All power in heaven 
and in earth is given unto me." And this leading of 
their minds must be such as would gradually force 
upon them the conviction that he was "changed," 
that he was no longer a man, and no longer subject 
to human conditions, as before his death. Having 
this thought in mind, we will have no difficulty whatever 
in seeing how our Lord inculcated these instructions 
during the forty days in his various interviews 
with his followers. 

Mary Magdalene was honored in being the first 
to whom our Lord revealed himself. Scholars are 
generally coming to the opinion that it is a mistake 
to suppose that Mary Magdalene had ever been an 

R2797 :page 127 

unchaste woman— a mistake to identify her with the 
woman in Galilee in the house of the Pharisee, who 
washed our Lord's feet with her tears and dried them 
with her hair, and of whom the account says, "She 
was a sinner." The name Magdalene is now supposed 
to signify that this Mary was of or from Magdala, 



a town on the sea of Galilee. However, according 
to the Scriptural account, Mary Magdalene was a 
miracle of grace, for it is distinctly stated (Luke 8:2) 
that she had been obsessed of evil spirits, seven of 
them, whom the Lord cast out. Many think that she 
was a woman of wealth, and the evidences are that she 
greatly appreciated her benefactor, and esteemed it a 
privilege to follow him whithersoever he went. Not 
only had she come from Galilee to Judea, but she was 
near the cross at the time of his death, and the first 
at the tomb on the morning of the resurrection— 
"while it was yet dark." Such love and devotion 
commend themselves to every sincere heart, and are 
surely worthy of emulation on the part of those who 
receive at the Lord's hands spiritual favors, forgiveness, 
reconciliation, the spirit of a sound mind, new 
hopes and aspirations, etc. 

To harmonize the various accounts we must suppose 
that the women charged with the work of embalming 
our Lord's body lived in various parts of the 
city, and did not all arrive at the same hour. Mary 
Magdalene arrived first, and finding the tomb empty 
hastened and first found Peter and afterward John, 
both of whom at once ran to the sepulchre, Mary 
probably returning more slowly to the same place, arriving 
there after they and the other women had gone. 
It was at this second visit that the Lord revealed himself 
to her. She had been weeping and then stooped 
down in order to see through the low doorway, as 
tho to reassure herself that it was empty, and then 
saw for the first time two angels in white, who inquired 
respecting her sorrow. The angels had doubtless 
been there when she was there before, but she 
had not seen them, because not of their choosing to 
"appear:" indeed, the Scriptures assure us, saying, 
"Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to 
minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation"? 
And again, "The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 

Doubtless holy angels had in charge not only 
our Lord's body, but also the interests of his bereaved 
followers; and now, and on other occasions, 
some of these appeared— appeared, because they 
could not be seen without appearing, without a 
miracle— appeared as "young men," tho they were 
not men, but angels; not flesh, but spirit beings— assuming 
fleshly bodies for a time, that they might 
render the service necessary. In Luke 24:4 these 
same angels appearing as men are said to have been 
clothed in shining garments— so that they might not 
be understood to be men, but might at once be recognized 
as heavenly messengers. On the contrary, 
when our risen Lord as a "quickening spirit" similarly 
"appeared" in the flesh, in order to come closer to 
his followers, he did not appear in shining garments, 
but in ordinary apparel, assumed for the purpose, 



and in order that he might have the better opportunity 
for giving the instructions which his followers 
needed. 

R2798 : page 127 

The words of the angels to Mary would be calculated 
to assuage her grief, for they manifested no 
grief, and by their question implied that she had 
no ground for it. At this juncture something drew 
Mary's attention, and turning around she discovered 
another person near her, evidently in ordinary garments, 
whom she presumed to be a servant of Joseph 
of Arimathea, the owner of the garden— his gardener. 
She considered herself a trespasser to some extent, and 
assuming that our Lord's body was not wanted longer 
in the rich man's tomb she inquired where he had 
been taken, that she might take the proper steps to 
care for his reinterment. Then Jesus (for it was he 
who had "appeared" in the form of a gardener) spoke 
her name: "Mary!" At once she recognized the 
voice, and crying, "Master, Teacher!" she fell at his 
feet, grasping them as tho fearful that somehow, if 
she let go, she might never get the opportunity of 
touching his blessed person again. Our Lord's words 
to her, "Touch me not, but go, tell my brethren," 
would more properly be translated, Cling not to me, 
etc.— for I have not yet ascended to my Father; I 
will be here a while yet, before I ascend, but your 
great opportunity for clinging to me and trusting in 
me will be after I have presented to the Father, and 
he has accepted, the great atonement for sins which 
I have just accomplished at Calvary. Mary's touch 
could do our Lord no harm, for others touched him 
subsequently, as the record shows; but our Lord would 
lead Mary's mind away from a mere clinging in the 
flesh,— to the higher relationship and intimacy of 
heart and of spirit, which would now be possible, not 
only for her, but for all his followers, not only then 
but ever since. In a spiritual way the Lord's people 
may be exhorted not only to "look unto Jesus," the 
Author and Finisher of our faith, but also to "cling to 
Jesus," and by faith to place our hands in his that he 
may lead us all through our pilgrim journey, in the 
narrow way until he shall bring us to himself, when 
we, like him, shall be changed, in a moment, in a 
twinkling of an eye, and be like him, spirit beings, 
and see him as he is;— not as he was, before his resurrection, 
nor as he "appeared" during the forty days 
after it— 1 John 3:2. 

Our Lord gave Mary a message, a service to perform, 
and so it is with all who love the Lord and seek 
him and find him: they are not to merely enjoy him 
selfishly, but are given a commission in his service for 
the brethren. This seems as true today as ever. And 
by the way, this is the second instance in which our 



Lord ever addressed his disciples as "brethren," with 
all that that word implies of fellowship and of all being 
children of the one Father. (Matt. 12:48.) Now 
he emphasized this relationship by referring to the 
Father as his Father, and their Father, his God and 
their God. How close this brings our Lord to us in 
fellowship and relationship, not by pulling him down, 
but by realizing him as highly exalted, far above 
angels, principalities and powers, and every name 
that is named; it lifts us up, and by faith enables us 
to consider ourselves, as the Lord considers us, 
"brethren," prospective joint-heirs with him, who by 
and by shall be like him, our elder brother, sharing, 
through his grace and assistance, in his resurrection, 
and participating as joint-heirs in his "Kingdom"— 

R2798 : page 128 

if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

Mary departed with her glad message and was 
undoubtedly much happier in the delivery of it than 
if she had been permitted to remain clinging to the 
Lord; enjoying her knowledge somewhat selfishly. 
To find her Lord alive when she had supposed him 
dead meant to Mary a joy such as the Apostle Peter 
expressed when he said, "Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to 
his abundant mercy, hath begotten us again unto a 
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead." We may well suppose from our own experience 
in such matters, that every time Mary told 
the good tidings to others and made their hearts rejoice 
also, it brought her a fresh increase of joy. The 
Master similarly sends all who recognize him as "he 
that liveth and was dead, and is alive forevermore," 
to go forth and tell others of the glorious fact that we 
have a living Savior, whose love and interest extends 
to every interest and affair of our lives, and who not only 
is full of sympathy and compassion, but is able also to 
succor those who are tempted, who are in trial, who are 
in distress of any kind;— one who is able to bring us off 
conquerors, to give us strength to endure hardness, and 
who by and by will receive to himself all the faithful. 



R2798 : page 128 

BISHOP RYLE'S MILLENNIAL CREED. 



"FIRST. I believe that the world will never be 
completely converted to Christianity, by any 
existing agency, before the end of this dispensation. 



In spite of all that can be done by ministers, members 

and churches, the wheat and the tares will grow 

together until the harvest; and when the end comes, 

it will find the earth in much the same state that it 

was when the flood came in the days of Noah.— Matt. 13:24-30; 

Luke 17:20-36; Matt. 24:37-47. 

"Second. I believe that the wide-spread unbelief, 
indifference, formalism and wickedness which 
are to be seen throughout Christendom, are only what 
we are taught to expect in God's Word. Troublous 
times, departures from the faith, evil men waxing 
worse and worse, love waxing cold, are things distinctly 
predicted. So far from making me doubt the 
truth of Christianity, they help to confirm my faith. 
Melancholy and sorrowful as the sight is, if I did not 
see it I should think the Bible was not true.— Matt. 24:12; 
2 Tim. 3:1-6,13. 

"Third. I believe that the grand purpose of the 
present dispensation is to gather out of the world an 
elect people, and not to convert all mankind. It does 
not surprise me at all to hear that the heathen are not 
all converted when missionaries preach, and that believers 
are but a little flock in any congregation in my 
own land. It is precisely the state of things I expected 
to find. The Gospel is to be preached 'for a 
witness,' and then shall the end come. This is the 
dispensation of election, and not of universal conversion. 
-Acts 15:14-19; Matt. 24:14; 
Romans 8:20-24,28,29. 

"Fourth. I believe that the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is the great event which will wind 
up the present dispensation, and for which we ought 
daily to long and pray. Thy Kingdom come,' 'Come, 
Lord Jesus,' should be our daily prayer. We look 
backward, if we have faith, to Christ dying on the 
cross, and we ought to look forward, no less, if we 
have hope, to Christ coming again.— John 14:3; 2 Tim. 4:8; 
2 Peter 3:12; Titus 2:13; 1 Cor. 11:26. 

"Fifth. I believe that the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is to be a literal, personal coming: 
that as he went away in the clouds of heaven, before 
the eyes of his disciples, so, in like manner, will he 
return. -Acts 1:11; 1 Thess. 4:14-18. 

[As his going was known only to his faithful 
followers, so only such will have the eye of faith and 
that enlightenment which will permit them to discern 
the second presence of the Lord, while all others will 
continue about the ordinary vocations of life, ignorant 
of the fact that they are living "in the days of the 
Son of Man,"— eating, drinking, planting, building, 
and knowing not of his parousia, his presence. Then, 
too, he went away quietly, unostentatiously, as well 
as unknown to the world, and the manner of his coming 
will be similar— he shall come in like manner. 
"Now the Lord is that spirit," and tho we, the 
Church, shall see him, it will be "as he is," and not as 



he was. At first we will see him with the eye of faith 
through the prophetic word of promise only, but the 
promise is that we also in due time shall be "changed" 
—to spirit beings. Then "we shall see him as he is; 
for we shall be like him." (1 John 3:2.)-EDITOR.] 

"Sixth. I believe that, after our Lord Jesus 
Christ comes again, the earth will be renewed and the 
curse removed; the devil shall be bound, the godly 
shall be rewarded, the wicked shall be punished; and 
that before he comes there shall be neither resurrection, 
judgment or millennium; and that not till after 
he comes shall the earth be filled with the knowledge 
of the glory of the Lord. -Acts 3:20-26; Isa. 25:6-9; 
Rev. 1:5-8; 20:1-6; Isa. 65:17 to end. 

"Seventh. I believe that the Jews shall ultimately 
be regathered, as a separate nation, restored to their 
own land, and converted to the faith of Christ.— Jer. 3:10,11; 
13:10; Rom. 11:25,26; 2 Cor. 3:15,16. 

"Eighth. I believe that the literal sense of the 
Old Testament prophecies has been far too much neglected 
in the present day, and far too much neglected 
by the churches; and that, under the mistaken system 
of spiritualizing and accommodating Bible language, 
Christians have too often completely missed the meaning. 
-Luke 24:25,26. 

"I believe, finally, that it is for the safety, happiness 
and comfort of all true Christians to expect as 
little as possible from churches or governments under 

R2799 : page 128 

the present dispensation; to hold themselves ready for 
tremendous convulsions, and changes of all things 
established, and to expect their good things only from 
Christ's second advent." 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 