VOL. XIII. APRIL 1, 1892. NO. 7. 

"THE BRIDE, THE LAMB'S WIFE." 

(SPECIAL ATTENTION AND CAREFUL STUDY OF THIS SUBJECT IS 
REQUESTED, FOR REASONS EXPLAINED FURTHER ALONG. --EDITOR.) 



"I have espoused you as a chaste virgin unto one husband, 
even Christ."— 2 Cor. 11:2. 

The letter of the Apostle Paul in which these 
words occur was addressed to the Church of 
God at Corinth and to all the saints in all 
Achaia (2 Cor. 1:1), and together with the other 
epistles was designed by the Holy Spirit for the 
instruction of the whole Church, during the 
entire Gospel age. Therefore when the Apostle 
says, "I have espoused you as a chaste virgin 
unto one husband, even Christ," it is evident 
that the entire faithful Church is meant— all 
who as "wise virgins" will continue faithful to 
the espousal vows. Such will, in due time, be 
accepted of Christ as his glorious bride without 



spot or wrinkle or any such thing. 

This beautiful figure of the Church's relationship 
to Christ is made very prominent in the 
Scriptures. See the invitation to become the 
bride in Psa. 45:10,11, and the promised joy 
and gladness of those who accept it and prove 
themselves worthy of it. Then read Paul's 
counsel to the husbands and wives who are truly 
wedded in the Lord: they two shall be one 
flesh— as one person, having but one mind and 
one common interest, purpose and aim. And 
for this purpose, to this end, each is to forsake 
the former ties which united them to parents 
and brothers and sisters. Then says the Apostle, 
"This is a great mystery"— it is something 
rarely seen, even among Christian husbands 
and wives— "but I speak concerning 
Christ and the Church," the Bridegroom and 
Bride between whom the union will be perfect. 
-Eph. 5:22-33. 

Isaac and his wife, Rebecca, furnish a striking 
type of Christ and the Church as bridegroom 
and bride, to which we will refer later; 
and the Revelator points to the heavenly Jerusalem, 
the glorified Church, as the bride, the 
Lamb's wife. 

The teaching of this oft-repeated and beautiful 
symbol, by which the Lord would have us 
understand and appreciate his great love and 
tender care for us as his Church, is so plain 
that it seems strange that any should fail to 
comprehend it; yet through a misapplication 
of a type some few have reached erroneous conclusions 
on the subject. Two of the dear friends 
of the truth think they have found new light 
on this subject, though their views differ somewhat, 
and both cannot be right. 

One holds that the patriarchs and prophets 
of the past dispensation, mentioned in Heb. 11, 
will, in their resurrection, constitute the bride; 
and the other holds that the bride of Christ is 
to be composed of the living Israelites now regathering 
to Palestine, who, as we have seen, 
shall be the first to be blessed and restored to 
human perfection under the new Millennial dispensation. 
While dissimilar in some respects, 
these views are sufficiently alike to be examined 
together. 

We reply (1), It would be impossible in 
God's order to call the bride before the bridegroom. 
It pleased the Father that in the 

R1386 : page 100 

Anointed One all fulness should dwell— that in 
all things he should have the pre-eminence. 



(2) It would be an incongruous and impossible 

union for the bridegroom to be spiritual, and 

the bride to be human. It would be out of 

harmony, too, with our Lord's prayer, "Father 

I will that they also whom thou hast given 

me be with me where I am, that they may 

behold my glory;" and again, with his statements 

—"I go to prepare a place for you," and 

"I will come again and receive you unto myself, 

that where I am there ye may be also." 

How could Bridegroom and Bride have fellowship 

and union, joint-heirship and joint-inheritance, 

if one were of the spiritual and the 

other of the human nature? 

Both of the objecting friends recognize the 
force of the type to which we long ago called 
attention— that Abraham, Isaac and Rebecca 
represent Jehovah, Christ and the Bride. But 
both seem to have forgotten that a type must 
not be used to teach a doctrine, but merely to illustrate 
one that is already taught in plain terms. 

Both proceed to claim that Isaac represented 
the entire Gospel Church— head and body— 
and that Rebecca, his bride, must therefore represent 
some other class. They claim that as 
we have shown, or rather as the Apostle has 
shown, that Sarah, Isaac's mother, was a type of 
the Abrahamic Covenant (Gal. 4:24,31), and 
as Sarah died before Eliezer was sent to seek a 
bride for Isaac, therefore the Gospel Covenant 
must come to an end before the call of the Bride; 
and hence that the calling of the Bride will be 
deferred until this Gospel age is ended. The 
fact that the servant is instructed not to take a 
wife for Isaac from among the Canaanites, but 
to go to Abraham's own kindred for her, they 
interpret to signify that the bride must be of the 
natural seed of Abraham, claiming accordingly 
that she could not be selected from Jews 
and Gentiles as the Gospel Church has been 
selected, but must be Jewish exclusively. 

We have stated thus fully and clearly their 
position, which we believe to be erroneous, so 
that the answer may be the more conclusive to 
these friends and to all. 

Let us see to it, beloved, that we are of those 
who hold the Head (Col. 2:19), who acknowledge 
in every thought and doctrine the preeminence 
of our Redeemer. He is the antitype 
of Isaac— not we. He, alone and apart 
from us, was the heir of all things. We were 
strangers to him and afar off, like Rebecca, 
when Christ (Isaac) became Lord of all and 
was highly exalted and given a name above 
every name, and when in consequence he could 
say, "All power in heaven and in earth is 



given unto me." Ah, yes! "Of the people there 
was none with him." 

It is since he is thus Lord of all, and our 
Lord, that we or any have received an invitation 
from the Father to become his bride and 
joint-heir. To us the spirit of truth declares, 
as Eliezer declared to Rebecca and her family 
concerning Isaac— His Father is very rich, and 
all that he hath he has given to his Son— "He 
is Lord of all" the estate, and fully his Father's 
representative, and the Father now seeketh for 
him a bride and joint-heir. 

And as in the type certain gold ornaments 
were presented to Rebecca from the moment 
that she entertained the good tidings, so with 
us: from the moment that we first gave ear to 
the Father's invitation or "high-calling" we 
have been blessed. The ornaments, being of 
gold, symbolize divine blessings, gold always 
symbolizing divine things. The golden adornments 
were first, earrings, representing the blessed 
effect of hearing the call; and secondly, bracelets 
for the hands, representing the blessed effect 
of the divine call upon all our doings thereafter. 

And so these blessings came merely from the 
attentive hearing of the high call; and yet 
greater blessings followed when we accepted 
that call and said that we would leave our 
father's house (the human nature) and our own 
people (earthly friendships) and go to our Espoused 
One. (Psa. 45:9-11.) So in the type 
—when the decision was reached and Rebecca 
was "betrothed" or "espoused" to Isaac, whom 
having not seen she loved, the servant presented 
her with vessels of silver (symbolizing truths), 
and with further jewels or ornaments of gold 
(divine blessings and graces), and with new raiment, 
symbolizing her newness of life and relationship 
to the Father and the Son whose call 
she had accepted.— Gen. 24:22,53. 

R1386 :page 101 

And as Rebecca's mother and brother also 
received some valuable presents from the servant 
of Abraham when she received her greater 
blessing, this symbolizes the fact that not only 
are the fully consecrated ones blessed when they 
leave all to accept the "high-calling," but 
others of the sympathizing ones of the household 
of faith (the justified, but not fully sanctified) 
also receive spiritual blessings through the 
betrothed class, even before the union with the 
Bridegroom. 

It should be noted, then, that our friends are 
building their theories upon several misinterpretations. 



(1) Sarah's death before the Bride 
of Isaac was called would show that the promised 
"Seed" mentioned in the Abrahamic Covenant 
was fulfilled in the person of our Lord 
Jesus— the heir, and the only heir under that 
Covenant. (Heb. 1:2; Titus 3:5-7.) This the 
Apostle expresses clearly, saying— "He saith 
not, And to seeds,' as of many; but as of one, 
And to thy seed'— which is Christ." (Gal. 3:16.) 
That the Apostle here uses the name 
Christ to refer to our Lord Jesus personally, 
exclusive of his Church, is shown clearly by his 
further use of the word in the succeeding verses 
of this same chapter. See verses 22,24,26 and 27. 
In verses 28 and 29 he brings in the name 
Christ as applicable to all the Church, but in 
such a manner as to show that it is our coming 
into betrothal and union with him that gives us a 
share in that name and in the honors and glories 
future which it implies. "If ye be Christ's 
[if ye, like Rebecca, the type, have accepted 
the Father's offer to become joint-heirs with 
his Son, if ye have joyfully accepted the calling 
presented to you by the servant, the Spirit 
of Truth, and have forsaken all, and are fully 
betrothed to your Lord] then [not by being, 
like your Lord, natural heirs of those covenant 
blessings, but by your union with Christ] ye are 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the 
promise" [children of God, whom Abraham 
typified; and if children, then heirs; heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with, by and through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord]. 

In Eph. 5:28-30, the Apostle shows that for 
Christ to love his bride is to love himself, for 
in accepting the Church as his Bride the Lord 

R1387 :page 101 

accepts her as his own body, even as in the type 
of this (Adam and Eve and the human union), 
the wife is accepted as the very flesh of her 
husband and her body as an addition to his 
members— and the husband as her head. Thus, 
now, the consecrated, espoused ones while in 
the flesh represent Christ in the flesh; and in 
their daily sacrifices they are filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ 
(Col. 1:24); and by and by, when glorified, 
when made spirit-beings like their glorious 
Lord, they will be his glorified spouse and joint-heir, 
and still loved as himself— as members 
of his body. 

Again, the view that the Bride must be of the 
natural seed of Abraham is a mistake. Rebecca 
was not of the seed of Abraham. If it had 



been the design to represent the Bride of Christ 
as being taken from among the Jews, the natural 
seed of Abraham, no doubt a daughter of 
Hagar, who represented the Jewish or Law Covenant, 
would have been chosen. On the contrary, 
when studying or applying a known type 
we should be sure not to mix type and antitype. 
Abraham as a part of the type represented God, 
and hence Abraham's own people represented 
God's people, as contrasted with the Canaanites, 
who represented the wilfully wicked. This 
feature of the type points out to us the fact 
that while God does call sinners to repentance, 
he does not call sinners to become joint-heirs 
with Christ, his Son and heir. To this close 
and glorious relationship he invites only those 
whom he recognizes as friends of righteousness 
and truth. In a word, this type confirms the 
teachings of the Apostles, that it is after we 
have been "justified by faith, and have peace 
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
we have access into this grace [this call to joint-heirship 
with the Only Begotten Son and heir] 
wherein we stand— rejoicing in hope of [sharing] 
the glory of God." (Rom. 5:1,2.) Then 
we shall be fully united to him, and see him as 
he is, receive his name, which is above every 
name, and enter into (his mother Sarah's tent) 
the privileges and opportunities for blessing the 
world promised in the Abrahamic Covenant, 
represented by Sarah.— Gal. 4:24. 
So, then, we have shown Scripturally (1) that 

R1387 :page 102 

Isaac primarily represented our Lord, the "heir 

of all things," personally, and no others; (2) 

that the joint-heirs were represented in Rebecca, 

his bride, who was his only joint-heir; (3) that 

Rebecca typified a class selected from among 

justified believers— believers in God (Abraham) 

and in Christ (Isaac)— which is true only of the 

household of faith and surely not true of the 

Jews; (4) that the Abrahamic Covenant, represented 

by Sarah, bore only one seed, which is 

Christ Jesus, and that it died or ceased as a mother 

when he had finished his course and become 

heir of all things; (5) that if we would become 

joint-heirs of the opportunity and honor (of being 

God's seed through whom the blessing of 

the world will come) contained in that Abrahamic 

Covenant, typified by Sarah, there is no 

other way than by becoming Christ's— by giving 

ourselves to him according to the Father's 

invitation by the spirit of the truth— losing our 

own name and taking his, and forgetting our 



father's house (earthly hopes and ambitions) 
and our own people and becoming wholly his 
—his Bride, whom he loves and will cherish as 
"his own body." 

Next, let us look at the objection which 
seems to have led into the misinterpretations 
which we have here sought to correct. It is 
claimed that because the Church is sometimes 
called the body of Christ, of which Jesus is the 
head, it could not also be the Bride. Therefore, 
say the objectors, the Bride must be one 
class and the Body another class. 

This at first has a show of logic, but we must 
not trust our imperfect minds to reason straight, 
if we wander away from the Word and forget 
that "thus it is written." We must compare 
spiritual things with spiritual things, as the 
Apostle directs, and let the Word of God be 
its own interpreter. Just as unreasonably might 
we say that if Christ is the "Good Shepherd" 
and we members of his Body, we could not also 
be "his sheep," or members of the "little 
flock" to whom it is the Father's good pleasure 
to give the Kingdom, and that the little 
flock could not be the Bride, because no shepherd 
ever marries his flock. Just as unreasonably 
we might say, too, that when Christ is 
termed the Captain of our salvation, and we 
"good soldiers," the soldiers must be another 
class; because it is said that we are the body of 
Christ and members in particular. Just as unreasonably 
might we argue that those whom 
Christ is not ashamed to call his "brethren" 
must be a different class from those called 
the Bride and the Body of Christ, because 
naturally a man does not marry his brethren, 
nor are they his own body. Just as unreasonably 
might we proceed to argue that a 
captain never marries his soldiers, and that 
hence the Bride, the Body, the Good Soldiers, 
the Brethren and the little flock of Sheep must 
be different classes. The same reasoning would 
also apply to the relationship of Christ as our 
great High Priest and ourselves as the Royal 
Priesthood under him; to Christ the Pearl Merchant 
and the Church the pearl; to Christ the 
Sower of the "good seed," and "wheat" the 
children of the Kingdom; to Christ the Chief 
Corner Stone and the overcoming Church the 
living stones builded up into him unto a holy 
temple of God; to Christ the vine and his 
people the branches. 

A little reflection upon these facts will surely 
convince all that our friends were mistaken in 
concluding that because the Church in some 
places in Scripture is called "the body" she 



could not also with equal propriety be called 
"the bride" of Christ. Perhaps, indeed, their 
error may result (under the Lord's overruling 
providence) in bringing clearer views on the 
subject, not to themselves alone, but also to 
others of the Church. 

The above figures, while very different, serve, 
each better than any other, to illustrate some 
peculiar feature either of the character of the 
Lord or of the Church, or of the relationship 
between them. For instance, as sheep the 
Church must be meek, willing to be led— not 
wayward, headstrong and perverse like goats; 
they must, however, not only be meek and docile 
and peace-loving like sheep, but like soldiers 
they must "fight a good fight" and overcome 
the world and its influence, conquering 
self and overcoming obstacles put in the way 
of their service for the Lord by the world and 
the devil. Sheep are not overcomers and overcomers 
are not sheepish; two opposite truths 

R1387 :page 103 

were to be taught and two opposite illustrations 
were necessary: as "sheep" we follow our 
Shepherd and gladly obey his word, and as 
"soldiers" of the cross we fight against all opposition 
that would hinder our following and 
obeying our Captain; but we fight the good 
fight— for truth and right and love, and not 
selfishly and with carnal weapons. 

The figure of a body beautifully represents 
the intimate relationship existing between our 
Lord Jesus and his Church. He is the Head- 
he plans, directs, supervises and cares for the 
various members of his body, the Church, and 
all real members are dependent upon each other 
and upon the Head and are bound together by 
the ties of spiritual love and common interest. 
And although the Head has been actually absent 
for over eighteen hundred years, he has yet been 
present in his care and by his spirit, and representatively 
through certain members of the body 
upon whom he, in his absence, confers certain 
gifts representing his qualities and office as the 
head of the Church— the eye, the mouth, the 
ear members. (1 Cor. 12:15,21.) We should 
have missed much had the illustration of the 
Lord as the Head and the Church as his body 
been omitted. We are glad that no good thing 
or illustration helpful to those who would walk 
uprightly has been omitted. 

And when once clearly seen and fully appreciated, 
we feel sure that none will regret the 
use by the Spirit of any figures used to show 



the Church and her relationship to her Lord- 
especially that representing her as the chaste 
virgin espoused to Christ and soon to be made 
one with him in nature and likeness and glory 
and work. As the figure of head and body represented 
the care of the Lord in and over the 
Church during his actual absence in "a far 
country," the figure of the betrothed or espoused 
virgin, longing for the coming of the Bridegroom 
and the consummation of her hopes and 
his promises, represents the actual state of the 
case far better. Like Rebecca we were already 
virgins, pure ones, whose sins had been pardoned 
(by the grace of God through the atoning 
sacrifice of Christ), and therefore of the 
household of faith, before we were called of the 
Spirit to go to him to become his Bride and 
joint-heir. Like her we each (and all of the 
faithful little flock from the first) have been betrothed 
to our Lord and are following on to 
know the Lord and to see him as he is and to 
share his glory— under the lead of the Spirit. 
Already we have exceeding great and precious 
promises, gifts and graces of the spirit, but we 
are not satisfied: we prize them and treasure 
them, but we think of them only as foretastes 
of the greater blessings to come when we shall 
enter fully into the joys of our Lord. We shall 
be satisfied only when we shall see him as he is 
—when we shall awake in his likeness.— 1 John 3:2; 
Psa. 17:15. 

All along the journey, like Rebecca, the 
Church has been on the look-out for him whom, 
not having seen, she loved, and in whom, though 
she saw him not, yet she rejoiced with joy unspeakable 
and full of glory at the thought of 
the coming union. (1 Pet. 1:8.) And now, 
oh, blessed vision! our eyes of faith, like Rebecca's, 
are keen and we see one in the field 
(the world) approaching us. Like Rebecca, 
we ask our guide (the Spirit of truth) who it is 
—half surmising from the first that it is our 
Beloved, as we see his stately steppings among 
the nations and note the promised signs of his 
presence. The Spirit of the Lord through his 
Word is even now assuring us that what we see 
is "the sign [or manifestation] of the Son of 

R1388 :page 103 

Man," and that the hour of our rapture is near 
at hand. Soon we shall pass beyond the vail 
of death and be with him (See Gen. 24:64,65) 
and be accepted with him into the work and 
office of fulfilling the Covenant represented in 
Sarah. This in the type is shown by the entrance 



of Rebecca with Isaac into Sarah's tent. 

When it is remembered that the Apostle refers 
to mother Eve as a likeness of the Church and 
father Adam as a figure of our Lord Jesus; and 
when we remember that in order to the development 
of Eve a deep sleep fell upon Adam 
and she was formed from his wounded side, we 
see a beautiful harmony between this type and 
the facts. In order that we should have a being 
at all and be capable of receiving a call to 
be the Bride of Christ, it was necessary that 
our Lord should die for us— the deep sleep 
of death came upon him, his side was riven 

R1388 : page 104 

as the price of our life, our existence— and 

being thus justified by his death we were acceptable 

to him as his Bride. When all the 

chaste, wise virgins (i.e., the "overcomers," 

the "good soldiers," the faithful, fruit-bearing 

members or "branches" of the "Vine," the obedient 

"sheep," the sacrificing royal "priests") 

have been selected and prepared and made ready 

for union with the Bridegroom, the marriage or 

glorification will be accomplished; and then the 

regeneration of the world will follow. 

THE REGENERATION OF THE WORLD. 



But here again some are inclined to err: 
comparing spiritual things with natural, they 
fall into the error of expecting that the world 
will be re-generated somewhat after the manner 
of the first generation or natural birth; and consequently 
they begin to wonder and speculate as 
to how the Bride of Christ will conceive and 
bring forth children during the Millennial age, 
and point to Adam and Eve and their offspring 
as an illustration of Christ and the Church and 
the re-generation of the world. 

All this is a mistake, and comes from carrying 
a figure further than God intended, and 
further than the plain statements of his Word 
authorize. The expression regeneration does 
signify to give life again, but it in no way implies 
that it will be given in the same way as 
now. Adam was the first generator of his race: 
Christ is prepared to be the second father, the 
re-generator to such of the race as will accept 
the life he offers in his way and upon his conditions. 
The time for this offer of regeneration 
to the world will be in the Millennial age, 
as our Lord clearly shows. (Matt. 19:28.) He 



will then cause all to hear the good tidings that 

as they lost human perfection (mental, moral 

and physical) in Adam they may have their inherited 

condemnation blotted out, and may 

regain those blessings and favors lost, at the 

hands of Christ their Redeemer, by proving their 

desire to be at-one with God through him. 

As during the Gospel age the Church, the 
Bride, is regenerated and begotten to a new 
nature by faith in and obedience to certain exceeding 
great and precious promises limited to 
this age, so in the next age other precious promises 
of earthly restitution will be the begetting 
influence by obedience to which, under God's 
arrangement, they shall be re-generated and 
restored to the original likeness and harmony 
with God. 

The figure of the Bridegroom and the Bride is 
at an end when they twain are made one. To 
carry this figure further and talk about children 
of the Bride is unwarranted by the Scriptures, 
and is unjustifiable speculation. We would 
have just as much right to speculate further 
about the Lord's "sheep," and to say that sheep 
are cared for in order to get their wool and finally 
for the shepherd to sell off or to kill and 
eat, and that, therefore, after a while all the 
Church will be so dealt with by our Good 
Shepherd. 

If the type of Adam and Eve and their union, 
representing the union to be accomplished 
between Christ and his Church, did not end at 
that union, but continued and included the 
bearing of children, then the sin of Adam and 
Eve and their expulsion from Eden must also 
be parts of the type, which must be fulfilled on 
a still more awful scale than the type. But, we 
repeat, the type ended when Adam accepted of 
Eve as his wife— when they became one; for 
this final union or oneness and joint-heirship, 
between Christ and his faithful followers, is 
all that was intended to be typified. 

Just so, too, with the type of Isaac and Rebecca: 
it ends where Isaac receives his espoused 
into his mother's tent, and does not extend to 
the long-time barrenness of Rebecca; nor to the 
two kinds of twin sons (who figure in an entirely 
different type, as the Apostle shows); nor 
to the blind old age of Isaac, and his deception 
by Rebecca and Jacob. 

The majority of the figures used apply to 
and illustrate matters of the present age, and 
terminate with this age; being finished, they 
are either dropped or merged into other figures 
which better represent the changed condition 
of affairs beyond the present age. When the 



new conditions have been ushered in, there 
will no longer be use for the symbols which 
now serve so well to illustrate the true Church, 
such as "good fish," "wise virgins," "good 
soldiers," "vine-branches," "sheep," "wheat," 

R1388 : page 105 

etc. In connection with the parable of the 

harvesting of the "wheat" class the Lord clearly 

shows this change of illustration; for, instead 

of speaking further of glorified wheat, 

he changes and uses the sun as a more appropriate 

figure, saying: "Then shall the righteous 

shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of 

their father." Just so with the figure of "the 

Bride, the Lamb's wife." It is used repeatedly 

in reference to the Church during the 

period of her espousal, but ceases and is merged 

into another symbol or figure with the end of 

this age. 

Those who have but an imperfect knowledge 
of the old Jewish usage in marriage, which is 
the basis of the illustration, might suppose that 
the Church could not be appropriately or properly 
likened to the Bride or wife until the 
marriage. This would be true according to 
present custom; but the Jewish custom fits the 
facts much better, and was doubtless so arranged 
of God as a type. This old custom was 
for the father or some friend of the man to 
make a contract, arrange terms, etc., for him 
with the one to be invited to become his wife 
and joint-heir. Such a one was called "the 
friend of the Bridegroom." With them this 
contract constituted the real marriage, but the 
contracting parties lived apart usually for a 
year, after which came the wedding feast celebrating 
their union, and thereafter they lived 
together. John the Baptist at our Lord's first 
advent occupied the position of "friend of the 
Bridegroom" toward the Jewish nation— seeking 
to have them accept of Christ the Bridegroom 
and become his Bride. (John 3:29.) 
The nation as a whole rejected the offer, but a 
small remnant of them (the apostles, etc.) accepted, 
and also became in turn the friends of the 
Bridegroom, the mouthpieces of the Spirit to 
seek among God's people— believing Gentiles 
included— for the chaste, wise virgins and to espouse 
such to Christ— telling them of "the 
riches of grace in Christ Jesus." While the 
Church as a whole is sometimes spoken of as 
one virgin, because the marriage to be completed 
soon will be with one Lord, yet each 
faithful individual of the Church is recognized 



as a wise virgin, and really, each is individually 
and separately espoused to the Lord. This 
is clearly stated by the Apostle in Rom. 7:4. 
"Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become 
dead to the Law by the body [sacrifice] of 
Christ; that ye should be married to another, 
even to him who is raised from the dead." 

So then the work of espousing "wise virgins" 
to Christ as to a husband has been in 
progress throughout the entire Gospel age; and 
each espoused one is in turn permitted to serve 
in another capacity— as a "friend of the Bridegroom" 
to tell others of the great privilege 
and, co-operating with the Spirit of the truth, to 
say, "Come," to whomsoever will. (See Rev. 22:17,20.) 
And the living representatives of 
this class at any time have constituted, properly 
speaking, the Bride or Church, although the 
Church or Bride will not be actually complete 
without all the members. As in Jewish custom 
the espoused virgin was called a Bride from the 
time of her consent or contract with the Bridegroom, 
so the espoused virgin Church is called 
Christ's Bride— before the consummation of 
their union. Accordingly, the Scriptures speak 
of the marriage feast coming after the "wife 
hath made herself ready."— Rev. 19:7. 

In Rev. 18:23, when speaking of Babylon's 
fall, it is declared that the voice of the Bridegroom 
and the voice of the Bride shall no more 
be heard in her: clearly showing that previously 
they had spoken in and through Babylon, 
the confused class, and that the names Bridegroom 
and Bride were applicable before Babylon's 
fall and before the marriage feast. 

In Rev. 21:9 we are invited to "come hither" 
to the yet future standpoint and get a view 
of the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and see how 
she will then appear. "And he showed me the 
holy city Jerusalem descending out of heaven 
from God, having the glory of God." This, it 
will be noted, is given to mark the change of 
the symbol from a Bride to a City; just as elsewhere 
the figure was shown to change from 
"wheat" to "the Sun." A city is a symbol 
of a government, and the calling of it the New 
Jerusalem city would signify— The new, antitypical 
government of peace. There has been 
no occasion for the use of such a symbol during 
the Gospel age, because the Church has not 

R1388 :page 106 

been in ruling power; and when glorified with 
her Lord the figure of a virgin-bride waiting 
for full union with the Bridegroom will no 



longer be appropriate as now; hence the change 
from the one symbol to the other. 

"THY MAKER IS THY HUSBAND." 



The Old Testament makes several references 
like the above to some union or Covenant between 
Jehovah and Israel. See Isa. 54:1-6; 

R1389 : page 106 

Ezek. 16:32; Jer. 3:14; Hosea 2:2-7,14-20. 
The contracting parties are Jehovah and Israel, 
but the reference to a union is in a less particular 
sense than the New Testament references 
to Christ and the Bride, the Lamb's wife. Indeed, 
the word husband as above simply means 
caretaker. In another place Judah is represented 
as being the unfaithful husband. (Mai. 2:11-15.) 
In Isa. 62:3-5, in representing the 
future blessing of the land of Israel, the figure 
is changed, and it is said that her sons shall 
marry her, and that she shall be as a lamp and 
as a crown in the Lord's hand, and that he will 
rejoice over the restored land like as a Bridegroom 
rejoices over his bride. 

Of all the references Isaiah 54 is the most explicit; 
and upon it God has given us light 
through the Apostle Paul. (Read Gal. 4:22-31 
in the Emphatic Diaglott and in Rotherham's 
translation.) 

Here we are shown clearly that the barren 
woman who is to be blessed and to bring forth 
children and to sing, and whose Maker is her 
husband, refers neither to the people of fleshly 
Israel nor to the people of spiritual Israel. 
The Apostle declares the whole thing "an allegory," 
a figure, a type; and he explains the 
figure. Abraham was a type of God and Abraham's 
wives were types of God's Covenants. 
The covenant first declared was the Gospel 
Covenant, by which God promised to bless the 
world through the promised Seed, which is 
Christ. This covenant was typified by Sarah. 
But this promise has been barren for a long 
time— all the families of the earth have not 
been blessed, although nearly four thousand 
years have elapsed since God recognized that 
covenant and swore by himself to bring forth 
such results. Meantime (430 years after recognizing 
this covenant— Gal. 3:17) God made 
another covenant— not so great, however, nor 
by any means so good a covenant as the former 
—the Law Covenant. This covenant was typified 



in Hagar, Sarah's servant. 

For a time it appeared that the children of 
the Law Dispensation (fleshly Israel) were the 
full inheritors of the first promise or covenant, 
as Hagar bore Ishmael for Sarah and upon her 
knees as her representative. In the type, Ishmael 
passed for a time as Abraham's son and 
heir, just as Israel after the flesh for centuries 
appeared to be the promised children of God 
in whom all nations should be blessed. But 
not so was God's plan, according to which the 
offspring of Hagar the servant represented a 
servant class, while the offspring of Sarah represented 
a class of sons and heirs. 

The Hagar Covenant, the Law Covenant, 
did bring forth some noble servants of the 
Lord— "Moses verily was faithful as a servant 
over all his house" [of servants], but few in 
all— Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the holy 
prophets down to John. (Heb. 3:1-6.) There 
the Sarah Covenant began to bear: Christ our 
Lord was begotten and born of the Spirit and 
became Son and Lord and heir of all— Christ 
as a Son over his own house [also sons], whose 
house are we if we hold fast to our hope, firm 
unto the end of our trial. 

As Sarah had but one son, so the covenant 
which she represented has but one "Seed, which 
is Christ," which, however, under God's gracious 
provision, is made to include all such as 
are accepted through Christ to be his "brethren." 
But the promise includes not only the 
development and blessing of the Seed, but also 
the blessing of all the families of the earth 
through that Seed, and hence, as the Apostle 
shows, it was the whole gospel in few words. ~ 
Gal. 3:8. 

The Hagar or Law Covenant was again fitly 
represented by the rocky, barren Mt. Sinai, 
where the Law was given and where the Servant 
House was organized as a nation. It was also 
represented by the capital city of that nation, 
Jerusalem— which was continually besieged and 
in captivity. So says the Apostle: the Sarah 
Covenant is represented in "the exalted Jerusalem" 

R1389 : page 107 

—the Kingdom soon to come into power 
to bless the world— whose offspring and heirs 
through Christ we already are. This is the 
city (i.e., government) of which Christ shall be 
the head, the city of the Great King of which 
Jerusalem the literal was but an imperfect type. 

Abraham and others of the ancient worthies 
believed God, that he would establish 



righteousness in the earth, and that under his 
righteous government they would fully realize 
all that God had promised them. It is under 
this perfect city or government from God, 
through Christ, that they shall find a country 
(literally, a home) which could never have come 
under the imperfect city (government) of bondage 
which was typified by Hagar. (See Heb. 11:16.) 
Nevertheless, these all have been waiting 
for the true seed and heir (Christ) to come, 
and until his Church, his Bride, shall be selected 
and united with him; because it is by 
and through us, "the Seed," that the Kingdom 
shall come and all their good hopes be fulfilled. 
-Heb. 11:39,40. 

But much of the Sarah Covenant is still future. 
Christ has become heir of all things, but 
he has not yet used his great power and reigned; 
he has not yet entered fully into the glory of 
his high office. He has finished the sacrificial 
features of his work and all things are ready for 
the consequent work of blessing the world; but 
he waits, according to the Father's plan, until 
his "brethren," his "body," his Bride, shall be 
selected and have herself ready. And we, 
his espoused— what of us? We are coming to 
him and to the Kingdom which he and the 
Father have promised; we are running the race 
for the great prize of our high calling to joint-heirship 
in his divine nature and glory. We 
are not, filled with fearful apprehensions, approaching 
Mt. Sinai with its thunders and with 
its Law which none could keep, but we are approaching 
a very different condition of things, 
which should and does fill our hearts with rejoicing. 
We are approaching Mount Zion [the 
Kingdom of Zion], the city [government] of 
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to 
[association with] an innumerable company of 
angels— a full assembly— and to the gathering 
together of the Church of first-born ones, having 
been enrolled in the heavens, and to a Judge 
who is God of all, and to the spirits of the 
righteous made perfect, and to the Mediator of 
the New Covenant— Jesus— and to the blood 
of sprinkling which speaketh better things than 
that of Abel [which speaks our pardon and 
peace instead of crying for just vengeance]. 
This, beloved, is what for eighteen hundred 
years and more we have been approaching, and 
which now, thank God, we are very near. But 
the world is approaching another manifestation 
of divine power, more terrible than that at 
Sinai, and of which that was but the illustration 
—a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation— no, nor ever shall be again 



—a trouble in which both the symbolic earth 
(society) and the symbolic heavens (ecclesiasticism) 
shall be shaken and utterly removed, to 
make room for our Kingdom which shall never 
be shaken, because founded by love and mercy 
upon principles of justice. 



R1389 :page 107 

TRAVELS IN THE HOLY LAND. 

AUGUST 1891. -EDITORIAL NOTES.--NO. II. 



The climate of Jerusalem surprises us. It 
is pleasantly cool at night, and, although hot 
at midday, it is decidedly cooler than we had 
expected to find it. The mountain air is very 
pure and invigorating. Jerusalem is a mountain 
city— in the tops of the mountains. The 
four mountain-tops or hills within the present 
walls evidently represented four small cities 
at one time, each with its own wall— Mt. 
Moriah, Mt. Zion, Mt. Acra, Mt. Bezetha, all 
surrounded by a general wall. The city at one 
time may have been nearly a half larger than 
at present, including more of Bezetha on the 
northwest and more of Zion on the southwest. 
The difficulty in determining arises from the 
fact that the city has been destroyed and rebuilt 
so many times. Excavations in various 
directions continually reveal old fragments of 

R1389 : page 108 

walls or cisterns or other ruins, sometimes fifty 
or even seventy feet below the present surface. 
The Tyropean valley is now almost level full 
of debris upon which houses have been built 
and inhabited these many years. 

At first the city of Jerusalem is disappointing. 
It is built after the manner of Arabian 
cities generally. The streets are mere alleyways, 
and are not depended on for ventilation, 
except for the small shops or bazars. 
The dwellings merely connect with the street 
by a door or an occasional window. The inhabitants 
seem to rely for light and ventilation 
upon inner courts from which access is had to 
the various apartments. The present buildings, 
aside from those of the various religious societies 
and government and hotel buildings, are 
generally very inferior; yet one is sometimes 



surprised at the contrast between the outside 

and the inside of some of them. Nor need 

we be surprised if, as the people become degraded, 

their ideas of architecture also depreciated. 

Certainly the very ancient ruins from 

time to time uncovered exhibit more of art 

and dignity than do the modern stone structures. 

The present population is said to be fifty 
thousand. To suppose that it ever contained 
a million people, as Josephus intimates, one 
would be obliged to conclude [1] that the 
city was larger than at present; [2] that then 
as now the people here lived more closely than 
in American or European cities (except in the 
quarters of the very poor); [3] that the siege 
was at the time of a feast which drew many 
people to Jerusalem from all parts of Palestine 
and from outside countries; [4] that the people 
from suburban villages crowded into the 

R1390 : page 108 

city for protection from the Romans; and [5] 
that Solomon's quarries and stables would, in 
such an emergency, shelter fifty thousand people. 

One is impressed from the first with the fact 
that Religion is the chief business of Jerusalem. 
Our guide informs us that there are over 
seventy convents. These, representing various 
religious factions, all seem to be imbued 
with the one error— viz.: that their duty in life 
is to pray much and often and to do nothing. 
Each sect thanks God that it is not as the 
others and especially not like the poor people 
who do a little honest work, and, according to 
divine arrangement, earn their bread by sweat 
of face. Few of them esteem very highly the 
great apostle who wrote against those "forbidding 
to marry" and those "who labor not at 
all." These very religious people all claim to 
live by faith; but the opinion of "the common 
people" is that they enjoy many of the 
substantials and even of the luxuries of the 
present life. Of course all claim that they 
trust to God for food and clothing; but from 
their craftiness many believe that their faith 
rests largely upon the credulity of their fellowmen, 
whose large and warmer hearts are moved 
by misplaced sympathy to assist them. These, 
without exception, we believe, claim to practice 
celibacy. They are supported by friends 
and religious orders in Europe and America, 
and by the liberal donations of visitors, who 
regard them as martyrs. They include Catholics 
of all shades, Greek, Roman, Armenian 
and Syrian, "the Americans," "the Germans" 



(or Society of the Temple) and Mohammedans. 
The Armenian convent on Zion 
Street is the largest. It can accommodate with 
lodgings about eight thousand pilgrims. The 
pilgrims, especially of the Greek and Armenian 
churches, come in great numbers at the 
Passover anniversary of our Lord's death. 

We enter the city at the Jaffa gate, the nearest 
to our hotel, on the way passing large numbers 
of new buildings erected by Jewish societies 
and others, and much more modern looking 
than those within the walls. The new 
outside portion is known as new Jerusalem. 
The Jaffa gate is the busiest of the city's gates: 
it is thronged with people and camels and 
donkeys and trades-folk carrying and crying 
their wares, especially eatables, and with cripples 
and blind seeking alms. Our dragoman 
leads the way to clear a path for us, and must 
repeatedly shout "O-ah!" (i.e., "Look out!" 
or "Take care!") to camel and donkey drivers, 
to prevent our being run over or jammed between 
a donkey's and a camel's burden and the 
wall; for we are not, like the natives, accustomed 
to looking out for ourselves and dodging. 

Here, near the gate we have entered, is the 
Tower of David or the stronghold of Zion. 

R1390 :page 109 

(2 Sam. 5:7.) Opposite is a large new building 
erected in 1886. It is occupied by stores 
below and a hotel above, and was the first modern 
building erected in Jerusalem for other 
than religious purposes. In excavating for its 
foundations the ruins and foundation of the 
Tower of Hananeel were discovered, and it is 
built partly upon the old wall of the Tower. 
Now read the Lord's promises— Jer. 31:27,38-40: 
Zech. 14:9-12. 

Passing along Zion Street we come to a 
building with a black dome said to be built 
over the cave where David, Solomon and many 
others of Israel's kings were buried. (1 Kings 2:10.) 
The tomb is in the possession of the 
Mohammedans, who permit no one to enter 
it. A large room above it, thirty by fifty feet, 
is accessible, however, and we enter it. This 
"upper room" is reputed to be the one where 
our Lord ate the Last Supper with his disciples, 
and where they tarried after his ascension and 
were anointed with the Holy Spirit at Pentecost. 
It is supposed that it was here that 
Peter preached the discourse in which he remarked 
that David's sepulchre was still with 
them. (Acts 2:29.) In memory of the Lord's 



washing of the disciples' feet in this "upper 
room," Roman Catholic monks now wash the 
feet of some pilgrims, yearly, on the Anniversary. 

Our guide says that a splendid view of the 
city can be had from the housetop of "the 
Americans." They welcome us to enter, and 
we thankfully avail ourselves of their kindness. 
They invite us to sit down, and our conversation 
naturally drifts into religious channels, 
the Lord's promises to the land and the people. 
They give us a poor account of the missionaries, 
and declare that they do harm rather than 
good to the natives, all of whom, they aver 
(except those in their employ), despise them. 
As to the nature of their sins, we can learn no 
particulars, except that they are haughty and 
lordly in their bearing toward the poor natives. 
The Bishop of the Church of England (imitating 
the Patriarchs of the Greek and Roman 
Catholic churches), when passing through the 
streets, is preceded by two servants, one of 
whom carries a whip to clear the way while the 
other shouts to make way for the superior. 
Among independent-minded people, such as 
the Arabs, we can readily see that such a course 
would win but few hearts, even though long 
accustomed to such treatment from Turkish 
government officials. The Americans declare 
that they are there to live before the people 
true Christian lives, and believe they are doing 
more for the cause of Christ than the missionaries. 
This seems good, and we are greatly 
interested in them and inquire concerning the 
nature of their work. To our surprise, they 
have "no work," no mission among the poor, 
ignorant people who so much need instruction 
and help. Their idea seems to be that living 
good lives consists in living as "a unity"— as 
one family, trusting in the Lord to supply their 
needs. They claim that thus they follow Christ's 
footsteps, who had not where to lay his head, 
and that the early Church had formed a unity. 
(Acts 4:32-37.) We answer that the Lord 
went about doing good and had to be about 
the Father's business; point out that the principle 
of community, tried in the early Church, 
had not been taught by Christ; that it had 
failed; and that the Apostles nowhere taught 
that such communities were to be formed. In 
proof we cite Paul's advice that men labor 
with their own hands, that they may have to 
give to those in need (Eph. 4:28), and that 
for charities each should lay by him, on the 
first day of the week, according as the Lord 
had prospered him. (1 Cor. 16:2.) We urge 
that these instructions are opposed to "community. 1 



They do not like Paul so well, so 

we refer to our Lord's dying words to John, in 

obedience to which John took Mary to "his 

own house" (John 19:27), proving that our 

Lord had neither taught nor practised communism, 

although that will be more nearly the practice 

of the future. But when they find the 

sword of the spirit too sharp for their theory, 

they say they fear that discussion is not profitable. 

We realize the shrewdness and worldly-wisdom 

of their leader in this and other matters, 

and, remembering that the Lord had said, 

He that hath an ear, let him hear, we conclude 

that it is his will that we say no more to these 

who, at present, have no ear for the truth. 

(To be Continued.) 



page 110 

STUDIES IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

--INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1390 :page 110 

GOD'S WORKS AND WORD. 



LESSON III., APRIL 17, PSALM 19:1-14. 

Golden Text— "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting 
the soul."— Verse 7. 

It is good to meditate upon, to ponder, the 
Word of the Lord; for only in so doing can we 
receive the nourishment it is designed to give. 
A hasty reading of the Scriptures and a quick 
return of the mind to other thoughts and pursuits 
makes a spiritual dyspeptic, incapable of 
assimilating the spirit of the truth and lacking 
the strength and power of mature and developed 
Christian character. The Psalmist beautifully 
represents the proper attitude of all 
those who truly love the Lord, and who therefore 



delight in his Word and plan: "His delight 

is in the law of the Lord, and in his law 

doth he meditate day and night;" "I will 

meditate of all thy work, and talk of thy doings;" 

"I will meditate in thy precepts and 

have respect unto thy ways. I will delight myself 

in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word;" 

"Thy testimonies are my delight and my 

counsellors;" "I meditate on all thy works; I 

muse on the work of thy hands;" "O how 

love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day; 

...therefore I hate every false way. ...Thy 

testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever;" 

"My meditation of them shall be sweet: I will 

be glad in the Lord."-Psa. 1:2; 77:12; 1 19:15,16,24; 

143:5; 119:97,104,111; 104:34. 

Here, as well as in the lesson under consideration, 
the two great books of nature and of 
revelation are pointed out as special themes for 
the meditation of those who love the Lord and 
who desire to know more of him. 

Verses 1-6 refer to the silent yet eloquent 
testimony of nature to the power and skill and 
wisdom and goodness and glory of its divine 
Author. Its testimony may be read by the 
thoughtful of every land and of every language, 
by day and by night, in all the earth. "The 
heavens declare the glory of God, and the 
firmament showeth his handiwork." Job, considering 
the testimony of nature to the glory 
of God, says, "He is wise in heart and mighty 
in strength. ..which maketh Arcturus, Orion, 
and the Pleiades, and the chambers of the 
south; which doeth great things past finding 
out; yea, and wonders without number." 
(Job 9:4,9,10.) And the Lord, desiring to 
reassure Job of his superior power and grace, 
inquires of him, "Canst thou bind the sweet 
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of 

R1391 :page 110 

Orion? Canst thou bring forth the constellations 

of the Zodiac, each in its season? or 

canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Knowest 

thou the ordinances of heaven? or dost 

thou appoint its rule on earth?"— Job 38:31-33. 

Thus, by their numberless multitude, their 
orderly grouping in various constellations, their 
continual yet never conflicting movements, 
their perfect harmony, their magnitude and 
their mutual benign influence, do the shining 
hosts of heaven declare the glory of God, by 
day and by night. He who meditates upon 
these things will scarcely be "the fool" who 
saith "in his heart, There is no God;" for all 



nature testifies to the Creator's glory and power. 

Verses 7-1 1 refer us to the yet superior glory 
of God's special written revelation of himself, 
given through his inspired human agents, the 
prophets and the apostles. This testimony not 
only declares the existence and power and wisdom 
of God, with a silent intimation of his 
goodness and grace, but with overwhelming 
force it bears to the thoughtful mind the convincing 
testimony of all his glorious attributes 
and of all his love and grace toward us in Christ. 

Hear the Psalmist: "The law of the Lord 
is perfect, converting the soul." Other influences 
may lead to temporary and partial 
changes of course and action, but nothing else 
equals God's revealed Truth in producing a 
change— change of being, character, soul. It 
is because other converting agencies and powers 
are so often used (instead of this one which 
God has provided) that there are so many 
merely glossed-over, nominal Christians, as 
compared with the few whose entire beings 
are turned and fully consecrated to the Lord. 
People may be converted from savagery to civilization 
by a general knowledge; or from intemperance 
to sobriety by a study of the advantages 
of the latter over the former; or from 
dishonesty to honesty by learning that "Honesty 
is the best policy." But none of these are 
soul conversions. Only God's truth can produce 
soul conversion, as also our Lord indicates in 
his prayer, "Sanctify them through thy truth— 
thy word is truth." 

"The testimony of the Lord is sure [not 
doubtful, but clear and positive], making wise 

R1391 :page 111 

[not the heady and wilful who have plans and 
theories of their own and who do not submit 
themselves to the will and plan of God, but] 
the simple" [the single hearted who have no will 
or plan of their own which they wish the Lord 
to adopt, but who seek the Lord's will only]. 

"The statutes [piqqudim— appointments: the 
appointed plans] of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart." Yes, indeed, God's glorious, 
appointed plan of the ages rejoices the hearts 
of all who have come to a knowledge of it. 

"The commandments [mitsvah— precepts or 
teachings] of the Lord are clear, enlightening 
the eyes" [showing us the unmistakable course 
and end of righteousness and of unrighteousness]. 

"The fear [yirah— reverence] of the Lord 
is clean [a pure and lofty sentiment based upon 
love and gratitude, and not upon a servile recognition 



of tyranny and power], enduring forever." 

"The judgments [mishpat— ordinances or 
decrees] of the Lord are true; they are altogether 
righteous. More to be desired are they 
than gold; yea, than much fine gold: and 
they are sweeter than honey and the droppings 
of the honeycomb." Once, following the leadings 
of mistaken teachers, and catechisms, 
we thought of God's "Eternal Decrees" only 
with horror, supposing that they provided for 
the salvation of but a mere handful of our 
race and for the everlasting misery of the masses. 
But what a change since the eyes of our 
understandings are opened. God's decrees 
are sweet to our taste, we appreciate them 
greatly, we see that he has decreed a Great 
Savior and a great salvation, open to every 
creature's acceptance; and that he has provided 
that all shall be brought to a clear knowledge 
of the truth, that they may have the fullest 
opportunity for everlasting life upon the only 
condition God can make— righteousness. 

"Moreover, by them [by the judgments or 
decrees of the Lord as to the course of righteousness 
and unrighteousness and their rewards 
and penalties] is thy servant [the thoughtful 
servant, who meditates on these things] warned; 
and in keeping them [in remembering and 
harmonizing with them] there is great reward." 

Thus the Book of Nature and the Book of 
Revelation, when rightly read, harmoniously 
declare the glory of God; and blessed is the 
man whose character is ennobled and purified 
and blessed by constant meditation on these 
glorious themes. How it refreshes and strengthens 
every noble and generous aspiration, checks 
every tendency to evil and sin, purifies the 
heart, kindles hope, awakens zeal and starts 
and keeps us in the heavenly race with its 
glorious end in view. The great Emperor of 
this wonderful universe upon which we daily 
and nightly cast our wondering gaze has 
called even us to be the bride of and joint-heir 
with his only begotten Son, the heir of all 
things; and in these glorious revelations of 
himself is supplied the inspiration and instruction 
necessary to enable us to run with 
patience the race set before us, if we make 
them the centre of our meditations. 

Verse 12— "Who [in his own strength or by 
his own wisdom and foresight] can guard against 
errors?" Not one; for as the Apostle Paul 
tells us, we have our treasure, the new nature, in 
earthen vessels. Not only are we weak, mentally, 
morally and physically, but in addition 
we have a wily foe: we wrestle not merely with 



flesh and blood, but also against principalities 
and unseen spiritual powers, strongly entrenched 
in places of power and influence. (Eph. 6:12.) 
Who, indeed, is strong enough in himself to 
guard against errors of doctrine and practice 
strongly entrenched in a misguided and depraved 
public opinion, fortified by the tendencies 
of his own impaired conditions of mind 
and heart and skilfully glossed over by the 
great deceiver who, with untiring effort, seeks 
to accomplish our deception and overthrow? 
Who, indeed, is sufficient for these things? 
The inquiry of the Psalmist implies the answer 
—Not one. In our own strength we cannot 
presume to stand, and therefore how appropriate 
the prayer:— 

Verses 12-13. "From secret faults do thou 
cleanse me. Also from presumptuous sins do 
thou restrain thy servant; let them not have dominion 
over me: then shall I be upright, and I 
shall be innocent from the great transgression." 

Sins of presumption are such as result from 
undue self-confidence, ambition or pride. Many 
are guilty of them without seemingly being 
aware of the fact: They presume in prayer to 
direct the Lord how they want to have numbers 
join some sect, whose existence God never 
authorized; or they say how many they want 
to have converted at a certain meeting; or they 
instruct him how the Foreign Missions should 
be blessed and what results they shall expect. 

Others presume to decide what God intends 
to do aside from what his Word authorizes, 
and will perhaps pass lightly over such a doctrine 
as that of the Second Death if it stands 
in the way of a favorite theory which they have 
prepared for the Lord to follow. This is presumptuous 
sin. 

Others, on the other hand, tell that God will 
everlastingly preserve the wicked in torture, 
and thus they are in error from attempting to 
be wise above what is written. Is not this a 
presumptuous sin? 

Such presumptuous sins bring natural consequences: 

R1391 :page 112 

the presumptuous lose respect for 

that which they can do without, or can twist 

and turn to their own convenience. As respect 

for the exactness of the Bible is lost the presumption 

naturally increases and finds more 

pronounced expression in their self-assurance. 

Some, indeed, go so far as to interpret the language 

of Scripture the opposite of the way in 

which it reads, to favor the ideas of the presumer, 



whatever they may be. Thus one 
will read that certain wilful sinners who sin 
against full light and knowledge "shall be 
punished with everlasting destruction," and 
"in the second death," and will unblushingly 
assert that these words mean the reverse— that 
they mean everlasting preservation in life and 
in torment. Others, to support an opposite 
theory, will claim that the Second Death means 
a second blessing, and that when it is declared 
that at the end of the Millennial age of trial 
all those whose names are not found written in 
the Book of Life— the fearful, the unbelieving, 
the abominable, those who in spirit are whoremongers, 
murderers, sorcerers, and idolaters, 
and all who love lies and take pleasure in making 
them— that when these are said to be cast 
into the Second Death, it means that they will 
be blessed, sanctified and ushered into glory. 
Ah! yes, beloved, this sin of presumption is 
one into which many who have been enlightened 
by a knowledge of the plan of God are 
inclined to fall. Instead of carefully noting 
and thoughtfully considering those scriptures 
which, while they recognize their superior advantage 
and special favor from God in a knowledge 
of the truth, also warn them of the great 
danger of those thus enlightened (since the 
present is the judgment-day of all such, who 
stand on trial for life, with the alternative of 
the second death before them)— instead of 
carefully observing these (See Heb. 6:4-8; 
10:26-31; Rev. 2:11; 20:6), they ignore 
them, and, presumptuously leaning to their own 
understanding, proceed to reason in this wise: 
—They say, The Scriptures tell us that "God 
is love," so loving that he has provided salvation 
for all mankind. So far they say truly; 
but here leaving the Scriptures they begin to 
reason— as they claim, to the glory of God, 
though nothing can be to the glory of God 
which perverts or denies any portion of inspired 
truth. They say, "Yes, and we have 
faith (?) to believe that his love is so powerful 

R1392:page 112 

that not one rebellious sinner can ever get 
away from it; and if one millennium is not 
sufficient to reform him then he shall have 
another and another; for all must be saved." 
But here are the Bible warnings of a Second 
Death for wilful sinners, and coupled with the 
statement, too, that Christ dieth no more and 
that, consequently, such can never be redeemed 
again, if found worthy of the second death for 



their own wilful sins, committed with full 

knowledge and with full responsibility. The redemption 

provided in Christ is complete and 

for all, providing full salvation for every child 

of Adam from all the penalties and weaknesses 

sustained through Adam's disobedience and 

fall from divine favor. But having had such a 

salvation put fully within their reach, each is 

thereafter responsible exactly as was Adam; 

and each is subject to the same penalty— death 

—if wilfully disobedient. This is called the 

second death because it is the penalty of wilful 

sin under the second trial. 

But the presumptuous ones grow more arrogant 
and self-assertive and take the further step 
of denying the necessity of a ransom, claiming 
that the death of Christ did not redeem us 
from the first death, that we were not bought 
with a price, that they had formerly made a 
mistake in thinking so, and that their imitation 
of Christ's life is all that divine justice can demand 
of them or of any man. Thus they do 
despite to the spirit of grace manifested by 
Jehovah in the gift of his only begotten Son, 
our Redeemer, and presume to stand in the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness.— Isa. 64:6. 

They fall into this great error in their attempt 
to establish their presumptuous theory. 
For they see that if it be admitted that the 
penalty of sin was death when Adam was 
tried, and if the death of Christ was necessary 
as the payment of that penalty before any 
could be pardoned, granted liberty to become 
sons of God or be resurrected (Rom. 3:24-26; 
Col. 1:20-22; 1 Cor. 15:21,22), then, since 
God changes not, there could be no hope of 
escape from the second death except by the 
payment of a second ransom-price for each 
one so sentenced. 

Thus presumptuous sins pervert the judgment, 
make void the Scriptures and lead to "the 
great transgression" of "counting the blood 
of the covenant wherewith we were sanctified 
a common thing." (Heb. 10:29.) In view of 
such temptations and tendencies, let the consecrated 
ever bear in mind that their only 
safety is in meekness and humility, clinging 
close to the word of the Lord; and in meditating 
on its precepts and pondering over all 
their solemn and momentous import— "Then 
shall" they "be upright, and they shall be 
innocent from the great transgression." And 
let the constant prayer of all such be— 

Verse 14. "Let the words of my mouth, and 
the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in 
thy sight, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer." 



page 114 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS FOR REGULAR READERS. 



R1392:page 114 

The Convention for Bible Study and for 
commemorating our Lord's death, recently announced 
to be held in Allegheny from April 
7th to 14th, is just closed. It has been one of the 
most interesting of the kind ever held here 
or perhaps anywhere; for we may scarcely 
except the gatherings of the early Church in 
the days of the Apostles. 

In numbers the meeting was greater than 
any of its predecessors— about two hundred 
attending from neighboring cities, towns and 



states, in addition to about the same number 
of home residents. And all these we may 
safely count as interested ones, because others 
were invited to stay away. 

The visitors came various distances, and represented 
the following states: Pennsylvania, 
New York, New Jersey, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, 
Manitoba Canada, Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
Dakota, Colorado, Kansas, Arkansas, 
Missouri, Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, West Virginia, 
Maryland, Kentucky, Iowa and Michigan. 

R1393 :page 114 

This meeting seemed to surpass its predecessors 
in spiritual tone, if that were possible 
—but the last always seems to be the best. 

The meetings began at six o'clock on the morning 
of the 7th, in the various bedrooms where 
the friends were billeted, and continued during 
breakfast until nine o'clock, the hour of the public 
meeting— from which the time until ten o'clock 
was devoted to prayer, praise and exhortation. 
The morning session for Bible study began at ten 
o'clock and lasted until one. The afternoon session 
began at three o'clock and lasted until six. 
Then came a luncheon and chat followed by 
evening session for testimony, praise and mutual 
rejoicing. The latter we endeavored to 
close at nine o'clock, but sometimes they continued 
until after eleven. Even after retiring 
some could not restrain themselves to sleep and 
let others sleep. And at and between all of 
these meetings, the topic was the love and 
plan of God, the centre of that love and plan— 
the cross of Christ, the blessings already ours 
through it, the blessings yet to flow from it to 
the world, and the consecration of heart and 
every talent to the service of this loving God, 
this gracious plan and this mighty Savior. 

All seemed to show on their faces what they 
attested with their voices— that their hearts 
were full and overflowing with the love of God 
and Christ, resulting from the fact that the 
light of the glory of God as it shines in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord had shined into 
their hearts. The Bible study sessions lasted 
for five days and were followed by two days of 
conference by and with the Colporteurs relative 
to their important part in the harvest work. 
Five new workers decided to give their time 
in this blessed service which the Master has so 
signally blessed. Each pledged himself to earnest 
service to our Redeemer and King during 
the year beginning, and promised to remember 
one another continually at the throne of grace. 



R1393: page 114 
