Announcements
EXALTING JEHOVAH’S WORSHIP ABOVE THE MOUNTAINS—Isa. 2:2, 3, AS.
In the Bible the expression “mountains” is often used to refer symbolically to governments, autocratic, democratic and others. “The mountain of Jehovah’s house” or temple was Mount Moriah. It represents Jehovah’s place of exalted worship. In the Bible we are assured that God’s worship will be exalted above all human rule “in these last days,” the time we are living in. All persons who hope to survive the destruction of the present wicked “system of things” and live under God’s kingdom must say, ‘Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob [spiritual Israel].’ All of Jehovah’s witnesses during December will say “come” to hundreds of thousands of people world-wide, inviting them to learn the way to safety. You May Survive Armageddon into God’s New World or another Bible study aid book and also a booklet will be offered to all on a contribution of 50c. Many new ones will begin saying “come” this month. If you would like to share contact the nearby Kingdom Hall for details.
THE 1957 YEARBOOK IS READY!
Busy people get things done. Few people are busier than those engaged in the business of preaching “this good news of the kingdom.” That is why the results of this activity are so far-reaching. Each year adds to the volume of praise being extended to the Most High, because each year brings new praisers to extol his virtues and proclaim the blessings due mankind through his righteous kingdom now at hand. Have you ever read the thrilling account of how all this is being accomplished? Each year Jehovah’s witnesses publish in their Yearbook a record of the year’s world-wide Kingdom preaching. It is a stirring report released by the president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. The 1957 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now available on a contribution of 50c. Send for your copy at once and share in the joy of seeing the progress of a people who are dedicated to Jehovah God and who eagerly spend their time and effort in acquainting others with God’s purposes toward the world of mankind. The 1957 calendar is also available. These are 25c each, or five to one address for $1.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 30: Jehovah, God of Production. Page 721.
January 6: Productive Witnessing. Page 728.

