Announcements
● Literature offer for March: Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! for a contribution of $3.00. April and May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $5.00. Awake! subscription may be offered on same basis. Six-month subscriptions and one-year subscriptions to monthly editions are $2.50. June: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation accounts on March 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● In preparation for the Memorial celebration, all will want to follow the schedule for Bible reading provided on the 1989 calendar, beginning on Friday, March 17.
● Contributions that congregations send to the Society for the advancement of Kingdom work as well as contributions to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund or special contributions for other designated purposes are acknowledged on the Society’s monthly statements to the congregations. These acknowledgments include brief expressions of appreciation. The presiding overseer should observe such acknowledgments and have these called to the attention of the congregation each month when the accounts report is given. The Society wants the brothers to know that their contributions have been received and that they are appreciated.
● The Society is now accepting orders for reprinted Watchtower bound volumes in English for the years 1970 through 1974. Congregations and individuals desiring to have these volumes for their library should determine the total number of volumes they need for each year and submit their requests through the congregation. The total quantities should be entered on the Literature Order form (S-14) and SUBMITTED DURING THE MONTH OF MARCH 1989. (See Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) Printing of the third five-year series of The Watchtower bound volumes in English will commence this spring. Please do not place orders for years other than 1970 through 1974 until future direction appears in Our Kingdom Ministry. Since the Society will not stock these reprinted volumes, we urge all to consider the matter carefully and place orders for the 1970 through 1974 volumes that are needed. Later orders will only be filled as long as existing supplies last. These reprinted volumes are controlled stock items and are to be paid for upon receipt. The price will be $6.00 each.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—1986 Edition (Regular edition; bi12 with marginal references)​—Portuguese
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black or maroon​—French
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Armenian, Gun
Watch Tower Publications Scriptural Index 1945-1985​—Finnish
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Large size)​—Bislama
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Luganda
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Cambodian
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Hindi, Hungarian, Vietnamese
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Vietnamese
Tract No. 14​—Estonian, Ukrainian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Daniel (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—English
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four tapes in an album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Portuguese
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
Aid to Bible Understanding (A-Z)​—English

