Are You Searching for Godly Wisdom?
1 “Keep Searching as for Hid Treasures” was the subject of a motivating talk on the second day of the “Divine Justice” District Conventions. Are we following through with what we heard and endeavoring to become more diligent searchers for treasures of wisdom?​—Prov. 2:1-6.
2 We would be poor treasure seekers if we rarely read the Bible or if we generally failed to read The Watchtower and Awake! Do we dig for the priceless gems of wisdom in God’s Word when preparing talks, pondering the answer to a Bible question, or seeking solutions to problems? Time spent in research and meditation is needed in order to find Bible gems, but what happiness results!​—Prov. 3:13-18.
3 Now we can make regular use of the new publication Insight on the Scriptures along with the Index, Concordance, Reference Bible, and other outstanding publications in our theocratic library. How generously Jehovah has supplied us with the help we need for searching out “the deep things of God”!​—1 Cor. 2:10.
4 Our spiritual health is directly related to godly wisdom. On Sunday morning of our convention, many fine suggestions were shared in the talk “Maintaining Spiritual Health in a Sick World.” Do you recall how we can avoid spiritual sickness due to weaknesses of the flesh, worldly influences, and the machinations of the Devil? The convention speaker pointed out that we can build and maintain spiritual health by never neglecting to nourish ourselves spiritually through study, by attendance and participation at meetings, and by having a wholesome share in the field service. Taking preventive measures such as shunning bad association and debased worldly entertainment while also avoiding persons who do “not assent to healthful words” will help us maintain a healthy faith.​—1 Tim. 6:3, 4; Titus 1:13.
5 As we follow through on the points learned at the “Divine Justice” District Convention, let us be determined to give due thought to what we hear at Christian meetings and thus gain additional godly wisdom and discernment.​—2 Tim. 2:7.

