Can You Auxiliary Pioneer in April?
1 Jesus initiated a work of such importance that the future of all mankind depends upon its outcome. (Matt. 4:17) It is the work of preaching the good news and making disciples. This work will reach its climax just before “the end,” when the Kingdom message will have been “preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations.”​—Matt. 24:14.
2 Since we have now reached the conclusion of the system of things, this work is more urgent than ever. With lives at stake, unnecessary delay can have far-reaching consequences. The auxiliary pioneer arrangement has encouraged many to be more active in getting this urgent work done. Can you auxiliary pioneer in April?
APRIL PROVIDES FINE OPPORTUNITY
3 With its five full weekends, April will be an excellent month for many to enroll as auxiliary pioneers. Even some with full-time secular employment may be able to do so. Some who pioneered last year were greatly blessed and expressed their desire to serve again this year. By making plans now, could you auxiliary pioneer in April? Why not discuss this possibility with those who are already appointed and get some practical suggestions from them?
4 Expanding our service can bring increased happiness. Even though this may entail sacrificing other personal interests, by sowing bountifully, we will reap increased spiritual blessings. (2 Cor. 9:6b) Those working whole-souled for Jehovah are “filled with joy” in the bountiful harvest of new disciples.​—Acts 13:48, 52.
A THEOCRATIC STEPPING-STONE
5 After first tasting the joys of the auxiliary pioneer service, many have become regular pioneers. In this way, auxiliary pioneer service can serve as a stepping-stone toward greater happiness. If you are able to auxiliary pioneer in April and succeeding months, you may be able to develop return visits and Bible studies that will help you make a smooth transition to the regular pioneer service at the beginning of the new service year in September.
6 Why are many of Jehovah’s Witnesses expanding their ministry at this time instead of seeking more material advantages in this system? It is because they want to praise Jehovah and tell others about his purposes. They know that “the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) They act sincerely in harmony with their prayer that the Master of the harvest will “send out workers into his harvest.”​—Matt. 9:37, 38.
7 Genuine love for God and for neighbor moves us to share in the disciple-making work to the extent of our ability. (Matt. 22:37-39; 28:19) Although personal circumstances prevent many from being pioneer publishers, doing all we can in Jehovah’s service according to our circumstances commends us as those who are ‘working hard and exerting themselves in helping all sorts of men to be saved.’— 1 Tim. 4:10.

