Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 6
Song 209
 7 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to get adequate literature supplies for a full share in field service this Saturday and Sunday.
20 min: “Urgently Declare Jehovah’s Judgments.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Inform congregation of time and place for any additional meetings for service during the March campaign. Have experienced publisher demonstrate presentation based on information in paragraph 5. Consider cited scriptures as time permits.
18 min: “Memorial Celebration for 1989.” Talk by presiding overseer with some audience participation. Ask congregation to relate how they plan to invite new ones to the Memorial and help these to attend. Remind congregation that Memorial invitations are available.
Song 3 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 13
Song 43
12 min: Local announcements. Include accounts report, warmly expressing appreciation for contributions acknowledged by the Society. Remind all that Memorial will be Wednesday evening, March 22. Give time of celebration and outline local arrangements. Special effort to be made on weekend to invite interested persons. Briefly demonstrate calling to remind one previously invited.
20 min: “Can You Auxiliary Pioneer in April?” Question-and-answer coverage. Include practical comments from those in local congregation who have auxiliary pioneered previously while caring for family obligations or while holding full-time secular jobs.
13 min: Interview some who are planning to auxiliary pioneer in April. How have they arranged their schedule? Ask why this April can be a fine month to pioneer. Encourage all who can to apply promptly. Applying now for this service will allow additional time to coordinate schedule with others. Publishers whose circumstances do not allow them to pioneer may be able to increase hours for month by working with the pioneers as they are able.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 20
Song 87
12 min: Local announcements. Encourage prompt follow-up visits on those attending Memorial, whether new ones or those who seldom attend meetings. Explain what congregation is doing and what publishers can do individually. Outline additional group-witnessing arrangements made for this week.
18 min: “Are You Searching for Godly Wisdom?” Elder briefly reviews article and then invites a group of publishers to join him in discussing how personal reading and study of Revelation Climax book has strengthened their faith and renewed their determination to be faithful and zealous to the end. Highlight new insight on “great crowd” as included in the symbol of ‘myriads of horses’ described in Revelation 9:16-19. (Rev. 7:9) Stimulate eagerness to share in wide distribution of this unique publication for our times.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “They Can Help You to Preach” in the February 15, 1989, Watchtower, pages 22-4. Importance of magazines coming each week by subscription should be emphasized.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 27
Song 156
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Have pioneer or skilled publisher demonstrate use of Topic for Conversation, adapting it to the subscription offer. Encourage all to arrange to participate in field service this weekend, supporting magazine work on Saturday as well as house-to-house witnessing on the first Sunday of the month.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Featuring The Watchtower.” Questions and answers. In connection with paragraph 3, have a publisher demonstrate how to give a 30- to 60-second magazine presentation in the door-to-door activity. Stress the need to present only the magazines. For paragraph 4, have a publisher demonstrate using the April 15 Watchtower in street work. In discussing paragraphs 5 and 6, emphasize that the magazine presentation is to be no longer than 60 seconds; when presenting the subscription, the Topic for Conversation should be used.
15 min: “Exert Yourselves Vigorously.” (Luke 13:24; 1 Tim. 4:10) Talk by service overseer, based on information in article “Do Not Let Your Hand Rest” that appeared in January 1988 Our Kingdom Ministry and the January 1, 1989, letter regarding territory seldom worked. Much enthusiasm generated in this work last year. There were over 800 assignments sent out. Many favorable comments from circuit overseers, congregations, and individual publishers who participated. Those who would like to apply should submit their applications as soon as possible.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.

