Presenting the Good News​—Featuring The Watchtower
1 The Bible strongly urges mankind to seek knowledge of God and of his Son, Jesus Christ. This knowledge is far more valuable than gold or silver. (Prov. 8:10) Why? Because such accurate knowledge leads to everlasting life. (John 17:3) However, accurate knowledge is not acquired or maintained without considerable personal effort. No wonder Solomon said: “If you keep seeking for it . . . , in that case you will understand the fear of Jehovah, and you will find the very knowledge of God.”​—Prov. 1:7; 2:4, 5.
2 The world of mankind is in darkness as to God’s purposes, but valuable knowledge of Jehovah comes to us through the precious and timely articles published in The Watchtower. (Isa. 60:2) What a privilege we have in sharing this vital information with others! During April and May, a series of articles on the exposure of Babylon the Great and her execution will be featured.
WHAT CAN WE HIGHLIGHT?
3 The April issues of The Watchtower examine the identity of “Babylon the Great, the mother of the harlots.” (Rev. 17:5) After introducing yourself, arouse the householder’s curiosity in the April 1 issue by saying: “Since the first century, people have been intrigued by the visions and symbols of the Bible book of Revelation. One of the most mysterious of these is the great harlot Babylon the Great, described in Revelation chapters 17 and 18. What does this Babylon symbolize? With the help of this article ‘A Mystery​—Who Is the Harlot Babylon the Great?’ you will discover the answer.” By leaving the question unanswered, you may get the attention of the individual.
4 In the April 15 issue, the article “Babylon the Great Plays the Harlot” explains what is meant by harlotry in the spiritual sense. The “Divine Justice” convention talk on “The Infamous Harlot” and the Resolution are also included. Again, we can ask thought-provoking questions such as: Who is this Babylon the Great? Why is she condemned in such strong terms in the Bible? How does her destruction affect our generation and your future? Remember to keep the presentation simple by getting directly to the point, doing so in 30 to 60 seconds.
PLAN AHEAD
5 While we normally stress the second and fourth Saturdays as magazine days each month, it would be good to stress all five Saturdays during April since we have these important magazines to present. On magazine day, concentrate on making a brief presentation of no more than 60 seconds. A wide circulation of these timely issues of the magazines is needed in order to sound a warning for all to hear.​—Isa. 61:2; Rev. 18:4, 5.
6 April begins a new Watchtower subscription campaign. Unlike the brief presentation that is recommended for the weekly magazine day, we will want to use the Topic for Conversation when offering the subscription. Those who do not wish to subscribe to the magazines should be encouraged to accept the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! for 50¢.
7 Do you fully appreciate the excelling value of The Watchtower? It is an important instrument for educating mankind in Jehovah’s ways of righteousness. (Matt. 5:6) In distributing this outstanding journal, we have the privilege of warning the nations of the impending destruction of Babylon the Great.

