Urgently Declare Jehovah’s Judgments
1 Jehovah’s appointed time to execute his judgments against Babylon the Great rapidly approaches. (Rev. 1:3; 19:2) But first, a final warning of her impending destruction must be given. In order to survive, lovers of righteousness must “get out of her” and work toward gaining an approved standing before Jehovah.​—Rev. 18:4.
2 The new book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! will help us to carry out this warning work. Clearly and vividly it presents God’s judgments against this condemned world. If you have not already done so, you should set aside time to complete the reading of this new book as soon as possible.
MAKE A SPECIAL EFFORT
3 In view of its urgent message, all publishers will want to have a part in offering the Revelation Climax book from house to house. Take note of not-at-homes and call again. Elders should consider arranging additional meetings for field service. Would afternoon service arrangements be helpful to the publishers? Some have found early evening witnessing to be very productive.
4 In addition to offering the Revelation Climax book from door to door, utilize other opportunities as well. Young publishers can offer the book to their teachers. Those employed secularly can talk with workmates during lunch breaks and offer the book to them. Give all persons​—relatives, deliverymen, salespersons who come to our door, doctors, dentists, lawyers, businesspeople with whom we have dealings—​the opportunity to “hear the words of this prophecy.” (Rev. 1:3) They may want to be among the unnumbered great crowd that will survive the climax of divine judgment at Armageddon.
5 The new Topic for Conversation is “Whom Shall We Worship?” Our introduction could include information from page 322 of the Reasoning book. Ask the householder if he has observed how many different forms of worship there are, and then point out that man has a basic need to worship something higher than himself. However, since men have so often worshiped false gods, Revelation 14:7 gives us a timely warning. This points out the need to worship our Creator, the true God. The book of Revelation identifies all false religions by the name Babylon the Great and sounds an urgent warning at Revelation 18:2a, 4. Though one may be morally upright and try to do good to others, what if he supports false religious organizations? God does not approve such a course. This gives us something serious to think about. Show the Revelation Climax book and draw attention to a specific point of interest. Then offer the book for a contribution of $3.
6 Your presentation may be varied according to the type of territory you are working. Review the material in the Reasoning book under “Religion,” pages 322-33, and under “Babylon the Great,” pages 49-53, for suggestions on how this can be done. It is urgent that we share fully in declaring this divine message of judgment and hope.​—Rev. 14:6, 7.

