Earth’s Endless Variety—How Did It Get Here?
OF THE more than 1.5 million species of animals that scientists have named so far, about one million are insects. It would take 6,000 encyclopedia pages to list all the known insects! How did these creatures originate? Why such endless variety? Is this the result of blind chance, of nature getting “lucky” millions of times? Or is it by design?
First, let us briefly note some of the other varieties of living things that are on our planet.
Amazing Birds
What about the over 9,000 different species of marvelously designed birds? Some hummingbirds are as tiny as large bees, yet they fly with more dexterity and grace than the most advanced helicopter. Other birds migrate thousands of miles every year, such as the arctic tern, which flies as much as 22,000 miles [35,000 km] on each round trip. It has no computer, no navigational instruments, yet it unerringly arrives at its destination. Does this innate ability exist by chance or by design?
Fascinating Variety of Plants
In addition, there is the tremendous variety and beauty of plant life—more than 350,000 species of plants. Approximately 250,000 of these produce flowers! The largest living things on earth—the giant sequoia trees—are plants.
How many different flowers grow in your garden or in your area? The beauty, the symmetry, and often the fragrance of these flowers—from the tiniest desert flower, daisy, or buttercup to orchids with their intricate variety—make one marvel. Again, we ask: How did they come to exist? By chance or by design?
Oceans Teeming With Life
And what of the life forms found in the rivers, lakes, and oceans of the world? Scientists say that there are about 8,400 known species of freshwater fish and about 13,300 of ocean-dwelling fish. The smallest of these is the goby found in the Indian Ocean. It is only about four tenths of an inch [1 cm] long. The largest is the whale shark, which can measure up to 60 feet [18 m] in length. These figures for species do not take into account the invertebrates (lacking a backbone) or species still to be discovered!
The Incredible Brain
Above all, the human brain—containing at least ten billion neurons, each possibly having over 1,000 synapses, or points of contact with other nerve cells—is incredible. Neurologist Dr. Richard Restak says: “The total number of connections within the vast network of the brain’s neuronal system is truly astronomical.” (The Brain) He adds: “There may be from ten trillion to one hundred trillion synapses in the brain.” Then he asks a pertinent question: “How could an organ such as the brain, which contains between ten billion and one hundred billion cells, ever develop from a single cell, the egg?” Is the brain the result of impersonal quirks and flukes of nature? Or is there intelligent design behind it all?
Yes, how did the seemingly endless diversity of life and design come about? Have you been taught that this was simply a matter of chance, of trial and error, of the hit and miss of a blind evolutionary lottery? Then continue reading to see the questions that some scientists, in all honesty, are asking about the theory of evolution, which has been called the foundation of all biological science.
[Diagram on page 4]
If a simple camera requires a designer, what about the far more complex human eye?
Lens Area
(Magnified)
Aqueous humor
Pupil
Cornea
Iris
Ciliary body
Lens
Complete Eye
Vitreous humor
Optic nerve
Retina
Choroid
Sclera

