From Our Readers
Dyslexia  I am writing to express my sincere thanks for the article “Overcoming the Frustration of Dyslexia.” (August 8, 1996) After reading the box “How to Recognize Dyslexia in Children,” my husband and I had our ten-year-old son assessed. We found that he does suffer from dyslexia, and we are now taking steps to give him the help he needs, both at home and at school. His teachers had always told us that he is a very capable child but that he would not apply himself. You can therefore imagine how grateful we are that this article was published.
J. S., Scotland
As the mother of two children with dyslexia, I rejoiced to read this article. It did a wonderful job of educating others about how very real this disability is and how difficult it is for those who have it. Can you imagine not being able to read a street sign? Or trying to order food from a menu when you can’t read what it says? I am sure that sufferers will put the information to good use.
M. K., United States
Endangered Species  Heartfelt thanks for the series “Endangered Species—Why Be Concerned?” (August 8, 1996) We really are running the risk of losing a treasure. The article kept alive my desire to live in God’s promised new world, where animals will be able to live without the threat of extinction.
D. I., Albania
Refugee Crisis  I am a refugee from Burundi, and I would like to express my appreciation for the series “The Refugee Crisis—Will It Ever End?” (August 22, 1996) I was greatly encouraged to learn Jehovah’s viewpoint on this matter and how, in ancient times, he had his people treat refugees with loving kindness. I thank you for the articles; they really comforted me.
D. M., Kenya
Bus Tragedy  While reading the article “Overcoming Tragedy in Jehovah’s Strength” (August 22, 1996), I could not help but cry because it hit close to home. I too was involved in an accident, along with my closest friend. She died a few hours later as a result of extreme injuries. Over the course of the next five years, I came to grips with the intense feelings of grief and guilt I had because I survived and she did not. I trust in Jehovah that he will remember my dear friend. My heart also goes out to those whose loved ones were lost in this tragedy in Spain.
J. T., United States
Stammering  Thank you for the article “Even the Tongue of Stammerers Will Speak.” (August 22, 1996) Petr Kunc’s experience greatly strengthened me. I too stammer. Before giving a Bible discourse, I always ask Jehovah to help me express myself clearly.
M. M., Italy
When I turned 20, I found myself having a hard time speaking to others and from the platform at the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. After an assignment, I would drip with sweat and feel an extraordinary fatigue. It is really a great encouragement to read an experience of a fellow Christian serving Jehovah despite this problem. It has helped me have a positive view of things.
M. S., Japan
I am moved to thank you for publishing this experience. I have had the same problem since childhood. Like Petr, I serve as an elder in the congregation, and I have to rely on Jehovah for strength in accomplishing my assignments. I now conduct the Theocratic Ministry School, helping others with their speaking.
N. O. N., Nigeria

