Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 25
13 min: Song 28. General announcements. (Special public talk will be held world wide the week of April 1. The subject is “Happy Though Hungry—How Can It Be?”) Relate experiences in offering Family Life book during February. Any Bible studies started?
22 min: “What Can You Do with the Help of Holy Spirit?” Audience participation. Encourage youths to comment on paragraph 2. Emphasize main point: With the help of Jehovah’s spirit, many more may be able to pioneer. Will you be one of them?
20 min: Who Has Done It? Ask all who have ever shared in any branch of full-time service, including auxiliary pioneering, to raise their hands. Interview these right from seats (not all need to be asked every question): When did you serve? How do you feel you benefited spiritually from the experience? Did it strengthen your faith and relationship with Jehovah? How? Did it improve your knowledge of the Bible and how to use it in service? Were you better able to cope with objections? Did preaching every day help lessen anxiety about approaching doors and increase your joy in the service? Did you start any Bible studies during your full-time service? Did any come into the truth as a result? Any experiences you wish to relate, especially where evidence of Jehovah’s spirit is illustrated? Would you recommend full-time service to others? Would you do it again if you could? Encourage those who wish to pioneer to obtain applications from congregation secretary tonight.
 5 min: Local service announcements, including subject to be discussed during week’s meetings for service. Song 117 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 4
10 min: Song 32 and general announcements. Accounts report.
20 min: “Plan Ahead—Pioneer.” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage as many as possible in congregation to auxiliary pioneer during April. Obtain application forms from congregation secretary.
25 min: Youths, Could Your Life Be Rewarding Like that of Timothy?
(5 min.) Talk by brother who has pioneer spirit. Consider importance of having wholesome goals in life. What are your goals? Higher education? Having fun in life? A good job? Someone who had all of these things was Solomon. What did Jehovah cause him to write for our benefit? Much worldly education does not bring happiness. (Eccl. 1:18) Pursuing pleasure, making “fun” the big thing in life, leaves one feeling empty. (Eccl. 2:1, 2) Learning to be a good worker is a blessing (Eccl. 2:24), but making your job the main thing in life leads to severe disappointment. (Eccl. 2:21) So, what will you do? Do not forget why you are alive. It is to serve Jehovah. Anyone who fails to live in full harmony with that fact will not be really happy. Apply the counsel at Ecclesiastes 12:1, so that in later years you do not say that you “have no delight” in life. Timothy was one who applied that Bible counsel.
(18 min.) Chairman invites several youths in middle and late teens to platform for discussion centered on life of Timothy. Main point to stress is that a full life, with real blessings, comes to those who use their lives fully in Jehovah’s service. Consider the following questions with those on platform: How old may Timothy have been when Paul first visited him while on his second missionary tour? (Aid p. 1602 ¶1) What personal problem did Timothy evidently have to contend with? (1 Tim. 5:23) How long did he remain with Paul? (w77 6/1 p. 339 ¶9) What experiences did they share together? (2 Tim. 3:10, 11; Aid p. 1602 ¶3-5) What wholesome qualities did Timothy demonstrate? (Phil. 2:20-22; 2 Tim. 1:5; w77 6/1 p. 339 ¶9) What opportunities did Timothy’s service lead to that other youths of his day did not have? How might the same be true today? (Participants must prepare well in advance for discussion and review source material. Keep part fast-moving and appeal to thinking of youths.)
(2 min.) Conclusion to audience. By wholeheartedly serving Jehovah full-time, youths can enjoy full, satisfying life. Nothing is more rewarding than being able to assist someone to get on the road to life. Many of those in full-time service, like Timothy, who now are overseers, serve in various congregations. Put Jehovah first in your life and experience the many blessings that will result.—Eccl. 12:1.
 5 min: Local announcements for field service. Announce subject to be considered at meeting for field service next week. Song 109 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 11
10 min: Song 68. General announcements. Special public talk for the week of April 1 will be “Happy Though Hungry—How Can It Be?” Encourage publishers to start talking to newly interested ones about attending the Memorial on Wednesday evening, April 11. Briefly cover “Pioneers and Their Reports.” Encourage auxiliary pioneering in April.
20 min: “Make Sure of the More Important Things.”
If you have a chalkboard in the Kingdom Hall, make use of it for this part. List key scriptures on the board as you discuss them. Alongside, put the gist of the text, such as: “Rev. 4:11—Alive because of God’s will.” “2 Cor. 5:14, 15—Live no longer for self.” “Matt. 16:24—Disown self.”
(5 min.) Talk. The Bible shows that there would be a clear distinction between true servants of Jehovah and those who do not serve him. True servants of God recognize that they exist because of God’s will, and the doing of that will is the foremost thing in their lives. (Rev. 4:11) The love that Christ has, as shown in his dying for mankind, moves such persons to live no longer for self. (2 Cor. 5:14, 15) Our having disowned ourselves, acknowledging Jehovah as our Owner, should be evident, not only by our baptism, but by how we live our lives every day. (Matt. 16:24) Can we say that these things are really true in our case? If so, God’s Word governs what we do with our lives.
(15 min.) Audience participation. Read or paraphrase all scriptures. The Bible helps us to keep the truly important things first in our lives. (Phil. 1:9-11) What is the result of doing this, as shown in verse 11? And what things lead to that result, according to verse 9?
What does the Bible show to be among the more important things to God? (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) In line with this, how did Jesus use his time when he was on earth? (Mark 1:38) After his resurrection, Jesus drew attention to the authority given him by God, and then to those who recognized that authority he assigned a work. What was it? (Matt. 28:19, 20) Later, before he ascended to heaven, what was the last thing that he said to his disciples so that they would not forget it? (Acts 1:8) The question we individually need to ask ourself is, ‘Does this work occupy the place that it deserves in my life?’
Some are able to be regular or auxiliary pioneers. The 1979 Yearbook shows that, on an average each month last year, 115,389 did so. How many locally? Some earnestly wish that their health and circumstances would make it possible, but these may not. God does not require what our circumstances do not permit; but doing God’s will should be foremost in the life of each of us. Are there any of us who could make adjustments in our lives to share more fully in direct Kingdom service? We do not want to turn out like the one described at Matthew 13:22; be like the one in Mt 13 verse 23.
Ask audience: Even if some of us have to work at full-time secular jobs, what might indicate that disciple-making really occupies the place that it should in our lives? How can a mother who spends almost all day caring for her family show that her life is really built around serving Jehovah?
Circumstances in one’s life may change; young folks graduate from school; parents have more time when their children set up their own household; retirement leaves one with more free time. Such is a time to ask oneself, Am I really making sure of the more important things? How am I spending my life? What is Jehovah’s view of the matter? May his view always guide our steps. (Ps. 36:9) In conclusion, briefly review the key texts used in the introductory talk.
25 min: “Taste and See that Jehovah Is Good.” (Based on Watchtower article in August 15, 1978, issue, page 20 down to second subheading on page 22.) Cover page 20 in brief introductory talk (2 min.), showing how we “taste,” as stated at Psalm 34:8, and how understanding the circumstances of David gives added meaning to that verse.
In covering page 21 and down to second subheading on page 22, read all the paragraphs under any one subheading (a different reader for each section), and then ask appropriate questions. Emphasize the final paragraph in each section.
In conclusion, encourage all to consider prayerfully what has been said at this meeting. As dedicated servants of God, are there changes that we should be making in our lives in order to share more fully in Jehovah’s service? Jehovah promises good things to those who, moved by faith, make such adjustments. (Applications for pioneer service may be obtained from the congregation secretary.)
 5 min: Local arrangements for field service. Mention subject that will be discussed at meetings for field service next week. Song 43 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 18
15 min: Song 105. General announcements and discussion on “Taste and See that Jehovah Is Good.”
(10 min.) Further discussion of article from Watchtower of August 15, 1978; from second subheading on page 22 to end of page 23. Objective is to stimulate desire to share in the blessings of pioneer service. Arrange in advance for youths in audience to read paragraphs. After reading a full section, invite comments. Have youths and any who have been pioneers ready to offer brief comments highlighting benefits of pioneer service.
Remind those who plan to auxiliary pioneer during April to turn in their applications.
20 min: One Is Our Leader—Are You Following His Lead? Scriptural discussion based on Matthew 23:10. Use following questions and scriptures to draw out examples of how each one personally has benefited from the lead of Christ in the areas considered. (Scriptures may be paraphrased or key points read.)
How did Jesus set the lead for us in witnessing? (John 18:37; Rev. 1:5) In attitude toward the work of witnessing? (John 4:34) In witnessing when it makes unusual demands on us? (Mark 6:31-34; Luke 9:10, 11) In witnessing even when meeting many who are not interested?—Matt. 23:37.
How has Jesus’ lead helped you to deal with serious problems you have faced as a witness for Jehovah? (Heb. 5:7, 8) To put up with opposition or indifference from family members? (Mark 3:21; Matt. 13:57, 58) To deal with others in a Christian manner?—Matt. 11:28-30.
All appreciate fine example Christ set for us. But he also backed up his lead to the point of ‘surrendering his soul for the sheep.’ (John 10:11, 15) This event will be called to mind at the Memorial on April 11. Can show loyal support for our Leader, Ransomer and King by being there and inviting others. Ask audience: How would you invite those with whom you study, relatives, neighbors, workmates, schoolmates and others to Memorial? Mention that Presenting the Good News has suggestions.
15 min: What Are We Doing with What We Are Learning?
Work needs to be done on this part WELL IN ADVANCE. Many fine field points and others to help us in our everyday lives are covered in our meetings. Our objective should be to use what we learn. (Jas. 1:22-25) On this part, use 5 minutes for each of the following meetings: Watchtower study, service meeting, congregation book study. Early in the month assign one or two book study groups to each of the three meetings; ask them to be alert to use points gleaned from material discussed at the meetings. (Rotate the assignments so that study groups are not concentrating on the same meeting that they had last month.) They may apply it in their own lives, use it in informal witnessing or when going from house to house or on a return visit. We would like to hear their experiences. This should not be a review of the meetings but should highlight how material from the meetings has actually been used.
10 min: Local arrangements for field service. Announce details regarding literature offer for April. (See Announcements.) Special public talk will be given on April 1 (or during that week) on subject “Happy Though Hungry—How Can It Be?” This talk is being given in congregations in many parts of the world next week. Don’t miss it, and endeavor to bring others with you. Song 46 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 25
Program to be planned locally to fit congregation needs. Include 15-minute discussion of April literature offer. Talk about how and when to offer subscriptions. Special magazines have been prepared for April; give them wide distribution. Encourage all to take note of what April issue of Our Kingdom Service says about a special program of Bible reading before Memorial.

