Presenting the Good News—With Memorial Invitations
1 The Memorial celebration brings to our minds what Christ has done in behalf of all of us, both those of the anointed remnant and the “other sheep.” Though Christ’s command, “Keep doing this in remembrance of me,” was specifically addressed to those who were to reign with him in the heavens as kings and priests, all of us have benefited from the sacrifice that he offered that very day. And this is still open to thousands, perhaps millions more who have yet to exercise faith.—Luke 22:19; John 3:16.
2 Therefore all who truly appreciate Christ’s ransom sacrifice, as well as God’s arrangement for Kingdom rule by those taken into the “new covenant,” will want to be present as observers in memorial of this important occasion. Those who attend have the spirit of John the Baptizer, who, knowing that his position was similar to that of an observer at a wedding ceremony, rejoiced with the bride (the anointed) and the bridegroom (Jesus).—John 3:29.
3 How can we bring these points home to those we invite to join with us for the Memorial observance? Of course, the printed Memorial invitations will be helpful, but we will want to make a warm personal appeal along with the invitation. Perhaps one could say something like this: “I very much want to give you this personal invitation to our yearly celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. To be there shows that one appreciates what Christ has done for us. Notice here at 2 Corinthians 5:14 how the Bible indicates that we should show our appreciation: [Read to “. . . died for all.”] The Lord’s Evening Meal is the only occasion that Christ himself commanded for special observance. At the meeting there will be an explanation from the Bible of the meaning of this event and its significance in our lives today. We hope you will arrange to be with us on Wednesday evening, April 11. The time and the address of our Kingdom Hall are on the invitation I gave you.” Other scriptures that could be used are Acts 4:12 and John 14:6.
4 No doubt our love for God and his Son will ‘compel us’ to invite all possible to assemble on this most important occasion. Especially should we encourage those who have already shown some interest in the truth to be present and, if possible, offer to call for them.

