What Can You Do with the Help of Holy Spirit?
1 “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me,” declared the apostle Paul. Do you have that same confidence? Do you reach out for that power through God’s holy spirit? It is there for the asking.—Phil. 4:13; Luke 11:13.
2 Just consider what our brothers in the past have done with the help of Jehovah’s spirit. Noah built a huge ark. Solomon built a temple without equal. Samson slew a thousand men single-handed and pulled down a pagan temple. But perhaps even more significant to us is the fact that Jehovah’s spirit sustained his prophets, ordinary people like us, in preaching work.
MANY PIONEER—CAN YOU?
3 Thousands today have also said, in effect, ‘With the help of holy spirit I can pioneer.’ And they are doing it! On an average, 115,000 around the world are special, regular or auxiliary pioneers each month. Even in lands where the work is under ban, there are thousands who are in the pioneer service. As some brothers have said, ‘If God’s spirit can raise dead people to life, it surely can animate live ones to make them strong for pioneering.’
4 What some of our brothers can do with the help of this spirit from God amazes us. Consider one 73-year-old brother here in the United States who has been a regular pioneer for 10 years. About a year ago he had to have both legs amputated. Until then he had been spending about 130 hours each month in field service. This average dropped somewhat during the three months following his operation. But then he began spending over 110 hours each month in the service—without legs! He wrote: “Although I have some problems, I am happy doing the Lord’s work again. Now, I feel as if I am of some use. In about three months I should get my artificial legs and will use them in the Lord’s service.” Who would deny that God’s holy spirit sustains such ones and imparts power to them? Why not take advantage of this “helper” to help you to pioneer?—John 14:26.
5 One sister who decided to pioneer wrote to the Society: “It was my desire to become a regular pioneer, but I was wary, due to my obligations as a wife and as a mother of three children, aged 11, 6 and 4. However, after attending the ‘Victorious Faith’ Convention in Pontiac, Mich., I knew that, if Jehovah willed, I could do it! I was especially encouraged and strengthened by Thursday’s talks on pioneering. Right then, I decided to put Jehovah to the test. He has answered my prayers. Last night I received my appointment as a regular pioneer.” This sister felt her circumstances would permit her to pioneer; that may not be true of all mothers. But during just the last month of these “Victorious Faith” conventions, the U.S. branch received over 740 applications for the regular pioneer service, more than for any month during the preceding three years! Many of these were married couples who want to pioneer together. Others were teen-agers, widows, retired folks, housewives and people from all walks of life. Holy spirit is helping them to do what many once thought impossible. They are pioneering!
6 Of course, some have Scriptural obligations that make it impossible to be regular pioneers. Even so, many of these find a way to auxiliary pioneer from time to time. Their hearts are in the pioneer work. They have the pioneer spirit.
YOU CAN ENCOURAGE PIONEERING
7 Many of the elders are among those who reflect this spirit. Some of them are able to auxiliary pioneer, and even where this is not possible, they give enthusiastic support to those who can.
8 Unfortunately, not all publishers seem to have this spirit. Some have been heard to discourage those who are in a position to pioneer from doing so. However, they may not appreciate the benefits that result to those who “taste and see that Jehovah is good.” (Ps. 34:8) Many who have set aside pursuits that brought them material advantages in order to pioneer have been richly blessed. Seeking the Kingdom first in expression of their faith has increased their spiritual treasures. And, as the Scriptures promise, Jehovah has added the material things they needed.—Matt. 6:33.
9 We are commanded to preach the Kingdom good news. For many to share in this work more fully it could mean pioneering. What a fine way to carry out the words of our yeartext: “My Father is glorified in this, that you keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples.” (John 15:8) Thus glorifying Jehovah we can be confident of his backing and the help of his holy spirit.

