‘A Drawer That Only Jehovah Can Open’
▪ In 2007, six-year-old Erika and four-year-old Mattia lost their father in death. The children’s pain has been eased, however, by the resurrection hope.—Acts 24:15.
Erika likes to share her Bible-based hope with others, especially at her school in Sicily. For example, when her friend Beatrice said that Erika’s father was now in heaven, Erika kindly replied that the Bible indicates otherwise. “So where is he then?” asked Beatrice.
“In the tomb,” replied Erika. At that point, Beatrice wanted to know what a tomb is.
“It’s like a drawer that opens and closes,” explained Erika. “But once this drawer is closed, you can’t open it. Only Jehovah can open it when the new world comes.”
Erika then explained to her friend that Jehovah is God’s name, that he will bring about a paradise on earth, that there will be no more sickness, and that dead ones will return to life. Then Erika asked Beatrice to check with her mother to see if it would be all right for her to receive as a gift a book that discusses these things.
When she had been assured that Beatrice’s mother had given permission, Erika gave her friend a copy of the book Learn From the Great Teacher. Erika continues to talk to others about the things she is learning from the Bible and has even given a copy of the above-mentioned book to her teacher.
Of course, Erika and her little brother still have sad moments because of the loss of their dad. But the resurrection hope makes them feel better. These children, like many others around the world, render thanks to Jehovah, the God of true comfort.—Matthew 21:16; 2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
You may request a copy of this 256-page, beautifully illustrated book, which has the same page size as this magazine. Simply fill in the accompanying coupon and mail it to the address provided or to an appropriate address listed on page 5 of this magazine.
□ Without obligation, I request a copy of the book shown here.
□ Please contact me concerning a free home Bible study.

