A Sure Source of Guidance and Hope
UNLIKE the demons, Jehovah God is all-wise and all-powerful. He is also the very personification of love. (1 John 4:8) His advice is always good, he offers it free of charge, and he has our best interests at heart. What a contrast to the advice of clairvoyants and psychics! “Hey there, all you [spiritually] thirsty ones!” God says. “Come to the water. And the ones that have no money! Come, buy and eat. Yes, come, buy wine and milk even without money and without price. Why do you people keep paying out money for what is not bread, and why is your toil for what results in no satisfaction? Listen intently to me, and eat what is good, and let your soul find its exquisite delight in fatness itself.”—Isaiah 55:1, 2.
Because it was inspired by our loving Creator, the Bible gives us hope, spiritual protection, purpose in life, and the very best principles to live by. Why not reflect for a moment on the following questions and the related passages taken from the Bible?
[Box on page 7]
● How can I find genuine inner peace? The Bible states: “This is what Jehovah has said, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: ‘I, Jehovah, am your God, the One teaching you to benefit yourself, the One causing you to tread in the way in which you should walk. O if only you would actually pay attention to my commandments! Then your peace would become just like a river, and your righteousness like the waves of the sea.’”—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
● Will evil always exist? “The upright are the ones that will reside in the earth, and the blameless are the ones that will be left over in it. As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.” (Proverbs 2:21, 22) Yes, wicked humans, as well as the wicked angels, will be destroyed everlastingly, as if by fire.—Revelation 20:10, 14.
● Will there be an end to sickness and suffering? “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things [today’s many problems] have passed away.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
  Unlike the demons, God never lies. In fact, he “cannot lie.” (Titus 1:2) Moreover, as the final article in this series will show, his truth is both liberating and life-giving.—John 8:32; 17:3.

