Bible Truth Set Them Free
JESUS CHRIST said to a group of listeners: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) As the following examples show, that freedom includes freedom from the demons, the liars and deceivers behind the occult.—John 8:44.
Each of these experiences highlights the liberating power of Bible truth. Yes, it alone truly sets people free. Why not examine the Bible for yourself. You will not be disappointed.
[Box/Picture on page 8]
Pictures are reenactments
● Susanna was a temple priestess in Brazil. She wanted to use her paranormal powers to help the needy. Additionally, she enjoyed “talking with her dead mother.” In time, however, her “mother” pleaded with her to kill herself and live with her in the spirit world. This tormented Susanna and gave her nightmares. Then Susanna and her husband began studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. They had a hard fight ‘opposing the Devil,’ but eventually he ‘fled from them.’ (James 4:7) Now they have peace, and Susanna no longer has nightmares. “I have so many things to thank Jehovah for,” she wrote, “but I am most thankful that he led us out of spiritual darkness.”
[Box/Picture on page 8]
● Timothy, who lives in West Africa, is deaf and mute.a Because regular doctors could not help him, he went to faith healers, but in vain. “My heart was broken by the deception,” he wrote. Then Timothy studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, who explained to him God’s purpose to remove all sickness and disabilities. Timothy said, “I eagerly await the day in God’s new world when ‘the very ears of the deaf ones will be unstopped . . . and the tongue of the speechless one will cry out in gladness.’” (Isaiah 35:1-6) In the meantime, he enjoys using a portable DVD player to share Bible truths with other people who are hearing impaired, helping them find true freedom.
[Footnote]
Some names have been changed.
[Box/Picture on page 9]
● Evelyn was deeply involved in the occult in Estonia. Since Jesus cured people, she wanted to do the same. She especially wanted to help her chronically ill mother. Thus, in an effort to diagnose and treat serious illness, she learned how to use pendulums. In time, she examined the Bible. The result? “I came to understand how deceived I had been,” she said. “So I burned my spiritistic literature and pendulums.” She now teaches the Bible’s liberating truths to others.
[Box/Picture on page 9]
● Mary grew up on one of the islands of Papua New Guinea, where people are afraid of the dead. When someone in her village died, Mary would sleep under another person’s bed, fearing that the spirit of the deceased would harass her if she was alone. Then she learned from the Bible that the dead are asleep—they are in the grave, awaiting a resurrection to life in Paradise on earth. (Luke 23:43; John 11:11-14) As a result, she no longer fears the dead.
[Box/Picture on page 9]
● Alicia, who was raised in a Christian home in the United States, took an interest in occult books and movies. Then she began to think seriously about the Bible truths she had learned. Realizing that she had, in reality, been trying to ‘partake of the table of Jehovah and the table of demons,’ she changed her ways and now has a clean conscience before God.—1 Corinthians 10:21.

