R1277 : cover 

Scriptures around perimeter of front page: 

Along top: 

"The Lord Reigneth! Let the Earth Rejoice.— Zion Heard and was Glad.— Judah 

Rejoiced."-Psa. 97:1,8. 

Along left edge: 

Fear not, Little Flock; for it is Your Father's good Pleasure to give You the 

Kingdom. They shall be Kings and Priests unto God, and Reign on the Earth. 

Along right edge: 

To him that Overcometh I will Grant to Sit with Me in My Throne, and to Eat of 

the Hidden Manna, He shall not be Hurt of the Second Death. 

Along bottom: 

"Arise, Shine; for thy Light is Come, and the Glory of the Lord is Risen upon 

Thee."-Isa. 60:1. 



Inside perimeter border: 

Vol. No., Cross & Crown emblem, Date. 

ZION'S 

WATCH TOWER 

and 

Herald of Christ's 

Presence. 



"Watchman, What of the Night? 

The Morning Cometh, and a Night also! If Ye will Inquire, Ye may Inquire. 

Isaiah 21:11. 



THE TEMPLE OF THE LIVING GOD. 



THE CHURCH.— Heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, our Lord. 

The Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

BASIS OF HOPE.— Ye were Bought with a Price, even the precious Blood of 

Christ— Accepted in the Beloved. 

HER HIGH CALLING.— Therefore, being justified by Faith— we have this Grace, 

wherein we rejoice. 

HER PROSPECTS.— To share the Divine Nature— made like her Lord in the First 

Resurrection. 



PRESENT WORK. --Perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry and 

Witnessing to the World. 

FUTURE WORK.— To bless and judge the world in righteousness, bringing all to 

full knowledge of the Truth. 

HOW TO ATTAIN THE PRIZE.— Wherefore, laying aside every weight and sin, let us 

Run with Patience the Race; looking unto Jesus, who for the same joy endured 

the Cross, despising the shame. 

THE WARNING. -He that looketh back is not fit for the Kingdom. Let no man 

take thy Crown. 

ENCOURAGEMENT.— He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able. 

HER GLORY.— Then shall the Righteous Shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of 

their Father. 

ROM. 8:17; REV. 21:9; 1 COR. 6:20; 1 PET. 18,19; ROM. 5:1,2; 
2 PET. 1:3,4; 1 JOHN 3:2; REV. 20:6; EPH. 4:12; MATT. 24:14; 
GAL. 3:16,29; ACTS 17:31; 1 TIM. 2:4,6; HEB. 12:1,2; LUKE 9:62; 
REV. 3:11; 1 COR. 10:13; MATT. 13:43. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ARCH ST.. 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



R1278 : inside cover 

WE CONTEND EARNESTLY FOR THE FAITH 

-ONCE DELIVERED TO THE SAINTS.- 



"We trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men 
—specially [or most fully and everlastingly] of those that 
believe."— 1 Tim. 4:10. 

"To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, 
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are 
all things, and we by him."— 1 Cor. 8:6. 

All we are brethren, and one is our Master, even Christ. 
(Matt. 23:8.) Our Master declares: "If ye keep my commandments 
ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept 
my Father's commandments and abide in his love." "And 
this is his commandment, that we love one another." 

WE SEEK TO WALK 

Worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, with all 
lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one 
another in love; endeavoring to preserve the unity of the 
spirit [oneness of mind] in the bond of peace. There is 
ONE BODY [Church], with ONE SPIRIT [one sentiment 
or disposition], even as we are called in ONE HOPE of 



our calling; ONE LORD, ONE FAITH, ONE BAPTISM, 
ONE GOD AND FATHER OF ALL, who is 
above all and through all and in us all.— Eph. 4:1-6. 

THE ONE BODY-is "the Church of the living God, the 
pillar and support of the truth;" "the Church of the first-born" 
"whose names are written in heaven;" the "little flock," 
to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom; 
the members in particular of the body of Christ; prospectively, 
Christ's Bride and joint-heir; the "Seed of Abraham," 
of which our Lord Jesus is Head. Since Pentecost this 
Church of Christ has been in process of selection from among 
justified believers, or the general "household of faith;" and 
its members, when complete and glorified, unitedly shall inherit 
the Abrahamic promise and bless all the families of the 
earth.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

THE ONE SPIRIT-is the spirit of the Truth, the spirit 
of God, the spirit of adoption as sons of God, which actuates 
and governs all who are of the ONE BODY, in vital union with 
the one Head, Christ Jesus. It is the spirit of holiness, and 
chief among its fruits is Love. 

THE ONE HOPE— which inspires all the members of the 
one body of Christ, who have the one spirit of the Truth, is 
"the hope set before us in the gospel," and not hopes suggested 
from our own or other men's imaginations or conjectures. 
The one hope is a "good hope" (2 Thes. 2:16), a 
hope of eternal life by a resurrection. (Titus 3:7.) The 
ground of this hope is found in Jehovah's promises, confirmed 
unto us by the death of our Lord Jesus as the ransom 
price for our sins, and by his resurrection from the dead for 
our justification.— 1 Pet. 1:3; Acts 17:31. 

THE ONE LORD-is the Head or Chief of the one body 
—his Church possessing the spirit of the Truth and actuated 
by the one hope of becoming his Bride and joint-heir. He 
and his Father are one, even as he and his church are one. 
(John 17:11.) He is the Redeemer of his church as well 
as her Lord, Exemplar and Master. And he is the Redeemer 
also of the whole world, and by virtue of that office he is 
to be the world's Deliverer from Adamic sin and death. He 
it is who in all things has the pre-eminence in Jehovah's plan 
and work. He was not only "the beginning of the creation 
of God," "the first-born of every creature," but more: he was 
the "beginning and the ending," he was the "Alpha and the 
Omega, the first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation; for 
all other "things were made by him, and without him was not 
any thing made that was made." (Col. 1:15,18; Rev. 3:14; 
1:8; 21:6; 22: 13; John 1:3.) He it is who, to carry 
out the Father's gracious plan, willingly left the glory which 
he had with the Father before the world was created, and 
became a man— a little lower than the angels— that he might, 
as a man, present himself in sacrifice for the sins of man. 
Thus we behold him as the "Mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all." 
(1 Tim. 2:5,6.) By his willing sacrifice of himself for men 
he bought Adam and the entire race condemned through his 
fall, and became Lord of all— not only of the living, but also 
of the dead, with full power and authority to awaken and 



restore to all that was lost whosoever accepts of the 
New Covenant of divine favor which, by his death, he sealed 
and made effective to all. But our Lord is no longer in the 
flesh, no longer a human being. He has finished the work 
of ransoming us, for which the taking of the flesh was needful. 
He was indeed put to death in the flesh, but was quickened 
[made alive] in the spirit. "Though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know him [so] no 
more." As he was begotten of the spirit at his baptism, so 
he was born of the spirit at his resurrection; and "that which 
is born of the spirit is spirit." "Now the Lord is that spirit." 
(1 Pet. 3:18; 2 Cor. 5:16; John 3:6; 2 Cor. 3:17.) 
Because he showed his obedience to the Father, and 
his confidence, in that he humbled himself to become a man 
and tasted death for every man, therefore God highly exalted 
him— far above manhood, far above the angelic nature; 
even far above his own glorious previous station, and gave 
him a name [title] above every name, that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow and every tongue confess, to 
the glory of God the Father. He made him partaker of the 
divine nature and honor, "that all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father." "He is Lord of all."— 
Phil. 2:8-11; John 5:22,23,26; Acts 10:36. 

THE ONE FAITH— is that we were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son, who died for our sins, the just for the 
unjust, to bring us to God; by whom we have accepted the 
at-one-ment with God, offered unto us. Wherefore, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; being cleansed 
by his blood [sacrifice], we are brought nigh to God and 
are no longer strangers and foreigners, but children and heirs 
of his favors, prepared for those who love him when brought 
nigh through the precious blood. Through this faith we 
grasp the exceeding great and precious promises of God as 
rapidly as we see them, and gladly appropriate them to ourselves. 
Faith anchors our hearts securely to the precious 
things of the future, though unseen as yet except to the eye 
of faith. Faith is the power of God to every one that believeth. 

THE ONE BAPTISM.-Those of the one BODY and one 
HOPE, joined to the one LORD, possessing the one FAITH, are 
all baptized or immersed into Jesus Christ. (Rom. 6:3.) 
As individuals they have reckonedly ceased to exist: henceforth, 
for them to live is for Christ to live. With their wills 
buried or immersed into the will of Christ, they thenceforth 
live, not unto themselves, but unto him that bought them 
with his own precious blood. Their own wills are dead, 
and henceforth they recognize only the will of the one Lord, 
the Head of the body, which is his church, whose names are 
written in heaven. Justified believers attain membership in 
this Church of Christ through this burial or immersion of 
their hearts, their wills, into the will of Christ. And as the 
Apostle further declares, this immersion of our wills (ourselves) 
into Christ is acceptable only when it is an immersion 
even unto death— an entire, a complete immersion forever. 
"Know ye not that so many of us as were immersed into Jesus 
Christ were immersed into his death? Therefore we are 
buried with him by immersion into death; that like as Christ 



was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we 

also [from the time of our consecration, the immersion of 

our wills into that of the one Lord,] should walk in newness 

of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness 

of his death, we shall be [sharers] also in the likeness of 

his resurrection"— the first resurrection, to be with him and 

like him, partakers of the divine nature. (Rom. 6:3-5; 

Phil. 3:10,11.) This is the only real baptism, of which immersion 

in water is only the beautiful and appropriate symbol. 



R1279 : page 1 

VOL. XII. JANUARY, 1891. NO. 1. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



"Looking back, we praise the way 
God has led us, led us day by day." 

Throughout the civilized world, despite the 
prognostications of many, peace prevails to a 
remarkable degree. While on every hand the two 
great armies, Capital and Labor, are busily organizing, 
and the various elements are preparing 
for the great final struggle and time of 
trouble such as was not since there was a nation, 
yet peace still prevails. And thus we see before 
us a fulfilment of God's prediction that the 
violent winds of war should be checked and 
holden until the sealing of the saints of God 
should be accomplished.— Rev. 7:1-3. 

Meantime the sealing progresses. Daily and 
hourly the saints of God are being searched 
out and sealed "in their foreheads" [intellectually] 
with a clear appreciation of "the mystery 
of God" which has been kept secret in 
part hitherto, but is now made manifest unto the 
saints, according to the will of God— the mystery 
of God being about finished. (Rev. 10:7; 
Rom. 16:25,26.) The "angels" or messengers 
doing this sealing (Rev. 7:1) are the same 
messengers referred to by our Lord when he declared 
that in the harvest or end of this age he 
would send forth his messengers with the sound 
of a great trumpet [the seventh trumpet], to 
gather together his elect from one end of heaven 
to the other. Every consecrated child of 
God who receives the truth realizes at once his 
duty and privilege of imparting it to others. 
He hears the commission, "Go ye into the 
vineyard;" and "He thatreapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 



These are the Lord's "angels"— messengers or 
servants. The sealing and the gathering we 
understand to refer to the same thing. And the 
heavens through which these messengers go sealing 
and gathering is not the heaven of God's 
throne, but the symbolic heavens so often referred 
to in the book of Revelation, namely, 
the nominal church. 

This "gathering together" is not a literal assembling 
in one locality, just as the heavens are 
not literal. The gathering is into one condition, 
into unity of heart and mind through the knowledge 
of the divine plan of the ages, and corresponds 
exactly to the sealing in the forehead; 
for all the elect are to be sealed with the same 
seal; and all thus sealed are to see eye to eye, 
and to be one in heart and hope and work. 

This sealing is performed only upon the consecrated. 
And the rapidity with which the work 
of sealing progresses in each, and which of them 
will eventually be fully sealed, depend upon the 
degrees of faithfulness to their consecration vows 
on the part of the various servants of God in the 
time of the sealing. His servants should serve him; 
and those who, either from slothfulness or from 
being overcharged with earthly things, are neglecting 
Christ's service, and burying the talents 
consecrated to him, will be passed by— will not be 
fully sealed if at all marked, but will be left to 

R1279 : page 2 

have their portion with the world in the great 
trouble which will begin just as soon as the faithful 
are all "gathered" and "sealed." 

All this implies great commotion, not only 
in the "heavens" [nominal church] but also 
among those being "gathered" and "sealed." 
It means crucial testing and sifting and close 
examination by the Lord through his truth and 
providences; for the Lord himself is the great 
superintendent of this important work, and is 
now directing his own servants. Each sealed 
one becomes a sealer of others as soon as he 
himself is sealed; and each gathered one becomes 
a gatherer of others as soon as he himself 
comes into oneness of heart and head with 
the Lord and the present truth. 

We must not wonder, then, at the shaking and 
falling now in progress among those most closely 
in contact with the work of sealing and gathering. 
The divisions must come. The Lord's words 
show us that it will cause much commotion 
when his order to separate wheat from tares is 
put into effect— a commotion which he would not 
permit until the harvest time had come. (Matt. 13:28-30.) 



And then in some respects a still 
greater commotion will ensue when these sealed 
and gathered servants, the "wheat" class, are 
examined after having been brought into some 
measure of the light and privileges of the present 
truth— when, as shown in two parables, 
two classes will be forcibly cast out of the light 
into the outer darkness of the world, thus to 
pass with the world through the great trouble now 
impending. The two classes to be thus cast out 
by the Lord are— first, those who have taken off 
the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness 
and who deny the precious blood and the ransom 
which it alone secures; and secondly, the 
unfaithful servants who bury their consecrated 
talents in earthly things instead of using them 
in the Master's service. No earthly power can 
keep such from going into the outer darkness 
of error, for it is the Master's order that they 
shall be cast out. 

Moreover, we can only expect that such will 
struggle vehemently against any reproofs and 
against any words of warning, and claim that 
instead of going into the outer darkness of the 
world they are following new light. As a reward 
for your efforts to do them good and to help them, 
by exposing their delusions, they will hate you 
and say all manner of evil against you. Be not 
surprised at this; it is merely incidental to the 
sifting which must go on to the finish. Remember 
the Master's words further— It is needful 
that offenses and divisions come, but woe to 
that man by whom the offense cometh. (Matt. 18:7; 
Rom. 16:17; 1 Cor. 11:19.) Let us 
not by our acts or words or looks drive such from 
us, except in so far as faithfulness in speaking 
the truth boldly and in love will do it. Let us 
not by our acts or words or looks drive such from 
us, except in so far as faithfulness in speaking 
the truth boldly and in love will do it. Let the 
truth make the separation. Speak the truth in 
love, and stand firmly by it. It is the power of 
God, not only in the first separating and gathering, 
but it will be the power also in the second 
separating and casting out. "For the word of 
God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any 
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing 
of soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, 
and is a discerner [manifester] of the thoughts 
and intents of the heart."— Heb. 4:12. 

Nor will those cast out of the light, as unworthy 
of it, recognize the agency by which the 
Lord will cast them out, any more than they 
recognized his agency in bringing them into the 
light. Yet he tells us that he will cast them out. 
They will go out from us because they were not 



of us, that it may be manifest that they were not 

all of us. (1 John 2:19.) They go out from us 

because they lack full consecration and full submission 

to the will of God. For this cause, thus 

to cast them out, the Lord will send them 

strong delusions, delusive errors, that they may 

believe a lie; that thus all who, when they know 

the truth, fail to take pleasure in serving it, 

may be condemned and manifested as unworthy 

of joint-heirship with Christ, and consequently 

unworthy of the light which he provides only 

for such. 

THE DOUBLE WORK NOW PROGRESSING. 

While the gathering and sealing work naturally 
took precedence to the sifting and testing 

R1280 : page 2 

of the gathered and sealed, yet now both are 
simultaneously progressing; and no sooner is the 
sealed one rejoiced with the beauty of the Lord's 

R1280:page3 

great plan than he, on being ushered into the 
company of the sealed, begins to be sifted and 
tested. "Who is sufficient for these things?" 
"Who shall be able to stand?" (2 Cor. 2:16; 
Mai. 3:2,3; Rev. 6:17.) None but the faithful 
shall be able to stand, because the Lord purposely 
will make the test so severe as to sift and 
shake out all others. (2 Thes. 2:1 1.) The faithful 
are those who are trusting in Jesus for all, 
and whose will is the will of their God, who are 
so consecrated to his will that they rejoice to 
serve him with every talent possessed. 

Both the gathering work and the sifting work 
are increasing. While the division is great and 
many are being cast out of the light, the faithful 
are daily becoming more awake to the privilege 
of being co-workers with the Lord in the 
present harvest, and the gathering more than 
keeps pace with the sifting and the falling. Each 
knows something of the falling, for it is confined to 
no one locality; but you do not all realize the 
great work of gathering now in progress, and we 
want, for your encouragement, to tell you of it 
briefly. 

The monthly circulation of the TOWER averages 
about ten thousand copies, which we may 
safely estimate represents fifteen thousand readers. 
And of those readers, scattered in all parts 
of the world, we estimate, judging from the 
letters received, that about four thousand are fully 



consecrated to the Lord and using their talents 
to praise him to the best of their ability. 
Such have the Master's assurance that they shall 
never fall, but that an abundant entrance shall 
be granted them into the everlasting kingdom 
and joys of their Lord; for they are faithful, 
and faithful is he that called them, who also will 
do all that he has so graciously promised. 

This probable 4000 may look to some like a 
very insignificant number in comparison with 
the millions of nominal Christians; and yet if 
there are so many of the consecrated and faithful 
now living, it is a large proportion of the 
full number-- 144,000 (Rev. 7:4)-to be made 
up during the 1900 years of the Gospel age, 
which would be an average of about 76 persons 
each year. And if 4000 persons now living are 
fully consecrated to the Lord and faithful, and 
have been so developed during the past ten 
years, this would show an average of 400 persons 
annually during the past ten years, or more 
than five times the proportionate annual number. 
So even this seemingly small estimate of 4000 
may be considerably reduced by the trials and 
siftings now in process, which are designed to 
prove their worthiness of the prize of the high 
calling. Like Gideon's band, this 144,000 is 
to be a picked and choice company. 

The others, the many— and the very anticipation 
causes pain— will probably all fall, according 
to the words of our Master's testimony, 
unless they, too, arouse speedily and by a full 
consecration enter fully into the Master's work 
as the chief business of life. While some will 
be falling because of unfaithfulness, losing the 
crowns apportioned to them when they made 
their covenant of consecration (Rev. 3:11), 
others will be "gathered" in and tested until 
the elect number of the "body" is complete. 

Oh! awake beloved, and resolve, each of you, 
that the Lord's work shall be your chief joy and 
chief work during the year just begun. The 
time is short. Labor while it is called to-day, 
for the night of trouble will soon end all the 
present, blessed opportunities, and it is he that 
reapeth that receiveth wages and gathereth fruit 
unto everlasting life. 

Of the estimated four thousand laborers in the 
cause of the present truth, engaged as the Lord's 
messengers in gathering and sealing his servants 
in their foreheads, of course the larger number 
are those who have only one or two talents 
—who were so hampered by marriage, families, 
etc., before the truth got hold of them, before 
their sealing, that their time, influence, means, 
etc., are more or less mortgaged to these earthly 



things, and less is therefore left for the great 
service of our King which now opens before 
them. These are using what opportunities or 
talents they have at their disposal, and are realizing 
the Lord's promise that he that uses his 
talents shall have them increased; and daily, in 
blessing and sealing others with the truth, these 
are entering into the joys of our Lord and having 
a foretaste of the new wine (joys) which we 
shall share with him when the Kingdom is fully 

R1280:page4 

established and when the truth shall flow to and 
bless all the families of the earth. 

Another part of the work which has received 
a great impetus during the past year is that 
known as the Colporteur work. Brethren and 
sisters who have five talents— influence, earthly 
prospects (money, etc.), reputation, strength 
and time— find that the best way of using all 
these to bring honor to the Master, to whom 
these talents by our consecration belong, is in 
taking the truth from house to house and from 
city to city, by introducing to others the Father's 
great plan and the harvest message which has 
sealed and so richly blessed them. It costs 
them something indeed thus to forsake earthly 
things— friends, houses, lands, money prospects 
and reputation; yet, noble band! they count 
all these things but loss and dross for the excellency 
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, 
whom they serve. Yea, they count not their 
lives dear unto them, but rejoice thus to be 
privileged to be Christ's co-workers and ambassadors 
for the truth in his stead. 

The world knoweth these not, even as it knew 
not the Master; but all who do recognize them 
should, if they ever have opportunity, set before 
them the best they have, and should rejoice to 
do for them as unto the Lord. 

Still there is room in this service, which seems 
to be the one most abundantly owned and 
blessed of the Lord. All the unencumbered can 
be given this grand opportunity for preaching 
the glad tidings. And we are continually in 
communication with others who are in various 
stages of preparation for this work, their full 
and grateful hearts longing to give every talent 
to the service of him who loved us and bought 
us with his own precious blood. The unencumbered 
need no preparation; but those who have 
families require to put matters in such shape that 
those dependent on them shall not suffer want 
(1 Tim. 5:8), while they are spreading the good 
tidings, else they must content themselves with 



a lesser service. Truly the work is a marvelous 
one— not that it would be strange to get so 
many to engage in any business if they had good 
salaries guaranteed— that we see every day; but 
it is unusual to find so many laboring for the 
mere necessities of life— for the majority barely 
meet their expenses, and those who can do more 
often esteem it a privilege to donate of their 
surplus to the TRACT FUND to help carry on the 
general work of preaching the truth. 

ANOTHER PART OF THE WORK. 

Another agency being greatly blessed and 
used by the Master in finding and sealing his 
faithful sheep is the OLD THEOLOGY TRACT work. 
Hundreds of thousands of these little messengers 
have gone hither and thither carrying the 
bread and water of life to many. Our readers 
have procured and distributed many thousands 
—one Brother subscribing for and circulating 
three thousand Tracts each quarter, and others 
less quantities in proportion to their means or 
opportunities for using them. Others who are 
too poor to purchase we have supplied gratis, 
and others who have no means of using the 
tracts have sent donations to the fund, thus to 
help on the cause of publishing and circulating 
the truth. 

About a year ago we requested the friends of 
the cause to send in to us memoranda of the 
numbers of the Post Office boxes in use in their 
towns. We got responses from many and sent 
out sample tracts by the hundreds of thousands, 
until the available funds, tracts, etc., ran low. 
We are now preparing for a vigorous campaign 
for our King and his truth, to set at liberty and 
to seal his earnest servants. Over twenty millions 
of pages of Old Theology Tracts are already 
under way and will soon, we trust, be with 
the Lord's other servants and agencies seeking 
and sealing his jewels. We could tell you much, 
too, of the faithful laborers connected with the 
TOWER Office, as well as of others of the faithful 
scattered ones who are doing what they can for 
the Master, whose places of service are less conspicuous 
than those of the colporteurs; but we 
forbear. The Lord knoweth his own. If any 
man will do the Father's will, he shall know of 
the doctrine. 

The grace, mercy, peace and blessing of our 
Lord Jesus be and abide with all who love him 
and serve him and trust his precious, cleansing 
blood during the year begun. Amen. 



R1284:page5 

"FROM GLORY UNTO GLORY." 



-2 COR. 3:18.- 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Be this our joyous song, 
As on the narrow way to life we bravely march along ! 
"From Glory unto Glory!" O word of stirring cheer, 
As dawns the solemn brightness of another glad New Year. 

Our own beloved Master "hath many things to say." 
Look forward to his teaching, unfolding day by day; 
To whispers of his spirit, to insight clear and sweet, 
To blessed consolation, while resting at his feet. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Our faith hath seen the King. 
We own his matchless beauty, as adoringly we sing; 
But he hath more to show us! O thought of untold bliss! 
And on we press exultingly in blessed hope to this:— 

To marvelous outpourings of his 'treasures new and old,' 
To largess of his bounty, paid in the King's own gold, 
To glorious expansion of his mysteries of grace, 
To radiant unveilings of the brightness of his face. 

From Glory unto Glory! What great things he hath done, 
What wonders he hath shown us, what triumphs he hath 

won! 
We marvel at the records of the blessings of the year! 
But sweeter than the Christmas bells rings out his promise 

clear- 
That "greater things," far greater, our longing eyes shall 

see! 
We can but wait and wonder what "greater things" shall 

be! 
But glorious fulfilments rejoicingly we claim, 
While pleading in the power of the All-Prevailing Name. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" What mighty blessings crown 
The lives for which our Lord hath laid his own so freely 

down! 
Omnipotence to keep us, Omniscience, too, to guide, 
Jehovah's blessed Presence within us to abide! 

The fulness of his blessing encompasseth our way; 
The fulness of his promises crowns every brightening day; 
The fulness of his glory is beaming from above, 
While more and more we realize the fulness of his love. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Without a shade of care, 
Because the Lord who loves us will every burden bear; 



Because we trust him fully, and know that he will guide, 
And know that he will keep us at his beloved side. 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Though tribulation fall, 
It cannot touch our treasure, when Christ is All in All! 
Whatever lies before us, there can be naught to fear, 
For what are pain and sorrow when Jesus Christ is near? 

"From Glory unto Glory!" O marvels of the word! 

"With open face beholding the glory of the Lord," 

We, even we (O wondrous grace!) "are changed into the same, 

The image of our Savior, to glorify his Name. 

Abiding in his presence, and walking in the light, 

And seeking to do always what is "pleasing in his sight;" 

We look to him to keep us "all glorious within," 

Because "the blood of Jesus Christ is cleansing from all sin." 

The things behind forgetting, we only gaze before 
"From Glory unto Glory," that "shineth more and more," 
Because our Lord hath said it, that such shall be our way, 
(O splendor of the promise!) "unto the perfect day." 

"From Glory unto Glory!" Our fellow-travelers still 
Are gathering on the journey! The bright electric thrill 
Of quick, instinctive union, more frequent and more sweet, 
Shall swiftly pass from heart to heart in true and tender beat. 

And closer yet, and closer, the golden bonds shall be, 
Enlinking all who love our Lord in pure sincerity; 
And wider yet, and wider, shall the circling glory glow, 
As more and more are taught of God that mighty love to 
know. 

O ye who seek the Savior, look up in faith and love; 
Come up into the sunshine, so bright and warm above! 
No longer tread the valley, but, clinging to his hand, 
Ascend the shining summits and view the glorious land. 

Our harp-notes should be sweeter, our trumpet-tones more 

clear, 
Our anthems ring so grandly that all the world must hear! 
O, royal be our music, for who hath cause to sing 
Like the chorus of redeemed ones, the children of the King? 

O, let our adoration for all that he hath done 

Peal out beyond the stars of God, while voice and life are one; 

And let our consecration be real, and deep, and true. 

O, even now our hearts shall bow, and joyful vows renew! 

"In full and glad surrender we give ourselves to thee, 
Thine utterly, and only, and evermore to be! 
O Son of God, who lovest us, we will be thine alone, 
And all we are, and all we have, shall henceforth be thine 
own!" 



Now onward, ever onward, "from strength to strength" 

we go, 
While "grace for grace" abundantly shall from his fulness flow, 
To glory's full fruition, from glory's foretaste here, 
Until his very Presence crown our happiest New Year! 
—Frances Ridley Havergal. 



R1281 : page 6 

THOUGHTS FOR THE NEW YEAR. 



OUR TALENTS AND THEIR USE. 

Exhortation.— "Consecrate yourselves to-day to the 
Lord,. ..that he may bestow upon you a blessing this 
day." "Offer unto the Lord thanksgiving; and pay thy 
vows unto the Most High." 

Promise.— "And call upon me in the day of trouble: 
I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." "The Lord 
will give strength unto his people."— Exod. 32:29; 
Psa. 50:14,15; 29:11. 

The dawn of another new year is properly a 
time for solemn reflections, both retrospective 
and prospective. In the retrospect how abundant 
is the cause for thanksgiving. We who have 
been blessed with the richest favors of divine 
grace in that knowledge of divine truth which 
reveals to us the high privilege of becoming sons 
and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for 
the called and chosen and faithful according to 
his purpose, have a never failing cause for deepest 
gratitude. Great indeed was the favor which 
revealed to us the hope of everlasting life as justified, 
human sons of God— of full restitution 
to the divine favor and likeness, as at first possessed 
by our father Adam. And great was our 
joy when first, by faith, we appropriated this precious 
promise and realized that legally, through 
merit of the precious blood of Christ shed for 
our redemption, we had passed from death unto 
life, and that in God's appointed time the everlasting 
treasure with all its attendant glory 
and blessing would be ours. But beyond even 
this favor are the "exceeding great and precious 
promises" to those of this justified class who 
have been called, according to God's purpose, 
to become the bride and joint-heir of his dear 
Son. 

Then, in addition to all these blessings of 
hope and promise, was the blessed realization 



during all the year, and with some of us 
for many years past, that though we walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death, as the Psalmist 
aptly represents the present life, our blessed 
Shepherd's rod and staff have been our comfort 
and our safeguard. How often has the friendly 
crook of the Shepherd's staff stayed us from 
wandering off into by-paths and kept us in the 
narrow way; how his chastening rod has from 
time to time aroused us from dreamy lethargy 
and urged us on our way. And at such times 
we have recalled the comforting words: "My 
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for 
whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. If ye 
endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with 
sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth 
not? But if ye be without chastisement, 
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards 
and not sons."— Heb. 12:5-8. 

Spiritually, we have feasted on the bounties 
of divine favor, while in things temporal, under 
whatsoever circumstances we have been placed, 
having the assurance that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, we have 
realized that godliness with contentment is great 
gain, having promise of the life that now is [so 
long as God wills to have us remain here], and 
also of that which is to come. Wherefore, we 
can and do most heartily "offer unto God 
thanksgiving." And shall we not render unto 
him, not only the praise of our lips, but also the 
incense of truly consecrated lives, throughout the 
year upon which we are just entering. Dearly beloved, 
consecrate yourselves anew to the Lord today 
—not in the sense of invalidating the consecration 
made once for all, possibly many years ago, 
but rather in the sense of re-affirming and emphasizing 
that covenant. Tell the dear Lord that 
you consider yourselves entirely his, and that it 
is still your purpose to keep your all upon the 
altar of sacrifice during this new year and until 
it is wholly consumed in his service. Then let 
us proceed with studious care from day to day 
to pay these, our vows of full consecration, unto 
the Most High. 

As we look back and with sorrow view the imperfections 
of even our best efforts, and then 
forward and see the lion-like difficulties that seem 

R1281 : page 7 

to obstruct our onward course, we will need 
greatly to re-inforce our waning courage with 
the special promises of divine grace to help in 



every time of need. We have the blessed assurance 

that "the Lord will give strength unto 

his people." "Call upon me in the day of 

trouble," he says, "and I will deliver thee, and 

thou shalt glorify me." As soldiers under our 

great Captain, we have enlisted in no uncertain 

struggle, except our own faint-heartedness or unfaithfulness 

should make it so. We are fully 

supplied with the whole armor of God, and will 

be amply protected against all the fiery darts of 

the adversary if we will accept it and carefully 

buckle it on; we are forewarned of all the snares 

and dangers that beset our onward way, so that 

we may avoid and overcome them; we are fully 

informed as to the policy and course of the 

Captain under whose banners we have enlisted, 

and of the part we are to take under his leading. 

We have his constant presence with us, even to 

the end of our course. His inspiring voice may 

always be heard above the clash and din of battle 

—Fear not, it is your Father's good pleasure 

to give you the kingdom! Be of good cheer: 

I have overcome! Let not your heart be troubled, 

neither let it be afraid! Greater is he 

that is for you than all they that be against you. 

If we are weak and incline to faint-heartedness 

we have only to remember the blessed promise, 

"The Lord will give strength unto his people;" 

and by our faithfulness in the service we shall 

glorify God and he will deliver us gloriously 

from all our foes, both seen and unseen. 

HOW SHALL WE PAY OUR VOWS? 

This is an important question with all the truly 
consecrated, and one surely of paramount importance. 
Let us consider, then, that when we 
consecrated ourselves fully to the Lord, we thereby 
signified that we would hold nothing back 
for self. That consecration included all our 
possessions, our time, our physical energies and 
our mental attainments. And it implied the 
sacrifice of all our former earthly ambitions, 
hopes and aims, so that we should no longer 
pursue them to any extent. This, and nothing 
less, is what our vow of full consecration signifies. 
But it signifies, further, that these possessions 
or personal qualifications, which the Lord terms 
talents, are not only to be released from the 
service of the worldly ambitions, etc., but that 
they are to be so released, not for aimless inactivity, 
but for the purpose of being utilized in 
an opposite direction— in the service of God, of 
his plan and of his children. 

In the parable of the talents (Matt. 25:14-30) 
the Lord illustrated very clearly how we are 



expected to pay our vows of consecration to the 
Most High. He says: "It is like a man who, 
intending to travel, called his own servants and 
delivered unto them his goods. And to one he 
gave five talents, to another two, and to another 
one; to each according to his respective capacity; 
and straightway took his journey." 

This master had important and valuable interests 
to leave in charge of his servants; and 
as these servants had all engaged to serve him, 
he had a right to expect of them a sincere and 
faithful interest in the work. Yet he did not expect 
more of them than they were severally able to 
accomplish. He rightly expected larger returns 
from the one who had five talents than from 
those who had one or two talents. And in the 
reckoning, it will be observed that the servant 
who had doubled his two talents was just as 
highly commended as the one who had doubled 
his five. The reply to each was the same— 
"Well done, good and faithful servant: thou 
hast been faithful over a few things; I will make 
thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord." And had the servant with 
the one talent been similarly faithful he would 
have received the very same commendation. 
Notice also that the parable does not represent 
the obligations of the world of mankind 
in the use of their talents, but merely of "his own 
servants"— the consecrated believers only. And 
notice also that no servant was left without some 
talent of usefulness and responsibility. Each 
servant had at least one talent; and for the right 
use of that one talent he was just as accountable 
to his master as were those who had more. 

But the professed servant with the one talent 
was unfaithful to his master, and yet he evidently 
wanted to be considered a servant still, and 
probably thought he was worthy of commendation 
and reward for not perverting his Lord's 

R1281 : page 8 

money to other uses. He had taken good care 
of the talent; he had not turned it in opposition 
to the Lord, but he had simply buried it- 
failed to use it. At the reckoning time, he who 
had received the one talent said, "Lord, I knew 
thee, that thou art an exacting man, reaping 
where thou hast not sown, and gathering where 
thou has not scattered. And I was afraid, and 
went and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, there 
thou hast thine own." 

"His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou 
wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that 
I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I 



have not scattered: thou oughtest therefore to 

have put my money to the exchangers; and then 

at my coming I should have received mine own 

with interest." It will be observed that this 

servant was not what men would generally call 

wicked. He was simply an idler, willing, if he 

could, to draw a servant's approval and compensation, 

but lacking any real, active interest in 

his master's business. He had no ill will toward his 

master, he was probably very glad that the other 

servants kept the business from going to wreck 

and ruin, he did nothing to hinder them from 

using their talents, but he did not feel the responsibility 

he had assumed in becoming a "servant," 

nor take a proper interest in his master's 

affairs. Yet, as a faithless, slothful servant, he 

was really a covenant-breaker, and therefore 

"wicked" and certainly unfit to be trusted with 

R1282 : page 8 

still greater responsibilities on the master's 
return. 

But let us remember that this was not a real 
case: it was simply a parable used to illustrate 
real cases. And if the illustration fits your individual 
case, let it not lose its effect upon you. 
The very object of the parable is to arouse such 
to a sense of their short-comings, and to recover 
them from the lethargy into which they have 
relaxed, by reminding them of their responsibilities. 
Activity in the Lord's service to the 
full extent of our ability or talents is what the 
Lord has a right to expect of all who profess 
to be his servants; and it is what he does expect. 
Therefore, if you have but one talent, 
do not bury it, but cultivate and use it; do what 
you can, and all you can, in the great work to 
which we have already consecrated our lives. 
And those who have several talents, let them see 
to it that they too are faithful to the extent of 
their abilities, not being content to do merely 
what the one-talented man can do or ought 
to do. Such a one would not be a good and 
faithful servant, and could not expect the 
Master's approving "Well done!" His approval 
will be given to those only who are faithful 
to the extent of their opportunity. 

Those who find the truth and make the consecration 
before they are encumbered with the 
cares of this life, who have no families dependent 
upon them and who have a reasonable degree 
of health, have at least two talents— time 
and health— which can and ought to be utilized 
in the service to the best possible advantage. 
Then there are those who have a money talent, 



or a business talent, and such should consider 
how these are being used. Are they largely 
swallowed up in luxuries or a superabundance 
of the good things of this life, for either self or 
family? Or are they being laid up as treasures 
upon earth— in banks, store-houses and investment 
securities, to enrich and to cultivate the 
spirit of pride in friends or children, and for 
them to quarrel over after you are dead? 

Our talents for use in the Lord's service consist 
of all those things and opportunities which 
are over and above what we need for the necessary 
and reasonable maintenance of ourselves or 
our families, if we have families, and the reasonable 
provision against distress in case of a 
sudden calamity or approaching old age, etc. 
Aside from these, all we have should be in active 
service, be they many talents or few. If we 
have five talents and are using only one or two, 
how can we expect the Master's "Well done, 
good and faithful servant." Did we not covenant 
to give and to use all for him?— all our 
money, all our time, all our influence, all our mental 
activity, all our physical ability? How faithful 
have we been during the past year? How 
do we stand at the bar of our own judgment? 
And how faithful will we be during the coming 
year? After providing things decent and honest 
for ourselves and those dependent upon us, 
let us judiciously appropriate our talents to what 
we profess to consider the chief business of life. 
Here are the testing points of true loyalty and 

R1282:page9 

devotion. Let us ponder them well, and not 
lightly set them aside. 

But observe further what the Lord has to say 
about this "wicked and slothful servant." He 
says: "Take the talent from him and give it unto 
him which hath ten talents; for unto every one 
that hath [made use of his talents] shall be given, 
and he shall have abundance; but from him 
that hath not [made use of his talent] shall be 
taken away even that which he hath. And cast 
ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 
The outer darkness here referred to is in contrast 
with the inner light of the holy place of 
favor and communion and instruction from God, 
symbolized in the Tabernacle. The testing 
comes on the return of the Master. Then the 
faithful servants shall enter into fuller joys and 
privileges and blessings, while the unfaithful will 
go into the outer darkness of error and ignorance 
concerning God's plans and ways, which envelopes 



the world in general, and their neglected 
opportunities for more abundant service will go as 
a reward to those who are already earnest and 
active, and whose abundant labors will in due 
time be abundantly rewarded. 

As we thus view our Lord's teaching, we see 
that our only security as sons of God and joint-heirs 
with Christ is in activity in the service of 
the truth. Well, says one, I see very few doing 
that. Very true: only a few will do it. But 
that precious few are the Lord's jewels. Are 
you one of them? Ah, that is the point to be 
considered. No matter how few they are, or 
whether you ever saw or knew of any such, that 
does not alter the conditions of our calling. 
This is the way: walk ye in it. One, at least, 
has trodden it before. Look for his foot-prints 
and follow him, and "He will give strength 
unto his people," even though they walk alone, 
as he did, without the cheering companionship 
of fellow-travelers. 

But think not that you are traveling alone in 
this narrow way. The Lord has now a consecrated 
people, a faithful band of servants who, 
with every talent consecrated, are steadily pursuing 
their course in the narrow way. We know 
some of them by name and by character and by 
their steady and progressive activity in the 
blessed work. Not many of them have five talents, 
but a good many have two or three, and some only 
one. Quietly and unobtrusively they go about 
from day to day preaching the wonderful words 
of life, and God is with them and is leading 
them on. Their hearts are full of joy and 
hope and they are kept securely amidst all the 
perils of this evil day. None are so clear in 
their apprehension and appreciation of truth as 
those who are fully enlisted in its service. Let 
all who would run the race successfully look 
well to their zeal and activity in the Lord's 
work. If we bury our one or our many talents 
under a weight of worldly cares and encumbrances 
which might be avoided or set aside; if 
we bury them under worldly ambitions for either 
self or family— whether this be by wasting consecrated 
time upon science, philosophy, music 
or art; or upon business, politics or pleasures; 
or in pampering pride and appetite— then as 
unfaithful servants we will sooner or later go 
into outer darkness, by being caught in some of 
the snares of this "evil day," and will be led 
farther and farther into error and away from 
truth. 

Mark well that it is not a case of such unfaithful 
servants being liable to get into outer darkness, 
into error: it is a case of must. The Master's 



orders are peremptory and decisive: "Cast 
the unprofitable servant into outer darkness." 
The light now shining is not for the unfaithful, 
but for the faithful servants; and no matter how 
clearly the unfaithful may have seen and understood 
the deep things of God, and no matter 
how he may have enjoyed them, if he has not 
loved them so as to serve them and sacrifice his 
conveniences for them, he is unworthy of them 
and must go out into the outer darkness of the 
world in general. With these as with the world 
the disappointment of theories and plans in the 
great time of trouble will ere long bring the 
weeping and gnashing of teeth foretold. 

It is indeed a notable fact that in no single 
case have we seen one drift away from the truth 
into the snares of these perilous times who was 
very active and fully enlisted in the Lord's work, 
whose one aim and endeavor was to herald the 

R1282:page 10 

truth and to bless others with it. To such the 
Lord says, "My grace is sufficient for thee"— 
"Ye shall never fall, for so an abundant entrance 
shall be ministered unto you into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Let us, then, dearly beloved, have for our watchword 
during the year the word DEVOTION; 
and let each of us write upon his heart the gracious 
PROMISE-"The Lord will give strength 
unto his people." Let us be faithfully "his 
people," and let us earnestly desire and faithfully 
use the strength promised. Faithful is he 
that hath promised, who also will do it. So, 
then, if you lack the strength to use faithfully 
your talent, the fault is yours, not God's. You 
either have not his service closely enough at 
heart or else do not make use of the strength 
he provides. "The Lord will give strength unto 
his people"— his trusting, faithful servants— 
those who are using to his praise the talents consecrated 
to their Master, however many or few 
those talents may be. 



R1282:page 10 

THE THRONE OF HIS GLORY. 



-MATT. 19:28.- 
In reply to the Apostle Peter's question- 



"Behold, we have forsaken all and followed 
thee, what shall we have therefore?" Jesus said 
unto them, "Verily, I say unto you that ye 
which have followed me, in the regeneration, 
when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of 
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, 
judging the twelve tribes of Israel." In another 
record of the same conversation there is a variation 
of words, but the ideas, so far as the present 
subject is concerned, are substantially the 
same: "Ye are they which have continued with 
me in my temptations; and I will appoint unto 
you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto 
me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in 
my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel." (Luke 22:28-30.) For 
Christ to have a kingdom appointed to him, as 
Luke records the conversation, and for him to 
sit on the throne of his glory, as Matthew records 
it, appear to indicate one and the same 
rank, though in expressing it the same words are 
not used. As this statement contains, in germ, 
so much that is to be developed and perfected 
in the future, it is important to consider in detail 
its various elements. 

R1283 : page 10 

1. THE THRONE. In the regeneration the Son 
of Man is to "sit on the throne." What throne, 
or what kind of a throne? Is it the identical 
seat, bench, or chair of state which David used 
that is to be given to David's Son and Lord 
for his use? Certainly not. Solomon laid 
aside his father's throne, and made a unique and 
costly one for his own use. (2 Chron. 9:17-19.) 
Is it Solomon's, or a material throne of any 
kind, whether made of ivory, or gold, or anything 
like them, which Christ is to occupy? 
There is no testimony to that effect. David sat 
on a material throne, and the throne of David is 
to be given to "the Son of the Highest," but 
it does not follow from that that the Son of the 
Highest is to sit on a material throne. A throne 
is the seat of a priest or a king, and it is often 
used as the emblem, or symbol, of sacerdotal or 
regal authority. In this figurative sense, it seems 
that many glorious promises are to be fulfilled. 
"Thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bring 
forth a Son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He 
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of 
the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto 
him the throne of his father David; and he shall 
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of 
his kingdom there shall be no end." (Luke 1:31-33.) 
That celebrated promise, which was 



made known to the virgin Mary by the angel 
Gabriel, may be taken as a sample. The throne 
of David is the emblem, or symbol, of David's 
reign, or kingdom; and David's reign, or kingdom, 
is a type, or figure, or shadow, of the 
reign, or kingdom, of David's Son and Lord. 
To the same effect is that memorable testimony 
which was given by the apostle Peter on the day 
of Pentecost: "Men and brethren, let me freely 
speak unto you of the patriarch David, that 
he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is 
with us unto this day. Therefore, being a 

R1283 :page 11 

prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with 
an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, 
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ 
to sit on his throne; he, seeing this before, spake 
of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was 
not left in hell (hades), neither his flesh did see 
corruption. This Jesus hath God raised up, 
whereof we all are witnesses. Therefore, being 
by the right hand of God exalted, and having 
received of the Father the promise of the holy 
Spirit, he hath shed forth this which ye now see 
and hear. For David is not ascended into the 
heavens; but he saith himself: The Lord said 
unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until 
I make thy foes thy footstool. Therefore, let 
all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God 
hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ." (Acts 2:29-36.) 
Nor is the authority of Christ confined to the 
house of Israel, or any other particular house, 
the land of Palestine, or any other particular 
land, because "all authority" is his: "God 
hath highly exalted him, and given him a name 
which is above every name; that at the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things under 
the earth; and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God 
the Father." (Phil. 2:9-11.) The authority 
of Christ to teach, and rule, and judge, extends 
over all heaven, all earth and all hades. Limitarians 
would have us ignore the words— 
"under the earth"— or blot them out of the 
inspired testimony; but hades is a part of Christ's 
dominion, and as indispensable as either earth or 
heaven. Christ has authority to reckon with 
every enemy of God and man; and wherever 
man is, his fealty will one day be claimed. 
"Every knee" is to have the opportunity of 
voluntarily bowing at the name of Jesus, and 
"every tongue" is to have the opportunity of 



voluntarily confessing that the Savior Anointed 
is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father. 
Neither death nor hades is an insurmountable 
barrier to this, because he holds the keys of both 
(Rev. 1:18), and will liberate every captive 
in due time. 

2. HIS GLORY. In the regeneration the Son 
of Man is to sit "on the throne of His glory." 
What glory? "There are celestial bodies, and 
bodies terrestrial, but the glory of the celestial 
is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. 
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory 
of the moon, and another glory of the stars; 
for star differeth from star in glory." (1 Cor. 15:40,41.) 
There is a glory peculiar to each 
kind of existence, whether animate or inanimate, 
from the very lowest to the very highest. 
There is one glory of the mineral, and another 
glory of the vegetable, and another glory of the 
animal. There is one glory of man, and another 
glory of angels, and another glory of the 
Generator and Regenerator of man. It is the 
highest kind of glory to which the Son of Man 
has been raised— that glory which is peculiar to 
the divine nature. This is the burden of that wonderful 
prayer— in the highest sense "The Lord's 
Prayer"— which Jesus uttered shortly before he 
died: "Father, the hour has come; glorify thy 
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee." 
"And now, O Father, glorify me with thine 
own self, with the glory which I had with thee 
before the world was." (John 17:1,5.) That 
this prayer was answered does not admit of a 
doubt. It is recorded of the martyr Stephen 
that he "saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing 
on the right hand of God, and said, Behold, 
I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man 
standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55,56.) 
To the same effect is the testimony of 
the highly favored Seer of Patrnos, only his description 
of what he saw is much more full and 
gorgeous: "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day, 
and heard behind me a great voice, as of a 
trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the 
first and the last." "And I turned to see the 
voice that spake with me. And being turned, 
I saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the 
midst of the candlesticks one like unto the Son 
of Man, clothed with a garment down to the 
foot, and about the paps with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hairs were as white as wool, 
as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame 
of fire; and his feet like unto fine brass, as if 
they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the 
sound of many waters. And he had in his 



R1283 : page 12 

right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth 

went a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance 

was as the sun shineth in his strength. 

And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead. 

And he laid his hand upon me, saying unto me, 

Fear not; I am the first and the last; I am he 

that liveth and was dead; and behold, I am 

alive forevermore, amen; and have the keys 

of hell (hades) and of death." (Rev. 1:10-18.) 

It is clear that the glory of our blessed Lord is 

of the same kind as that of the Most High himself. 

He has been glorified with the glory of 

God— the glory which he had with the Father 

before the world was; and his position is at the 

right hand of God. Not merely first in executive 

authority, but first in executive power also, 

in the accomplishment of the divine purpose 

regarding the salvation of man. 

3. SIT. In the regeneration the Son of Man 
is to "sit on the throne of his glory." That 
posture is often assigned to persons when it cannot 
be understood in a literal sense. Among 
the gorgeous imagery seen by the Apostle John 
is an infamous woman "that sitteth upon many 
waters." In her case, neither seat, nor posture, 
nor character, can be taken literally. They are 
all symbolic; and represent an established reign, 
or kingdom, or dominion, extending over "peoples, 
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues." 
(Rev. 17:1,15.) The Psalmist in his day was 
very familiar with the same kind of imagery. 
"The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the 
Lord sitteth King forever." (Psa. 29:10.) 
Here, also, the posture and seat are evidently 
symbolic, and indicate that Jehovah's reign, or 
kingdom, or dominion, is established over all 
created beings. These samples may indicate 
the way in which the posture is to be understood 
in the present case. The expression is undoubtedly 
figurative, indicating that the position of 
the Son of Man, invested with all executive authority 
and power, has been established; and 
not merely established, but permanently established. 
He is to rest in the position which has 
been given to him: "In that day there shall be 
a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign 
of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek; 
and his rest shall be glorious." (Isa. 11:1,10.) 
In what day? Read the context. When he is 
judging the poor with righteousness; when he 
is reproving with equity for the meek of the 
earth; when he is smiting the earth with the 
rod of his mouth; when he is slaying the wicked 
with the breath of his lips; when he is filling 



the earth full of knowledge of the Lord, as the 
waters cover the sea, and so on. His rest is 
not one of "masterly inactivity," but the very 
opposite. He is ever active, and his strength 
is equal to his activity. "Hast thou not known? 
hast thou not heard? that the everlasting God, 
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, 
fainteth not, neither is weary? There is no searching 
of his understanding. He giveth power to 
the faint, and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint 
and be weary, and the young men shall utterly 
fall: but they that wait upon the Lord shall renew 
their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be 
weary; and they shall walk, and not faint." 
(Isa. 40:28-31.) His rest is in the strength of 
his nature; in the security of his position; in 
the satisfaction of his work; and in the certainty 
of his ultimate and complete success. "The 
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right-hand, 
until I make Thine enemies thy footstool." 
(Psa. 110:1.) That position was given to our 
blessed Lord 1800 years ago; and it is never to 
be given up while one foe of God or man remains. 
Developed, extended, unfolded and 
manifested it will be, but never exchanged for 
any other. 

4. JOINT-PARTICIPATION. In the regeneration 
the twelve apostles are to "sit on twelve thrones." 
This gives every apostle a throne. Not that the 
number of thrones is restricted to twelve, or 
that he who is to occupy a throne must of necessity 
be an apostle. Matthew speaks of them as 
"disciples," and Luke speaks of "thrones" 

R1284:page 12 

without restricting them to twelve, or any definite 
number. The first disciples appear to be 
treated as representing all of their kind— true 
believers: "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also 
overcame, and am set down with my Father 
in his throne." (Rev. 3:21.) The Lord's prayer 

R1284 : page 13 

also, already quoted, is very clear on this point: 
"I pray for them; I pray not for the world, 
but for them which thou hast given me; for they 
are thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are 
mine; and I am glorified in them." "Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for them also which 
shall believe on me through their word." "And 
the glory which thou gavest me I have given 



them; that they may be one, even as we are 
one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may 
be made perfect in one; and that the world 
may know that thou hast sent me." (John 17:9-23.) 
So the apostles seem to have understood 
this matter:— "Simon Peter, a servant and an 
apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained 
like precious faith with us, through the 
righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ: 
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you, through 
the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord: 
according as his divine power has given unto 
us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, 
through the knowledge of him that hath called 
us to glory and virtue. Thereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises; that 
by these ye might be partakers of the divine 
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in 
the world through lust." (2 Pet. 1:1-4.) "Ye 
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an 
holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should 
shew forth the praises of him who hath called 
you out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
(1 Pet. 2:9.) "Unto him that loved us, and 
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath 
made us kings and priests unto God; to him be 
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen." 

Prophetic utterances are in accord with 
apostolic testimony:— "Behold, a king shall 
reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in 
judgment." (Isa. 32:1.) "Thy throne, O God, 
is for ever and ever; the sceptre of thy kingdom 
is a right sceptre. Thou lovest righteousness 
and hatest iniquity; therefore God, thy God, 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows." "Instead of thy fathers 
shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make 
princes in the earth. I will make thy name to 
be remembered in all generations; therefore 
shall the people praise thee for ever and ever." 
(Psa. 45:6,7,16,17.) Thus it is plain that the 
glory which is peculiar to the divine nature, as 
well as judicial, sacerdotal and regal authority, are 
to be jointly participated in, not only by Jesus 
and his Apostles, but by all those also who 
"have obtained like precious faith," and who 
"overcome" the seductions of the world, the 
flesh, and the devil, during the present evil age. 
As the anointed Head has been exalted to the 
divine nature, the anointed members are to participate 
in his exaltation; as he has been invested 
with all authority and power, they are to 
participate in his dignity; and as he has to occupy 
his position until his foes are under his 
footstool, they are to participate in that complete 
and beneficent triumph. "This honor have 



all his saints." May we be found worthy! 
JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1285 : page 13 

AN IMPORTANT QUESTION. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have been led to 
come again to you for some advice, feeling that 
you will gladly spare me a few moments time 
from your many and arduous duties to help me 
in my perplexity. 

In Matt. 18:7, Christ shows that snares must 
come and warns those through whom they come. 
In Matt. 13:41, the Lord again informs us that 
in the end of this age he will send his servants 
(messengers) to gather out of his Kingdom all 
"snares" and those who work lawlessness. The 
Diaglott shows that the "offenses" of Matt. 18:7 
and the "things that offend" of Matt. 13:41 
are the same words. I have been led to think 
that all organizations among men of these latter 
days having first, the hope of improvement of condition 
as a motive, and which second, owing to 
cupidity and sordidness of men, deteriorate rapidly 
into machines of self-aggrandizement of clique 
or class, belong to the "snares" of which the 
"overcomers" must beware and avoid. While 
their aims are generally honorable and satisfactory, 
especially at first, it seems that their methods, 
being largely founded on envy and strife, make 
them rapidly lawless institutions. The Diaglott 
shows that those who "do iniquity" in Matt. 13:41 
are those who "do lawlessness." In 
James 3:14-16 we are admonished that the wisdom 
of envy and strife is "earthly, sensual, devilish," 
and abounds with "confusion and every 

R1285 : page 14 

evil work." In Eph. 5:11 we are admonished 

to have "no fellowship with the unfruitful works 

of darkness." The rapid movement now in all 

lines of business is to organize for protection 

from evils that must destroy the various lines of 

business unless arrested, and then to proclaim non-intercourse 

with those who do not come into the 

organization and fellowship with it in its methods. 

You may sympathize with the motive and 

aim that prompts the organization, and give 

them your moral support by observing right 

practices, while deprecating the system inaugurated, 



but if you do not fall in line and aid the 

system, you will be persecuted. Query: Is it 

not the privilege and duty of those who are aiming 

to "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth," 

to remain outside of all these organizations, 

however harmless they may appear, and 

whatever necessity seems to demand their inauguration? 

It seems so to me, and yet I do not 

want to go to extremes, unless it is to an extreme 

the "Lamb" approves; and as you have 

unquestionably studied this feature, you can help 

me by your views, confirming mine, or leading 

me to search the Scripture again more profitably, 

if I am in error. 

I must soon act on this question before 50 to 
100 of my associates in the Insurance profession, 
and if I am confirmed in my present opinions, 
I shall decline to enter into affiliation 
with them, and state simply that fidelity to the 
teachings of God's Word prevents my doing so. 
This confession may open the way to some fruitful 
private testimony. Somehow, since I have 
been writing, the teachings of the Scripture 
quoted assure me that this is an instance where 
God's exhortation to "Come out from among 
them, and be ye separate" (2 Cor. 6:16-18), 
applies. The flesh always shrinks from such ordeals, 
yet thanks be to God, he always strengthens 
us through Christ, if we but accept his outstretched 
arm. 

The Lord is very exceedingly gracious to me, 
and is giving me daily "meat in due season," 
in things new and old, especially opening up 
details in many things old to us, but so new to 
Nominal Israel that they cannot brook them. 
Sr. Page shows increasing hunger for the knowledge 
of the truth. May the Lord grant equal 
zeal and earnestness to spread the "good tidings" 
as opportunity offers (either through favorable 
circumstances or watchfulness to use every 
means at hand). 

Remember me in Christian love to all the 
household of faith, as well as to our dear Sister 
Russell. 

In Christian love, your brother, 
W. E. PAGE. 

[We publish the above and subjoin its answer 
because the subject is daily becoming more important 
to all the saints.] 

DEAR BRO. PAGE:-Yours of the 13th inst. 
came duly. It gives me great pleasure to note 
your conscientious desire to consider and to do 
the Master's will in all things. With the little 
time I have at my disposal just now, I can only 
answer your letter very briefly. 

I think in the main you take a very proper 



view of the binding and fettering processes now 

going on. I would not be prepared to say, dogmatically, 

that a man could not be a member of 

the Knights of Labor or of some other Union, 

and yet be one of the "wheat" class in the barn-condition 

of safety; but I feel that the position 

of separateness from these human institutions and 

bondages is a safe position for the saints. This 

will probably be seen more in the future than at 

present. The present is merely an organizing 

time; it is in the future that the trials and testings 

will come. The present time is more like a 

period of enlistment preceding a war. While 

the recruiting elements are at work, with fife and 

drum, and with flags fluttering, many enlisting 

and wearing the uniform, there is little to arouse 

apprehension of wounds, pain and death. It is 

after the enlistment that the shock of battle 

comes. So with these societies. At present 

they are organizing, but by and by will begin 

the battle between them. I think with you that 

our safe position is to be as separate as possible 

from them all. 

I am glad to hear of Sister Page's progress, 
as well as your own, in the way of truth and 
service. May the Lord continue to bless you 
both in wisdom, grace and love. Your brother 
and fellow-servant, C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1280 : page 14 

MEETINGS IN TORONTO, CANADA. 

At the urgent solicitation of friends in and near 
Toronto, the Editor of this journal has arranged 
to speak twice at Toronto on Sunday, Feb'y 
22nd next. The hour and place will be duly announced 
in Toronto papers. TOWER subscribers 
present are urgently requested to make themselves 
known to the Editor. 



THE ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

The Anniversary of our Lord's "Last Supper, 
as reckoned by Jewish method of calculation, 
will this year fall on Tuesday evening, April 
21st. It will be more fully announced later. 



page 15 



EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I feel like writing you 
this evening and telling you how much I have 
enjoyed reading the "View" in November issue. 
How I am often led to rejoice that you 
followed up my "agnostic" remark of several 
years ago, and by it I have been led into truth. 
More and more I realize my unworthiness, but 
try to realize how the worthiness of Christ fills 
up for me what is lacking. I would like to tell 
you of some things that have transpired since I 
saw you last. How crowded I have been, not 
with the cares of business altogether, but how 
my time has been taken up by others in a way 
that has seemed to keep me back, yet in a way I 
could not help. But all the time my heart yearns 
for him who loved and gave himself for us. 

I have been, too, in trouble financially, and 
that has been a burden, also up to this time. I 
ought not to say burden for the Lord has kindly 
helped me to bear it and carry it in such 
a way that I will not call it a burden. But that 
accounts for the dearth of remittances, for I have 
been continually overdrawn in catching and trying 
to keep up. But I can now send you a small 
check ($10.00) which please apply as indicated 
on another sheet. 

I duly received the book of Poems and Hymns 
and have found many sweet words there. May 
I mention one? Page 41, "Filled with Christ's 
Fulness." When I came to that I was so struck 
with its thought that I made four copies and mailed 
them where I knew they would be appreciated. 
I have said so much to emphasize the truth of 
the remark, that though I have delayed saying 
it, yet I appreciate the contents of the book. 

May God continue to bless you and yours is 
the prayer of your brother in Christ, 
J. H. BROWN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I received a letter a 
few days since, some parts of which I thought 
would be both interesting and encouraging to 
you, and to many of the readers of the TOWER. 
The letter was from a brother, both in the flesh 
and in the Lord. He has been a Methodist 
preacher for some twenty years. Following are 
some extracts: 

"Since I wrote you last, our trials have been 
increasing, but our heavenly Father has been 
leading us and has greatly blessed us in many 



ways. We are learning lessons of faith and mean 
to maintain our integrity to the last. I am reading 
DAWN, Vol. I., for the third time and find nothing 
so far that I cannot accept. You have done 
untold good by sending those books and papers. 
I shall always thank God for your kindness to 
me in this my most severe trial. I believe I 
should have fainted and given up if it had not 
been for your kindness, and for these books. 
God has made them a wonderful help to me. 
How glad I should be if I could be a similar 
help to any one else. If I had the means I 
would start out over this country and lecture 
and preach on the THE PLAN OF THE AGES, and 
circulate these books, and scatter what has been 
such a great blessing to me. 

"I should love to meet the brethren at their 
annual meeting, but oh, how far we are from 
having such a privilege. Our heavenly Father 
will reward you. May God bless you abundantly. 
Pray for us, that our blessed heavenly 
Father may teach us his perfect will, and perfect 
that which is lacking in our faith. We are rejoicing 
in the Lord. Accept much love. 

Yours in Him, E. R. WEST." 

It is needless to say that this news greatly rejoiced 
my own heart. Can you wonder that I 
sat down immediately and wrote him a twelve-page 
letter, telling him, among other things, 
that I could not conceive of a higher calling or 
a grander work in the world than introducing 
these books which have been such a God-send 
to us, and which will be so to every true grain of 
wheat, and advising him and his wife to commence 
this work at once. I told him that I 
thought one could do more good in this way 
than in any other, and glorify God more fully 
and at the same time make a good, honest living. 
It affords, too, such rare opportunities to 
feed the truth-hungry children of God. Like 
our Master, we can go about doing good, preaching 
from house to house, to individuals, and to 
assemblies when practicable. I wonder why 
more of our dear brethren and sisters do not 
engage in this work. Surely it is a blessed privilege. 
"Look on the fields, for they are white 
already to harvest." And "He that reapeth 
receiveth wages." This (as it seems to me) applies 
to the end of this age as fully as it did to 
the end of the Jewish age. 

Yours in the love of the truth and in the 
harvest work, JAS. A. WEST. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every 
Lord's-day afternoon at 3 o'clock. A Social 
Meeting at 7.15 p.m. is followed by a Question 
Meeting at 8 o'clock, at which all reverent Bible 
questions are entertained. 



Our German-speaking friends occupy the same 
room every Lord's-day forenoon at 10:30 o'clock. 



page 16 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, 60 CENTS A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1338:page 16 

THE TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 



This is a business association merely; it was chartered as a corporation by 
the state of Pennsylvania, and authorized 

to hold or dispose of property in its own name as though it were an individual. 
It has no creed or confession. 

It is merely a business convenience in disseminating the truth. Any one 
subscribing to one copy or more of the Society's 

quarterly, styled Old Theology Tracts, (6 cents a year,) is considered an 
active member of this Society— but 

not a voting member. Any one subscribing for $10 work or more of the O.T. 
Tracts, or any one donating $10 or 

more to the funds of the Society for the spread of the Truth, is a voting 
member and is entitled to one vote for each 

$10 he or she may have donated. The affairs of the Society are so arranged 
that its entire control rests in the care of 

Brother and Sister Russell as long as they shall live. In fact, the only 
objects in having the corporation are:— 

First, To provide a channel or fund through which those who desire can 
employ their money talent, whether 

small or great, to better advantage for the spread of the Truth than if each 
interested one acted and published independently 
of the others. Second, The corporation was called for by reason of the 
uncertainty of the lives of those at 

present managing the fund. Some wrote that they were doing all that their 
present necessities permitted, but that at 

their death, they desired to do more; and urged the necessity of a legal 
corporation, as Brother and Sister Russell 
might die too, and they wanted their donations to go to the spread of the Truth. 

The Society owns nothing, has nothing, pays no salaries, no rent, or other 
expenses. Its policy is to use in the 

work every dollar received, to the best advantage, and as speedily as possible. 
Its success in publishing and circulating 

among the right kind of readers, tons of the Old Theology Tracts, is 
phenomenal alike to its friends and its enemies. 

The latter imagine that there must be great wealth connected with the concern, 
whereas really there is very 

little.— Few of the friends of this cause do, or are able to do, much 
financially; but what money there is, under economy 

and the divine blessing, is like the widow's cruse of oil: it accomplishes about 
a hundred times as much as other 
Tract Societies, which spend most of their receipts upon salaries. 



THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS 

No. 1. Do the Scripture Teach that Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin? 

No. 2. Calamities— Why God Permits them. 

No. 3. Protestants, Awake! How Priestcraft now Operates. 

No. 4. Dr. Talmage's View of the Millennium. 

No. 5. Bible Study and Students' Helps, Price Lists, etc. 

No. 6. The Hope of the Groaning Creation. 

No. 7. The Old, Old Story. (Poem-156 Verses.) 

Those who desire to send out sample tracts by mail to their friends, or to 
general lists of addresses of ministers or 
others, can send the lists to us, and we will save you all the trouble, and in 



lots of one hundred or more at a time 

will charge only what the stamps would cost you— one dollar a hundred. 

The first edition of each tract costs more proportionately than subsequent 
ones, and in order to give you the advantage 

of this we propose to send the old, back numbers, 1 to 6, at 45 cents per 
hundred for lots of one or more hundred, 

separate or assorted. (Price 1 cent each for less than 100.) Colporteurs are 
supplied with any of the above tracts free. 

Those who can use tracts to advantage, but who cannot pay for them, will 
please in ordering say how many they 

think they can use judiciously, and also explain their method of using that 
we too, may judge of its advisability. 



page 16 

THE WONDERFUL STORY." 

This is the same Poem as in No. 7, but it is more elegantly gotten up, with 
"Leatherette" covers and contains 15 illustrations. 

Originally gotten out to sell at 25 cents, it has been decided to put the price 
at 15 cents, or two copies for 

25 cents, to induce the greater number of sales. As this tract and another one 
to be issued during this year are larger 

and more costly than the regular issues, subscribers will be charged 25 cents 
for the four issues of 1891; and those 

whose subscriptions are for large quantities, and who send at the previous rates 
will be sent only a proportionate number 

of the more expensive issues. Of our Lord it was prophesied— "His name shall be 
called Wonderful." This is 

the story of him and his wonderful love and sacrifice, and of his coming reign 
of blessing and restitution. 

We believe that this simple statement of the plan in verse— suitable to the 
young, the middle aged and the elderly 

—is destined, under God's blessing, to do a great work. It will prove an 
entering wedge to many hearts, and will, 

we believe, lead on to the fuller details and proofs of the plan of the ages 
presented in the Millennial Dawn series. 

On these the colporteurs will be allowed one-half of the proceeds toward 
meeting their expenses— 6-1/4 cents each, in 

lots of 25 or 50 or 100 at a time. Those not regular colporteurs, but who are 
regular subscribers for the Old Theology 

Tracts, who may desire these for loaning or giving away will be supplied on 
the same terms in the same quantities. 

ADDRESS ORDERS TO Tower Tract Society, ALLEGHENY, PA. 



inside back cover 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES. 

"HELPING HAND FOR BIBLE STUDENTS." 



VOL. l.-"THE PLAN OF THE AGES." 



This work is specially designed to make plain the divine 
plan. It begins at the beginning of the subject, by establishing 
the faith of the reader in God and in the Bible as 
his revelation. It traces the glorious plan therein revealed, 
and shows which parts of the plan are accomplished 
and which will be accomplished during the Millennial 
age, also the manner of its introduction, and its 
objects and methods. 

We know of nothing to compare with this book, as a 
"Bible Key." The Two Hundredth Thousand is now 
on the press, and many who have read it carefully and 
prayerfully declare that if they could not obtain another 
they would not part with their copy, and the hopes it has 
enkindled, for millions. 

Clear type, good paper, 350 pages. Price in cloth covers, 
embossed, $1.00. (The subscribers to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, are supplied in any quantity at the wholesale 
price, 50 cents, as all are considered agents.) Price in 
paper covers, 25 cents, reduced from 50 cents. 
A GERMAN TRANSLATION OF THE ABOVE AT SAME PRICES. 

VOL. II.-"THE TIME IS AT HAND." 



This volume presents evidences that:— 
Six Thousand Years from Adam ended in A.D. 1872. 
The Date of our Lord's Birth was October, B.C. 2. 
The Date of Annunciation to Mary, Dec. 25th, B.C. 3. 
The Date of our Lord's Baptism was Oct., A.D. 29. 
The Date of our Lord's Crucifixion, April, A.D. 33. 
The "Seventy Weeks" of Israel's favor ended A.D. 36. 
The Jewish Age "Harvest" was 40 years, A.D. 30-70. 
The Christian Age "Harvest," 40 yrs., A.D. 1875-1914. 
The Jewish Jubilees were Typical of the "Times of Restitution 

of all Things."-Acts 3:19-21. 
The Typical Jubilees Mark the Date of their Antitype. 
The "Times of the Gentiles" will End with A.D. 1914. 
The Jewish Age, in Its Length, Its Ceremonies, etc., Typified 

the realities of the Christian Age and its Length. 
Elias or "Elijah the Prophet" was a Type.— How fulfilled. 
The Antichrist Has Come! What? When? Where? 

Besides the above, it treats many other subjects of deep 
interest and great importance to "the household of faith." 

Terms the same as Vol. I.— 360 pages. 

VOL. III.-"THY KINGDOM COME." 



(In preparation. Do not order until it is announced as ready.) 

This volume treats of the prophetic periods of Daniel 
and Revelation— The 2300 Days, The 1260 Days, The 
1290 Days, The 1335 Days. -The Work of the Harvest 
now in Progress.— The Return of God's Favor to Israel.— 
The Great Pyramid of Egypt and its wonderful corroboration 
of all the prophetic testimony. 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 



This is a very choice collection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns representing the choicest thoughts of some of 
God's saints, of both the past and the present. Some 
of these have been slightly and some considerably altered, 
to fully harmonize them with the clearer light of truth as 
it is now shining. Authors' names are given so far as 
known, and any alterations are noted. Cloth bound, red 
edges, 494 pages, $1— to TOWER subscribers, 50 cents. 

Every TOWER reader should have and use this means 
of grace. Its poems are gems and will encourage and 
comfort any loyal heart. Nothing is better calculated to 
inspire true devotion. To enable all our readers to 
profit by this means of grace, those of you too poor to purchase 
at the reduced price will be supplied free, upon request, 
out of the funds of the Tower Tract Society. 

TUNES FOR HYMNS OF DAWN. 



The 333 hymns above are widely selected and no single 
book contains all the appropriate turns for them. However, 
the tunes have been so marked that three popular 
books will supply them mostly— Winnowed Hymns, Songs 
of Pilgrimage and Gospel Hymns. Many already have 
these. Others we are prepared to supply at below the 
wholesale rate when purchased in connection with our 
own HYMNS OF DAWNS, as follows:-HYMNS OF DAWN 
with Gospel Hymns, Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, $1.20, postpaid. 
HYMNS OF DAWN with Winnowed Hymns, 75 cents, 
postpaid. HYMNS OF DAWN with Songs of Pilgrimage, 
$1.50 postpaid. Or the four books, HYMNS OF DAWN, 
Gospel Hymns Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4, Winnowed Hymns and 
Songs of Pilgrimage, all for $2.25, postage included. The 
usual price for the four, including postage, would be $3.77. 
We supply them for your convenience merely, without profit. 



Any of the above books will be loaned to the poor who 
will promise a careful reading and to pay return postage. 
All orders should be addressed, TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 



THE COLPORTEUR WORK. 



This important branch of the work is under the care of 
the Tract Society. Its arrangements are such that those 
Brethren and Sisters who can and do consecrate their time 
and talents to the public work of preaching the gospel by 
the selling of Millennial Dawn and taking subscriptions 
for the WATCH TOWER can meet their expenses. This 
preaching of the Kingdom from house to house, which 
seems to be the work now most favored of the Lord and 
most productive of good results, much resembles that done 
by those sent out during the harvest at the first advent; 
only that here it is not the natural eyes that are opened, 
but the eyes of men's understanding. 

TERMS AND CREDITS FOR COLPORTEURS. 

The TOWER TRACT SOCIETY provides that the regular 
Colporteurs shall have one-half of all their receipts, to meet 
their expenses, and gives them a limited credit when necessary 
to start them in the work. Many are so engaged 
now, and the field is abundantly large to permit all who 
can and will, to enter this ministry. Though not highly esteemed 
among men, it is highly honorable in the eyes of our 
King, and is proving mighty through him to the pulling 
down of the strongholds of error. "Pray ye the Lord of 
the harvest that he will send forth more laborers; for the 
fields are white for harvesting. He that reapeth receiveth 
wages and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 



Persons able to give a little time to the colporteur work, 
but not all, and whose circumstances require that moments 
so spent shall not be financially lost, are allowed 10 cents 
per volume for "expense money," on the paper editions of 
DAWN in packs of ten, twenty or more of a sort at a time. 
Persons using quantities of these books for loaning or for 
giving away are supplied on the same terms. 

For information as to Colporteur supplies, suitable territory, 
etc., address TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY, PA. 



back cover 

Scriptures around perimeter of back page: 

Along top: 

"Study to Show Thyself Approved unto God, a Workman that Needeth not to be 

Ashamed."— 2 Tim. 2:15. 



Along left edge: 

The Entrance of God's Word gives Light.— "Sanctify Them through Thy Truth: 

Thy Word is Truth."-Psa. 119:130; John 17:17. 

Along right edge: 

"Put on the Whole Armor of God, that Ye may be Able to Stand in the Evil Day, 

and Having Done All, to Stand. "-Eph. 6:11,13. 

Along bottom: 

The Word of God is Profitable— that the Man of God may be Thoroughly Furnished. 

-2 Tim. 3:15,17. 



Inside perimeter border: 

VALUABLE HELPS FOR BIBLE STUDENTS 

-SUPPLIED- 

FOR OUR SUBSCRIBERS' BENEFIT AT MUCH BELOW 
THE USUAL PRICES, AND IN SOME INSTANCES 

BELOW THE WHOLESALE PRICES. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 



This work, widely and favorably known, is a Greek 
New Testament with a literal, work-for-word English 
translation, under the Greek text. It has also an arranged 
English translation in a side column. Furthermore, it indicates 
the grammatical emphasis of the Greek text, so important 
yet so little appreciated, and not shown at all in the 
common version. 

The retail price of this work is $4.00, postage 16 cents; 
but a Brother, very anxious that all the TOWER readers 
should possess this help, in order to bring it within the 
reach of all, arranged to supply the book at $1.50, if we 
would pay the freight and postage, so that even the poor 
might have this blessing. We accepted the proposition, 
which still continues, but is limited to WATCH TOWER 
SUBSCRIBERS. 

ROTHERHAM'S TRANSLATION 



Of the New Testament is valuable as an emphasized translation, 
in critical study. We can supply it at the very low 
price of $1.00; by mail $1.15. 



LESSER'S TRANSLATION 



Of the Old Testament will also prove useful. It is a 
critical translation of the Old Testament by a Hebrew— 
the standard among Hebrews who read English. Price, 
in sheep binding, including postage, $1.50. 

YOUNG'S TRANSLATION OF THE BIBLE. 



This by many is highly esteemed for critical study. The 
usual price is $4.00, postage 15 cts. = $4.15. We can supply 
them at $2.80, plus postage, $2.95. 

THE REVISED BIBLE. 



We can supply the Cambridge Edition at the wholesale 
prices, in cloth bindings only, small size, 83 cts. Medium 
size, $1.25. Large size, $1.70— All postage included. 

STUDENTS' BIBLES. 



We can supply at wholesale cost prices, postage added, 
any of the Bagster's Bibles, including Bagster's Teachers' 
Bibles— the common version of the Bible, with references 
and many valuable helps. Our price list (free) contains 
a selection from Bagster's list, and also from the American 
Bible Society's list, of such as we deem specially good values. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 



This is the New Testament with foot-notes by Prof. C. 
Tischendorf, showing the various readings of the three oldest 
Greek Manuscripts (the Sinaitic, Vatican and Alexandrine) 
wherever they differ from the common English version. 
This is quite valuable for critical study. It is the 
highest authority on interpolations. Of this work we have 
imported a large quantity. The usual price is $1.00, but 
we will supply them at 50 cents, including postage. 

YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE. 



This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon, giving 
the meaning of the original terms in English, and also 



a Bible Concordance, giving each work of Scripture, and 
the word which it translates. The value of the work is 
becoming more apparent daily, as theorists attempt to palm 
off a private interpretation under the guise of "a better 
definition of the original." 

This superb volume exhibits 311,000 references and 
30,000 various readings. Its size is large quarto: 1094 
pages. The retail price of the book is $5.00, with postage, 
55 cents added— $5.55. Our price to our readers will 
hereafter be $4.25 by mail, postage prepaid by us; or $3.70, 
if sent by express at your charges. As it is quite a large 
volume (weight seven pounds), it will be cheapest for most 
purchasers to get it by mail.— This is the "Author's Edition," 
and the latest revision. The work cannot be sent 
to England because of English customs laws. 

CRUDEN'S BIBLE CONCORDANCE 



In cloth binding— price $1.00, postage 23 cents extra. 
Much below the regular price. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY, 



With useful information of an unsectarian sort on all religious 
subjects, will be found of value; though we cannot 
endorse all of its theological definitions. We can supply 
these at $1.00 per copy, cloth bound— postage 30 cts. extra. 

ENCYCLOPEDIAS AND DICTIONARIES. 



The copyright on the original edition of Webster's Unabridged 
Dictionary have expired, several reprints have 
appeared at very low prices. We have selected the best 
of these, the price of which in imitation Half-Russian binding 
is $5. These we can supply to TOWER subscribers at 
half price— $2.50, including postage. 

We have also arranged to supply Tower subscribers with 
the best American Edition of that wonderful work, Encyclopedia 
Britannica, 25 large volumes, at a very low price. 

FAMILY BIBLES. 



We have arranged with the Methodist Publishing House 
for the choice line of Family Bible in English and German 
published by them. 

The Parallel Edition has two specially valuable features. 
1st, In it the proper names are syllabled and accented; 
2nd, It is really two Bibles in one, because it contains 



both the Old Version and the Revised in parallel columns 
—easy for comparison. These we will supply to any subscriber 
to Zion's Watch Tower or to any purchaser of Millennial 
Dawn at one-half the regular list price, the price 
at which the publishers supply them to agents, wholesale. 
Or we will supply them to any one else for 10 per cent 
more to cover our time and trouble. 
PRICE LISTS SENT ON APPLICATION. 



ADDRESS ORDERS TO TOWER PUBLISHING CO., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 



R1285 : page 17 

VOL. XII. FEBRUARY, 1891. NO. 2. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



The falling away from the foundation principles 
of the Gospel of Christ continues. It is 
not confined to any one denomination, either. 
It will soon, as the Scriptures predict, affect all 
classes and sects. The stars [bright ones] shall 
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens 
shall be mightily shaken before they finally pass 
away with great confusion, to give place to the 
new heavens, the spiritual ruling powers of the 
Millennial age. 

The New York Witness seems to be awake 
to the fact that a great falling away is in progress, 
but evidently fails to grasp the real situation 
clearly. In an editorial on Theological 
Seminaries, it shows that these, instead of being 
bulwarks for the truth, are hot-beds of error. It 
deplores all desertions of "Orthodoxy," and 
evidently fails to see that the large proportion 
of error held by "Orthodoxy" is the cause for 
many now stumbling over and rejecting fundamental 
truths, such as the doctrine of the 
Atonement. 

After criticizing a Presbyterian deflection, it 
turns its attention to the same tendency among 
the leaders of thought in Methodism, as follows:— 

"A very notable manifestation of this disposition 
to appeal from the teaching of Scriptures 
to the bar of human reason was given by Bishop 
Fowler, of the M.E. Church, at the great Quadrennial 
Conference of that denomination held 
in this city in May, 1888. Bishop Fowler delivered 
a sermon on the Atonement before the 
Conference which was reported in full in the 
Christian Advocate, and that report contained 
the following paragraph: 

'"(1) Let me be specific. No debt has been 
paid. It is not in the field of commercial values. 
(2) If it were a debt to be paid by the 
sufferings of Christ, then it would be already 
paid and there could be no further claim against 
the sinner. He would need no pardon. His 
release would be demanded by justice. But such 
is not the case. (3) No debt has been paid. 
No penalty has been inflicted. The innocent 
may suffer for the guilty as a mother suffers for 
a bad child. But it is the coarsest kind of cruelty 
to punish, to inflict a penalty upon the innocent 
for the guilty. (4) If penalty were 



inflicted it would be all that justice could demand: 
when one has endured the penalty of a 
crime, then he is entitled to a discharge. He 
does not plead for pardon, but demands a discharge. 
(5) It is not thinkable that guilt can 
be transferred to the innocent. It inheres in the 
party sinning. It is monstrous and unthinkable 
injustice to hold the innocent as guilty. The 
fiction of substituting a supposed penalty inflicted 
upon Jesus for a penalty due to the guilty 
must be revolting to all sense of justice. (6) 
Guilt could not be transferred. Penalty could 
not be inflicted upon the innocent. Penalty 
inflicted at all must be upon the guilty, and 
then pardon would be impossible. There would 
be nothing to pardon. (7) No penalty has 
been inflicted.' 

"We called special attention to this paragraph 
at the time, and doubtless it was observed by 
many others both in and out of the Methodist 
communion, yet we have never heard of any 
special notice having been taken of it by the 

R1285 :page 18 

authorities of the Methodist Church, or of any 
determined protest against it on the part of the 
official organs of that body." 



It is certainly astounding to find such a wholesale 
falling away; for silence on the part of the 
others present at that great Conference, which 

R1286 : page 18 

represented every Methodist of the United 
States, gave the tacit consent of all to this 
denial of the foundation principles of Christianity. 
But though astounding, this is only in 
harmony with the Lord's testimony that in this 
"evil day" a thousand shall fall to one who 
will stand. 

We have numbered the various propositions 
in the above declaration by Bishop Fowler of 
his lack of faith, in order that we may the more 
conveniently examine and criticize each proposition 
separately. Let us see how the bishop's 
statements coincide with "the faith once delivered 
to the saints." 

(1) In this pointed, unmistakable statement 
of his position the gentleman's candor is to be 
appreciated. Nowhere does honesty show to 
better advantage than in a theological discussion, 
where so many writers and speakers feel free 



to handle not only the Word of God but also 
the English language deceitfully in order to 
gloss and cover a portion of their views. 

(2) In his second proposition, while reasoning 
well, the bishop falls into a difficulty from 
not being familiar enough with the Scriptural 
presentation of the subject. He is quite correct 
in reasoning that if man's debt were paid and 
canceled, there could be no further just claim 
against any, and that justice, instead of still following 
the sinner, demanding repentance, etc., 
as conditions of life, would be bound to demand 
that all whose debt was canceled should be 
set free at once, and unconditionally. 

But this is not the Scriptural presentation of 
the subject. The sinner's debt was not canceled 
but it was transferred or made over to our Lord 
Jesus, who assumed our debt, paid our penalty, 
BOUGHT US. He therefore, instead of freeing us, 
owns us; by virtue of having paid in full the claims 
of justice against us. True, he bought us in 
order to free us, but the purchase and the freeing 
are entirely distinct and separate 
transactions. 

The transaction between our Lord Jesus and 
the Heavenly Father, "finished" at Calvary, 
was indeed a transaction in which mankind was 
deeply interested, since it had special reference 
to their release from sin, condemnation and 
death; but man was not in any sense a party to 
that transaction. By giving himself a ransom 
for all, by paying to Justice the full penalty due 
from Adam— the one original culprit recognized 
and condemned by Justice, and the one through 
whom all his posterity suffered loss— the claim of 
Justice was indeed satisfied, but not as some have 
assumed by a credit of the sinners' account- 
thus: "The debt of Adam is hereby canceled, 
and he and his posterity are set free from 
all penalty." On the contrary, the transaction 
on the books of Justice would read thus— "This 
account against Adam and his race has been 
sold and assigned in full to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who gave therefor the full, corresponding price." 

Thus seen, the sinner is not freed from sin or 
condemnation or death by the work "finished" 
at Calvary. What there occurred was a satisfaction 
of Justice which removed the legal barrier 
which, unless removed, would have prevented 
and estopped any recovery of man. Justice is 
the foundation of God's government (Psa. 97:2), 
and his love could not operate in violation of 
his justice. 

The statement of the Scriptures is that the 
world still lieth in wickedness, that the original 
condemnation, which passed upon all men 



through Adam's transgression, is still upon all 
except the few, who, accepting forgiveness 
through Christ, have escaped the condemnation 
that is on the world.-l John 5:19; 2 Pet. 1:4; 
Rom. 8:1. 

These statements of God's own Word are 
amply borne out in our every-day experiences. 
We do not see that men are freed from sin or 
its penalty, death— "dying thou shalt die." 

If we knew no more than this of God's plan 
we would have little cause to rejoice; but, thank 
God, he has revealed to us the object of the 
transfer of our debt to the great Messiah who 

R1286 : page 19 

by his sacrifice redeemed us and transferred 
our cause from the tribunal of Justice to the 
tribunal of Grace. That transaction, in which 
we had no part, was to open up the way, 
by which God could be just and yet justify 
and restore to his favor those whom he 
had justly sentenced as unworthy of life or 
other favors. The case is thus put into such a 
state that God may justly show mercy to the 
sinners. 

As the representative of the Father and his 
plan, our Lord Jesus, the purchaser of the claims 
of Justice, will offer pardon, reconciliation and 
restoration to all that was lost, to all the race 
whose ransom-price he paid. He bought them 
for the very purpose of setting them free; but 
he has a time and an order and a method for 
presenting his gracious offer to all. And he will 
offer it to none unconditionally. The conditions, 
always the same, are faith and loving 
obedience. These are the conditions of the 
New Covenant which he sealed for all with his 
precious blood [his sacrificed life]— that any of 
the race who will to do so may through him return 
to fellowship with God and to everlasting life. 

This same principle of dealing with a debtor 
is in vogue to-day. If a man has a judgment 
against him for a thousand dollars, and a friend 
step forward and purchase that judgment, the 
debtor is not thereby freed from the debt; but 
after the purchase he owes the sum to the friend 
who bought the judgment; and it is for that 
friend to say upon what terms the debt may 
be forgiven or canceled. To this agree the 
words of the Apostles. "Ye are not your 
own— ye are bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ." "The man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom [a corresponding 
price] for all, to be testified in due time." But 
he did not release all: on the contrary, he arranged 



that there should be but one way for any 
to get free, and that is by faith in his sacrifice, 
and under the terms of the New Covenant 
which he made and sealed and ratified with his 
blood [his sacrificed life]. Yes, declares the 
Apostle, For to this end Christ both died and 
rose again, that he might be Lord [master, 
owner] both of the dead and living.— Rom. 14:9. 

But he did not desire to own and to rule mankind 
for any selfish purpose, but for their good— 
that he might discipline, instruct and ultimately 
restore all who, under his discipline, will come 
into harmony with the will of Jehovah. Such 
he will restore to the full liberty proper to sons 
of God [on whatever plane of being], but 
never granted to any rebellious creatures. 

"If the Son make you free, ye shall be free 
indeed," is a statement which shows at once 
that all were not made free by the death of 
Christ, but that by his death he legally purchased 
us, so that he can righteously bestow life 
and freedom upon all who apply for these blessings 
on his reasonable terms. 

(3) Proposition third we dispute. The debt 
has been paid so far as Justice is concerned; 
for though we are still debtors, our obligation 
is toward our Redeemer, who, by reason of the 
claims of Justice being settled, is now in position 
to forgive or pardon all who come unto 
God by him. The legal barrier to our emancipation 
has been removed, though the great work 
of emancipation has not been effected, as it will 
be, for all those who will accept of freedom on 
the terms dictated by the wise and loving Judge 
who bought the right to free us with his own precious 
blood. The love of God has arranged a way 
by which he who justly sentenced mankind to destruction 
can maintain his justice and yet grant 
them reconciliation and eternal life through 
the Redeemer— "to all those who obey him." The 
very penalty that had been pronounced against 
the human family, namely, "death," "destruction," 
has been paid by our Redeemer: "He 
died for our sins." "He died, the just for the 
unjust." "Jehovah hath let fall upon him the 
chastisement of us all." He became a man for 
the very purpose of giving this, our only ransom-price, 
and he gave it once and forever. 
The man Christ Jesus is dead forever: he gave 
himself a ransom for all. Though put to death 
in the flesh, he was not quickened (resurrected) 
in the flesh, but in spirit; he was sown a natural 
body, he was raised a spiritual body. Though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, henceforth 

R1286 : page 20 



we know him so no more. We now know him 
as the (quickening) life-giving Spirit, the express 
image of the Father's person and of the 
divine nature. Our ransom-price, the man Christ 
Jesus is in destruction, in death, as our substitute 
before Justice, in order that all that are in 
their graves and under the sentence of death 
may, in God's due time, go free, under the 
terms of the New Covenant. He gave himself 
as a man, and, thank God, never took back the 
price. His resurrection by the Father, on a 
higher plane of being, in no way invalidates 
the ransom given. The innocent did suffer for 
the guilty, voluntarily, freely, lovingly, just as 
a mother sometimes suffers and denies herself 
proper comforts to pay the fine of a law-breaking 
son. And it is a gross injustice to fair argument 
as well as a libel upon God's Word to 
infer that he compelled our sinless Lord to suffer 
for man the penalty of man's sin. Justice could 
not and did not compel; but it did permit and 
it did immensely reward (Phil. 2:9) the Lord's 
willing sacrifice. 

(4) The fourth proposition is conceded so far 
as our Lord Jesus, our substitute, is concerned. 
He paid the full price and no more can be required 
of him. But this argument does not apply to 

men at all, because Justice was not dealing with 
men but with Christ Jesus, our substitute, who, 
having paid the price, now owns us, and may do 
what he will with his own. God accepted of Jesus' 
death as the full, equivalent or corresponding 
price for Adam's guilt; and the case is no longer 
under the control of inexorable justice. If absolute 
justice had jurisdiction, it would condemn all, 
because all are imperfect and actually unworthy 
of life everlasting. But God's purpose in the 

R1287 : page 20 

work of redemption was to transfer man's case 
from the bar of justice and to provide for 
all another trial additional to the one lost 
for all by father Adam. And thus it is written, 
that though the Father had tried and sentenced 
Adam, and had now provided for the redemption 
in Christ, all future trial of the imperfect 
fallen race shall be conducted by the Son, our 
Lord Jesus, who bought all with his own precious 
blood.— John 5:22. 

(5) Proposition fifth is an uncandid, unfair 
statement. No theologian is excusable for ignorance 
of the fact that the Scriptures everywhere 

teach that, instead of the penalty of sin being 
"inflicted" upon our Redeemer, our Lord Jesus 



gladly and freely gave himself as our ransom, 
in harmony with the Father's gracious plan, 
with which he was most fully in accord. "Himself 
took our infirmities and bore our sicknesses." 
He truly declared, "No man taketh my life from 
me; I lay it down of myself."— John 10:18. 

(6) Proposition sixth we dispute upon the 
strength of the decision of the supreme court 
and highest standard of Justice. The Judge of 
all judges, Jehovah himself, has rendered his 
decision upon the question at issue. He has 
decided that both guilt and righteousness can 
be transferred under certain conditions. True, 
God has not decided that an unrepentant rebel 
and wilful sinner can be declared and accepted 
as righteous, when he is unrighteous to the core, 
not subject to the law of God, etc.; but he has 
decided that, inasmuch as the ransom-price for 
all hereditary sin has been paid by the Redeemer, 
any of the redeemed who have only this entailed 
or hereditary sin in them, and are not at 

heart antagonists of God and righteousness, may 

be considered to have had their sins imputed to 

the great Sin-bearer, and, receiving the imputation 

of the merit of their Redeemer's sacrifice, may 

be released from condemnation as sinners and 

receive the favor of God as sons. He who knew 

no sin was made sin for us [a sin-sacrifice or sin-offering 

that we might be made the righteousness 

of God in him. (2 Cor. 5:21.) In consequence 

we are told that we may reckon the 

righteousness of Christ as imputed to us, though 

our present attainment is not to righteousness; 

we are reckoned as though we possessed the full, 

complete righteousness which is offered us in 

Christ and to which we shall fully attain in the 

resurrection, if we follow on to know and to 

obey our Redeemer. Our sins were laid upon 

him and his righteousness is by faith imputed 

to us. 

(7) "No penalty has been inflicted" says the 
bishop. Ah! where has he lived on this sin-cursed 

R1287:page21 

earth that he has never seen evidences of 
the infliction of the penalty. "The wrath of 
God is revealed against all unrighteousness," 
says the Apostle; how can the bishop have escaped 
it? Possibly he has gotten his theological 
ideas so confused that he does not recognize 
the evidences of God's wrath, the evidences 
of the infliction of the penalty? Let us suggest 
to him that whenever he sees a funeral procession 
he is a witness of the infliction of the penalty 
which God pronounced against sin: "The 



wages of sin is death." Whenever we witness 
a death, or pain and suffering, which are but 
parts of the dying process, we have seen the 
wrath of God revealed in the very way and of 
the very kind the Scriptures describe. 

The trouble lies with a false theology which 
makes void the word of God by its false theories 
and philosophies; which declares that death 
is not death but a more abundant entrance into 
life. Having thus disposed of the real enemy 
and the real manifestation of God's wrath, 
and having pronounced it their friend, despite 
every instinct of sense and reason, and in opposition 
to God's Word, many feel called upon 
to make some other wrath and some other penalty 
for sin, and so turn and twist out of symbolic 
passages and parables a doctrine of an everlasting 
torment, either physical in flames, or what 
some declare worse, an endless mental torment. 

It is this "orthodox" penalty for sin for which 
the bishop has failed to find a place, either in 
reason or in Scripture; and failing to recognize 
the real, just and reasonable penalty, he declares 
that no penalty has been inflicted. The fact is 
that the bishop, like many others, is drifting 
into Infidelity. 

The only cure for this is the truth. Let death, 
the real penalty, be recognized, and it will soon 
be seen that this is just what our Redeemer paid 
for Adam and his race; and that it was a corresponding 
price, and met fully the penalty 
against the race. Let this be recognized and 
the light will soon stream in, showing that the 
due time must come when all shall be brought 
in contact with the privileges of reconciliation 
to God and restitution to human perfection in 
his likeness. Let this be seen, and the necessity 
for the resurrection will be recognized, and 
the Kingdom of God will be recognized as 
God's agency for bringing all the promised 
blessings to his redeemed creatures, to afford 
all a full opportunity to attain life everlasting. 
Then, too, the selection of the Kingdom 
class will be seen— how God is now bringing, 
through much tribulation and trial of faith, 
obedience and love, the "little flock" of saints 
who, as the bride of Christ, will be his joint-heirs 
in the Millennial Kingdom. 

Well, the bishops are not generally so ready 
or willing to hear as some of the humbler ones 
of God's people. But let those who see the 
light, like Gideon's faithful band, blow the 
trumpet and break their vessels, and let the 
light shine out. The victory is not so very 
near, but it is sure. Press nobly on, ye soldiers 
of the cross:— 



"The heavenly race demands thy zeal, 
And an immortal crown." 



page 21 

THE ANNIVERSARY SUPPER. 

The Anniversary of our Lord's "Last Supper," 
as reckoned by Jewish method of calculation, 
will this year fall on Tuesday evening, April 
21st. It will be more fully announced in our 
next issue. All who can do so are cordially invited 
to meet and celebrate with us in Allegheny. 
A few days of conference and Bible study will precede 
and follow the supper. Railroads will give 
two-thirds rates. Particulars in March TOWER. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, 
Arch Street, Allegheny, Pa. Readers and friends 
will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every 
Lord's-day afternoon at 3 o'clock. A Social 
Meeting at 7:15 p.m. is followed by a Question 
Meeting at 8 o'clock, at which all reverent Bible 
questions are entertained. 

Our German-speaking friends occupy the same 
room every Lord's-day forenoon at 10:30 o'clock. 



TAKE NOTICE, ALL. 

Please be particular to give full address in each letter. 

When you change your address, state where from, as 
well as where to. 

In sending lists for samples or new subscriptions, mention 
full address of each. 

Write orders and lists of subscribers on a sheet of paper 
separate from your letter. 

The safest way to send money is by Express or Postoffice 
Money Order, by Bank Check, or Registered. 

If needful to write a second time about any order, give date 
of previous order, how money was sent and full particulars. 



R1288 : page 22 
I AM THE WAY. 



Once I heard a sweet voice say, 
"Come to me: I am the way;" 
Then I was a sheep astray, 
Fainting in the heat of day. 

Mountains high my vision bound; 
Desert sands lay all around; 
Drink, nor food, could there be found! 
Naught sprang from the parched ground. 

Wearily I turned my head 
O'er the way my path had led. 
Surely, 'twas a voice, I said, 
Yet of feet I heard no tread. 

Like the mocking of a dream 
When the thoughts with fancies teem, 
Making things that are not seem 
Pleasant as a cooling stream:— 

So, the voice I heard behind, 
More than gentle, more than kind, 
Seemed to float upon the wind- 
Bringing solace to my mind. 

Soft again, and low and clear 
As the accents seraphs hear, 
Came the whisper to my ear, 
"I will help thee, do not fear." 

Look! the bread; the water springs! 
All the barren desert sings ! 
Haste thee! on love's wide-spread wings 
Tell the grace my message brings. 

Gird on thee thine armor bright! 
I, thy Captain, lead the fight; 
Up, and battle with thy might! 
God will guard and keep thee right. 

Gather to my fold the sheep; 
Gather lambs, that I may keep; 
Let them sing for joy and leap: 
None shall hunger more, nor weep. 

Beasts of prey, nor serpent's charm, 
Ne'er my homeward flocks shall harm, 
Nor my tender lambs alarm; 
All their foes will I disarm. 

From the hills shall rivers flow 
Through the verdant vales below; 
From Mount Zion light shall go; 
All the flock one Shepherd know. 



In and out his voice shall lead, 
Able to supply each need; 
In the pastures green to feed, 
Or to rest in blooming mead. 

MRS. ABIEL BOWEN. 



R1288 : page 22 

THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 



"The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in 
me."-John 14:30. 

Our Lord's reference here is to the great adversary 
of God and deceiver of men who for six 
thousand years past has pursued a course of systematic 
opposition to, and defiance of, the Almighty 
Jehovah, the great Emperor of the universe. 
He is elsewhere called the prince of the 
power of the air, and that old serpent which is 
the devil and Satan. He is also called Beelzebub, 
the prince of devils.— Matt. 12:24. 

Every reference to him represents him as an 
intelligent being of great power and influence, 
and as an ambitious leader. Yet in the beginning 
of his existence he was pure and perfect, 
an intelligent creature of God, created through 
the agency of his only begotten Son, without 
whom nothing was made that was made. (John 1:3.) 
Previous to his fall into sin he is spoken 
of as Lucifer, a morning star [a glorious being 
of creation's early morning]. 

Referring to his fall, the Lord, who declares 
that he has no pleasure in the death of him that 
falleth into sin and the condemnation to death 
(Ezek. 18:32), says, "How art thou fallen from 
heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!" Then 
he shows that undue ambition was the cause of 
his fall, saying, "For thou hast said in thine 
heart, Into heaven [the position of power] will 
I ascend; above the stars of God [other sons 
of the morning] will I exalt my throne; and I 
will sit also upon the mount of the assembly in 
the farthest end of the north [universal dominion]; 
I will ascend above the heights of the 
clouds; I will be equal to the Most High."— 
Isa. 14:12-14. 

Thus, instead of humbly and thankfully appreciating 
the favor of God which brought him 

R1288 : page 23 



into existence and crowned him with glory and 
honor as a bright star of creation's early morning, 
and, instead of returning due filial reverence, 
love and submission to his righteous will, 
this being cultivated a spirit of pride until his 
rising ambition aspired first to be a leader and 
chief of the other stars of the morning (the position 
already filled by the only begotten Son of 
God-John 1:1-3; Col. 1:15-17), and finally 
to outrival the Most High himself, as king of 
the universe. 

How different was the course of him who was 
actually above the morning stars— the only begotten 
Son from the bosom of the Father, and 
his honored and exalted agent in the creation of 
all things— not only of all the physical universe, 
but of all the intelligences as well. Of him we 
read that, "though being in a form of God [a 
mighty one], yet he did not meditate a usurpation, 
but [on the contrary] divested himself [of 
his glory], taking a bondman's form, and was 
made in the likeness of men. And being found 
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself [yet 
more] and became obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross." 

"Wherefore," says the Apostle, [because of 
his humility] "God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, both of things in heaven and things 
in earth, and things under the earth; and that 
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is 
Lord, to the glory of God the Father." (Phil. 2:6-11.) 
Thus, in accordance with a principle 
which God has laid down— that he will abase 
the proud and exalt the humble (Matt. 23:12; 
Jas. 4:6)— we see our Lord Jesus now exalted to 
the very position to which Satan through pride 
and ambition aspired and which he sought to attain, 
while Satan has been degraded, "cut down 
[or limited] to the earth" (Isa. 14:12), and 
sentenced to final destruction. 

Satan evidently had no faith in God's power, 
or perhaps in his willingness, to destroy him under 
any circumstances. Reasoning from the 
facts of his long continued existence and his unimpaired 
powers without any evidence of approaching 
dissolution, he concluded that his life 
could not be terminated. Consequently his 
ambitious schemes for power and dominion were 
deep laid and far reaching, having, as he supposed, 
ample time for full development. 

His ambitious policy seems to have begun to 
take shape immediately after the creation of 
man, through whose posterity, as they should multiply 
and attain the grand possibilities which he 



saw before them, he thought he saw his opportunity 
for the gratification of his hopes— for 
laying the foundation of his future dominion. 
And when he realized the restraint placed upon 
him which limited the sphere of his influence 
to the earth, he seems to have determined to 
make the most of his opportunities among men. 
From the promise of deliverance to mankind 
through the coming deliverer, he learned that a 
plan was already formed, the intended outcome 
of which was to be the triumph of the Son of 
God, whom he regarded with jealous hatred as 
a mighty rival. It surely was no part of his 
original policy to prostrate the race in death; 
and when to Eve he contradicted the threat of 
Jehovah, and declared, "Ye shall not surely 
die," he probably believed the lie, having first 
deceived himself, as most deceivers do. His 
object, seemingly, was to transfer man's allegiance 
from God to himself; and the death-penalty 
pronounced and executed upon the race was, we 
believe, an unlooked-for frustration of his plans. 
With this thought in mind, we see a continuation 
of the same line of policy, and an effort to 
outwit the Almighty, on the part of Satan, in 
the introduction of a new element among men, 
when some of the angels, under his seductive 
influence, were induced to leave their first estate 
and to assume and retain the human form 
and take to themselves wives of the daughters 
of men (Gen. 6:1,2,4; Jude 6,7), thus imparting 
a new life principle to the Adamic stock, 
the result of which was a race of "mighty men 
of renown," who, presumably, might live forever. 
This was a desperate and masterly stroke 
of policy; but again God put forth his power 
and frustrated the scheme, destroying with a 
flood the whole mongrel race, and preserving 

R1288 : page 24 

only Noah with his family, who was "perfect in 
his generation;" that is, he was of pure, unmixed 
Adamic stock.— Gen. 6:9. 

But, nothing daunted, the defiant rebel began 
his work among the sons of Noah after the 
flood, and with varying success has pursued his 
policy among the kingdoms of this world. And 
God has not specially interfered, and will not, 
until the end of this present evil world, when 
his time will have come for the setting up of 
Christ's kingdom. Then, he declares, Satan 
shall be firmly fettered and imprisoned for a 
thousand years. His policy during the period 
termed "this present evil world"— from the 
flood to the dawn of the Millennium— has been 



on the same line of scheming for power. Ever 
working in the hearts of the children of disobedience, 
he has always kept a majority in power 
who were not lovers of God and righteousness, 
as the pages of history fully attest; and working 
through the ambitions and selfishness of men, 
he has overturned kingdoms and revolutionized 
society with reckless indifference to the woes 
and miseries of men, in establishing his own 
dominion as "the prince of this world." 

To this our Lord referred when, just previous 
to his crucifixion, he said to his disciples, 
"Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for 
the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing 
in me." All along he had been in the 
world, and had been plotting and scheming and 
manipulating the affairs of men; but soon he 
was to come in the power of his kingdom, which 
we have seen to be the counterfeit kingdom of 
Christ, which was actually set up in the year 800 
of the Christian era under the name of "The 
Holy Roman Empire." "Hereafter"— after his 
death and resurrection— earth's rightful prince 
would have little to say; he would not interfere 
with the workings of the mystery of iniquity; 
he would permit the prince of this world to plot 
and scheme and develop his plans for setting up 
his counterfeit kingdom and do what he could 
to frustrate the plan of the Almighty for the 
establishment of Christ's Kingdom. 

From the pages of history we see how his 
kingdom was set up on a foundation of error, 
and how it was established on the basest principles 
of unrighteousness, with fire and fagot and 
sword and every device of torture wherewith to 
crush out truth and righteousness. And on the 
other hand, we see with what cunning craft he 
has endeavored to ensnare, entrap and lead 
astray; or, failing in this, to persecute the embryo 
kingdom of God, the Christian Church, 
both the Head, Christ Jesus, and all the members 
of his body. But when God's time for the 
establishment of Christ's kingdom has come, 
Satan's kingdom will be brought to naught as 
suddenly and as effectually as was his former 
purpose at the time of the flood. 

And even after the Millennial reign of Christ, 
notwithstanding the manifest futility of all his 
past endeavors, his ambition, even then, will lead 
to an attempt to establish some measure of authority 
and influence among men. When, under 
the reign of Christ, the resurrection of the dead 
is accomplished, and when Satan is loosed for a 
little season (Rev. 20:7), he will see a new avenue 
to the success of his long-cherished ambition, 
and be inspired with a fresh hope that his 



original purpose may yet be accomplished and 
that victory may very shortly be his. Then he will 
see not merely a perfect human pair with power to 
produce a mighty race destined to live forever, but 
the race completed and restored to life and vigor. 
His thought will be, If I can win this mighty race 
to my standard, my triumph and exaltation will be 
speedily accomplished. Again, therefore, he will 
figure as a leader, though, as now, unrecognized 
by men. Doubtless the temptation will again rest 
upon his old doctrine— that they shall not surely 
die, even if they do disregard and oppose the 
will of God. And those among men in whom 
the goodness of God has not wrought the spirit of 
humility and filial submission to his acknowledged 
superior wisdom, but, on the contrary, in 
whom pride has asserted itself, will easily be deceived 
and led into this error of believing that 
God either cannot or will not destroy them in a 
second death. And God will let him work for a 
little season, and no doubt he will work with all 
the zeal which a hope of speedy victory would 
naturally inspire. But he shall not succeed beyond 

R1288 : page 25 

the point which God permits for the final 
testing of mankind to prove who are worthy 
and who are unworthy of everlasting life. When 
this is accomplished, then follows the destruction 
of Satan and all who follow his leading. 

Thus discerning the general policy of our 
great adversary, we are enabled the better to 
understand his various devices and to discover 
his secret workings, and hence we should be the 
better guarded against his influence. In all his 
plottings and workings we see the evidence of 
an intellectuality which, though like the human, 
is far superior to it in power and scope, and with 
resources upon which to draw which are beyond 
the range of the human powers. Before the 
mind's eye, as represented in the Word of God, 
he stands out as a great intellectual giant, with 
an accumulation of at least more than six thousand 
years of knowledge and experience. What 
a mighty foe for poor fallen humanity to combat, 
with our present brief experience of threescore 
years and ten, and that in a degenerating 
and dying condition. 

He is full of ambition for self-exaltation, 
puffed up with arrogant pride which so over-estimates 
his own greatness that he considers 
himself worthy of the honor, power and glory 
of the God who gave him being, and is moved 
with merciless and continuous envy and 
hatred of the Son of God, as well as of the 



Heavenly Father who exalted him; and his 
whole career is untiringly devoted to his own 
ambitions and to the frustration of the divine 
plans, which he vainly presumes to accomplish. 
In the pursuance of his policy he is utterly reckless 
of its cost to humanity. Men in whose 
hearts he can work are so many tools in his 
hands whom he uses to oppose the principles of 
righteousness and truth. (Eph. 2:2.) For the 
accomplishment of his purposes there is no 
measure of hypocrisy which he would spurn 
(2 Cor. 1 1:14), no depth of iniquity to which 
he would not descend (John 13:27; 2 Thes. 2:9,10), 
no measure of cruelty that he would 
spare, and no height of folly to which he would 
not lead his deluded victims. He is a hypocrite, a 
deceiver, a tyrant and a merciless enemy of all 
who stand in the way of his ambitions. Look 
out for him! He will dog your steps; he will 
blind your eyes; he will stop your ears; he will 
fetter and handcuff and mentally chain you to 
his chariot-wheels, if you beware not of him. 
He it is who now "has the dominion of death" 
—whose power is manifest throughout the earth 
among those under condemnation to death. 
Here he goes about as a roaring lion, seeking 
whom he may devour. (1 Pet. 5:8.) In the 
great papal system, the most complete representative 
of his policy, his lionlike strength has 
most fully appeared, and his lionlike jaws have 
greedily devoured every interest of his deluded 
victims, while with the fires of persecution he 
has sought to devour in another sense the faithful 
few, who, despite his roaring anathemas, have 
bravely withstood his power. But nevertheless 
his days are numbered and his end is sure; for 
it is written that God will destroy him "holding 
the dominion of death" [not the eternal dominion 
and glory and power to which he aspired, 
but an ignominious dominion amid sin 
and death over poor fallen humanity], that is, the 
devil.— Heb. 2:14.— Rotherham. 

As children of God, therefore, in the midst 
of Satan's dominion and in opposition to his 
power, let us beware "lest Satan should get an 
advantage of us [through one or another of the 
numerous snares he has set for our feet]; for we 
are not ignorant of his devices. " (2 Cor. 2:11.) 
"Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be 
able to stand against the wiles of the devil; for 
we wrestle not against flesh and blood. [There are 
mighty invisible powers under the leadership of 
the prince of this world plotting to accomplish 
the stumbling of the feet of the body of Christ, 
and flesh and blood are only used as tools for 
that purpose by the great adversary], but [we 



wrestle] against principalities, against powers, 
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places" [in 
places of authority and power]. (Eph. 6:12.) 
Yet, if well armed with the whole armor which 
God supplies, and following our Captain's leading, 
we are safe; for greater is he that is for us 
than all that are against us. 



R1287 : page 26 

YOUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 



'Ye are the light of the world;. ..let your light 
shine.... Think not that I am come to destroy the 
law or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. 
For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, 
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law till 
all be fulfilled." 

"Whosoever therefore shall break one of these commandments, 
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the 
least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do 
and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom 
of heaven." 

"For I say unto you, that except your righteousness 
shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, 
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven."— 
Matt. 5:14-20. 

Our Lord's sermon on the mount, from which 
these words are chosen for our present consideration, 
was a most remarkable discourse for 
its simplicity and its weighty import. From beginning 
to end there are in it no attempts at 
literary embellishment, nor oratory, nor flights 
of fancy to please and entertain. His object 
was to instruct; and he did so in the most simple 
and forcible language. It will be observed, 
too, that he did not on this occasion seek a public 
place where the largest audience could be 
gathered; but, on the contrary, he chose a place 
of retirement where he could be alone with his 
disciples. The multitudes had thronged about 
him to witness his miracles and to hear his 
words, and he had healed their sicknesses and 
taught them many things, but this discourse was 
one specially designed for the disciples, the 
household of faith. And here it has been faithfully 
recorded, that its instructions may extend 
to the entire household, even to the end of the 
age. So while we consider these words of our 
Lord, we may almost realize that in company 



with Peter and James and John, and many of 
the brethren and sisters of the early church, 
we, too, are sitting on the grassy slopes of the 
mountain side and hearing the words as they fall 
from the lips of the greatest preacher the world 
has ever known. And as we turn away from the 
hallowed spot, let us not be forgetful hearers, but 
let us treasure up the words of life; let them 
sink deep into our hearts and bring forth their 
rich fruitage unto eternal life. 

This fragment of our Lord's discourse indicates 
a responsibility toward the truth received 
which it is feared many Christians do not carefully 
observe and consider. Mark the expression, 
"Ye are the light of the world;. ..let 
your light shine." And again he said, "As 
long as I am in the world, I am the light of the 
world;". .."he that followeth me shall not 
walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." 
(John 9:5; 8:12.) And now, instructed and 
enlightened from his Word, he would have us 
remember that we, as his representatives, are the 
light of the world, and that we should keep our 
light constantly trimmed and burning— that we 
must let our light shine so that those following 
us may not walk in darkness. 

Light is a symbol of truth both in the Scriptures 
and in common parlance. So the expression, 
"Ye are the light of the world;. ..let 
your light shine," is equivalent to saying— 
"You are now so illuminated by the truth that 
you yourself have become a living representative 
of the truth. So do not in any way obscure 
it, but let it shine out more and more, that others 
may be similarly blessed by it." This truth 
is "the light of life;" it is what the world needs 
—what all must have before they can attain unto 
everlasting life. Men must know the truth before 
the truth can make them free from the bondage 
of sin and death; they must know the truth 
before the truth can cleanse and sanctify them. 
It is the will of God, therefore, that all men 
shall come to an accurate knowledge of the 
truth. (1 Tim. 2:4.) And therefore it is the 
duty of every child of God to be very active 
in the dissemination of the truth— in letting his 
light shine, and in keeping it trimmed and 
burning. 

'"Trimmed and burning!' 'trimmed and 
burning!'" says some thoughtful soul. "I have 
often sung with fervor those words, Let the 
lower lights be burning,' 'Trim your lamps,' 

R1287 : page 27 

etc., but what does it mean?" It means that 



we must give very close attention to the words 

of life that we may come to an exact knowledge 

of the truth, and that we must carefully and 

faithfully trim away every vestige of error as fast 

as it becomes apparent to us— whether it be an 

error in doctrine or in our daily walk and conversation 

—so that the pure light of divine truth 

may shine out with as little obstruction as possible 

through the medium of a clear and transparent 

character. 

It is a lamentable fact that many of the Lord's 
children seem very indifferent to this matter of 
trimming their lights. They get some truth and 
with it a great deal of error, and instead of trying 
to eliminate the error, they hold and teach the 
two together, so that the light they shed is not 
a pure light, but is colored and distorted by the 
error with which it is mixed. And again, even 
when much pure truth is held, there are those 
who fail to let it have its cleansing effect upon 
the character, and so the light is obscured and 
misrepresented by the unclean medium through 
which it passes. Any who continue thus to hold 
the sacred trust of truth are really unworthy of 
it, and must eventually lose it; for it is written, 
"Light [truth] is sown for the righteous;" and 
such indifference to the claims of the truth is 
unrighteous. 

In our Lord's day there were those who openly 
professed to be teachers and representatives 
of divine truth. The scribes and pharisees professed 
to be very zealous for the truth, and 
thought themselves very creditable manifestations 
of its cleansing power. They claimed to 
have the light and to be letting it shine. 
"God," said the pharisee, "I thank thee that 
I am not as other men.... I fast twice in the 
week, I give tithes of all I possess." But the 
Lord said, "Woe unto you;. ..ye outwardly 
appear righteous unto men, but within ye are 
full of hypocrisy and deceit." So they appeared 
in the Lord's sight; but they were reverenced 
and honored of men and esteemed as 
holy and as guides in the way of truth and holiness. 
To God's law they presumed to add their 
own vain and foolish traditions which made 
void the law of God, and they were very zealous 
in teaching those traditions to the people. 

In so doing those teachers were inexcusable. 
The law of God was open before them, and it 
was their privilege and their duty to be correctly 
informed with reference to it. And especially 
after Christ had come, and by his teaching had 
made the truth so manifest, and the absurdity 
of their vain traditions so apparent, they were 
without excuse. And our Lord's accusation of 



hypocrisy well fitted their case when they resolutely 
determined to hold and teach the traditions 
of the elders and to oppose the increasing 
light of truth which made their absurdity so 
manifest. 

The scribes and pharisees had much truth: 
they had the whole law of God and claimed to 
believe and teach it, but they miserably colored 
and distorted it by their traditions and their 
really ignoble though whitewashed characters. 
And consequently their efforts, professedly to 
convert men to God, resulted only in making 
more hypocrites like themselves. 

"I say unto you," said the Lord to his disciples, 
"that except your righteousness shall exceed 
the righteousness of the scribes and pharisees, 
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom 
of heaven." 

Let us beware of that kind of righteousness 
which to men may indeed appear fair and praiseworthy, 
but which, in God's estimation, is mere 
sham and hypocrisy. God, who reads the 
heart, quickly discerns the motives with which 
we receive or disseminate the truth; and foolish 
indeed is the man who attempts to make merchandise 
of this divine treasure for the paltry 
gains of this fleeting life, who prefers to hold 
and to teach error and becloud or oppose the 
truth of God, or to sell it after having once accepted 
it, for money, or influence, or popularity 
among his dying fellow-travelers on the way to 
the tomb, or for any consideration whatever. 

And yet there are some who, though they do 
not thus hypocritically make merchandise of the 
truth, do in a measure undervalue it, and who, 
both in the present and in the future, will be 
the losers thereby. If we permit prejudice, or 

R1287 : page 28 

some measure of self-emulation, or of pride, or 

of combativeness, or any other thing, to interrupt 

the freedom of artless candor and simplicity 

and that spirit of meekness which alone 

befits the searchers after truth, we will find ourselves 

approaching the pharisaical spirit which, 

when fully ripe, is glaring hypocrisy. Those 

who avoid such a disposition and who therefore 

in meekness and sincerity fully accept the truth 

and zealously teach it at any cost or sacrifice, 

the Lord says, shall be called great in the kingdom 

of heaven; while those who hold and teach 

a measure of error when it was their privilege to 

have clear truth, had they been in the right condition 

of heart to receive it, shall be called least 

in the kingdom of heaven.— Matt. 5:19. 



Prejudices and various old deformities of 
disposition often greatly retard the progress of 
some of God's sincerely consecrated children; 
and in consequence, their efforts, which are 
verily meant to be in God's service, are misdirected, 
and they are found both believing and 
teaching contrary to the truth on points where 
God's Word is very explicit. Let us beware of 
these things, and, diligently casting behind us 
every hindrance to our personal progress in the 
way of truth and to our usefulness in the Master's 
service, let us run with patience, with 
meekness and diligence the race set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, who has said, "My grace is 
sufficient for thee. My strength is made perfect 
in weakness." 



R1287 : page 28 

THE KIND OF PUNISHMENT. 



The following is a copy of a letter recently 
sent by one of the Brethren to a minister, holding 
so-called "Plymouth Brethren" views, to 
whom he had already loaned Vols. I. and II. of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your favor of the 19th ult. 
was duly received and read with care. I see that 
we are entirely apart on our bases of interpretation 
of the Scriptures, you evidently endorsing 
what is known as the "Futurist System" in 
reading the Apocalypse. 

You state that you have examined Volume I. 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN very carefully, and yet 
you say that "one fundamental error which runs 
through the whole system of interpretation of 
the Scriptures in this volume is the denial of 
eternal punishment." If by eternal punishment 
you mean "everlasting torture in both mind 
and body forever," you are correct. And permit 
me to say right here that I believe no system 
of Bible interpretation can more completely 
and thoroughly "deny the Father and the 
Son" than such a one as this, which has been 
the foundation for all the horrible doings of 
Papacy. By ascribing to our loving, wise, just 
and powerful God and to his beloved Son, Jesus 
Christ, the qualities and attributes of the devil, 
this system has thoroughly and completely "denied 
the Father, and the Son," and no other 
teachings so thoroughly make void the glories 
of the ransom, in which Christ "tasted death 



for every man." Permit me to say further, that 
while these writings do deny such an interpretation 
of the Bible, they clearly and logically set 
forth that "the wages of sin is death," and that 
those who will not be subservient to the Lord 
when they understand him and his work in their 
"due time"— which for his "body" is during 
the reign of evil now closing, and for the world 
is when he comes to reign and when he establishes 
his Millennial Kingdom— will "be punished 
with everlasting destruction"— annihilation. 

We differ from you, not on the duration of 
the punishment, but its character. I believe 
that God's gift is life, and that those who will 
not accept it upon his condition of obedience 
to his righteous will, will have it withdrawn 
and will enter into death— utter loss of life. I 
further believe that Christ is the Mediator between 
God and men, and that the man Christ 
Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
(to all) in due time. There is no fact 
plainer in history than that but a very small portion 
of the human race has ever yet heard of 
the name of Christ, and hence I believe that the 
"due time" for the great majority of mankind 
to hear and to act on the glad tidings must be 
after the resurrection. In a word, I believe 
Christ's death to be the foundation on which, 
through resurrection, God will establish a kingdom 
on earth "in which will dwell righteousness," 
and that the time for this kingdom is 
during the Millennium. 

As a believer in our Lord Jesus and the import 
of his death, you cannot afford, my dear 

R1287 : page 29 

Brother, not to lay aside every prejudice and 
carefully consider, Bible in hand, the line of 
teaching set forth in the volumes which I sent you. 

I have looked over the tract, entitled "Eternal 
Punishment," which you sent me, and must 
confess that I have never seen so much twisting, 
warping and stretching of the Scriptures in so 
small a space before. 

Hoping that you will accept my views in the 
same spirit of love in which they are presented, 
and that you will give the truths set forth in 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" careful, prayerful study, 
Bible in hand, proving all things, holding fast 
that which is good, 

I am yours in the service of Christ, 
W. E. PAGE. 



page 29 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



North Dakota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I take the liberty 
of writing a few words to you to tell you how 
we are getting along here in the far west. We 
are a little flock here of four families, or nine 
members, which meet together every Sunday and 
try to build us up in the most holy truth. And, 
thank the Lord, we can say that we have been 
greatly blessed, and he has been in the midst of 
us as he has promised his disciples, and the 
TOWER is a great help to us to bring us to many 
facts; and as some of us cannot read English, 
we translate for each other, and we 
have the Bible by the side of the TOWER, and 
we have not found anything yet that has been 
contrary to the Bible. Thank the Lord! And 
thanks to him that he has considered us worthy 
to show us such important truth. But how sorry 
we are that we cannot do more in helping to 
spread the truth. 

We are farmers, and we had a total failure of 
crops this year, and we have all we can do to get 
along over the winter. But God is rich in grace 
and mercy. And we hope he will have forbearance 
with us as he can see to the heart, and see 
our willingness. The only thing we can do is 
to pray to God and the Lord Jesus Christ that 
he will bless your work and open willing hearts 
who have the money to help spread the truth. 
There were a good many that walked with us 
for a while, but they "stumbled on that stumbling-stone" 
which Paul speaks about. But we 
shall not wander. Jesus had seventy disciples 
once, but when he spoke about the bread of 
life they said, "Hard is this saying; who can 
hear it?" And from that time many of his disciples 
withdrew and walked no longer with him. 
Many say and do the same now-a-day when they 
hear the blessed truth. God help us all! 

I must close for this time. I am a poor writer 
in the English language, and I don't know 
whether you can understand me. Please find 
inclosed $1.25 as payment for the TOWER for 
1891, and one copy of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
Vol. I., and one hundred missionary envelopes. 

May God's grace be on us forever. Amen. 
I am your brother in the salvation, 
O. C. MELIN. 



R1288 : page 29 

Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-You will find enclosed 
money order for my TOWER subscription 
for the ensuing year. 

I received January number last night and 
quickly noticed the new suit in which the 
TOWER is clothed. I feel sure that the improvement 
will be greatly appreciated by its readers. 
The emblem of the cross and crown is an appropriate 
and beautiful design to be worn by the 
TOWER. Its presence should ever encourage, 
sustain and comfort the household of faith. 
It should also be a warning or reminder; for as 
the cross and crown are inseparable in the design, 
so the two are to be inseparably associated 
in the experience of the overcomers. If we 
would wear the crown we must bear the cross. 

I saw in the New York World a few days 
ago an article called "In behalf of the Hebrews." 
It stated that a movement had been 
inaugurated in Chicago in behalf of the Russian 
Hebrews, by W. F. Blackstone, who was 
chairman of the conference between Christians 
and Jews recently held in that city. It is to 
get up a petition to President Harrison and 
Secretary Blaine, asking them to use their good 
offices to secure the holding of an international 
conference, to consider the condition of the 
Hebrews, and to give them Palestine on the 
same principle that Bulgaria and other Turkish 
provinces have been given to their national 
owners. And it stated that the petition had already 
been signed by hundreds of representive 
citizens, including Protestants, Catholics, Jews, 
business men, city and government officials. It is 
endorsed by the entire secular and religious 
press of Chicago. It is stated that Mr. Blackstone 
will soon come east, to give New York 
and other eastern cities an opportunity to join 
the undertaking. 

R1288:page30 

This movement seems to fulfil the prophecy of 
Jer. 16:14-21. And I think that Mr. Blackstone 
is one of the fishers, and that the Czar of Russia 
is one of the hunters spoken of. This movement 
should cause much rejoicing to the watchmen. 
Let us lift up our heads, for our redemption 
draweth nigh. Yours cordially, 
D. M. HESSLER. 



page 30 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I don't know just 
when my subscription ends, but will send the 
money now so as not to miss a number, as I 
should much rather miss a Thanksgiving dinner 
than a TOWER. I often wish it were a weekly, 
and yet I think it is far too rich food to be partaken 
of too often. I find spiritual food needs 
time for digestion as well as bodily food; and 
I read them over and over, and get more benefit 
from them the second or third time than the 
first. I have read 1st and 2nd Vols, of DAWN, I 
think about six times, and if I could not get 
others I would not take ten dollars apiece for 
them; but as much as I prize them I have not 
succeeded in getting any one interested in them. 
They look it over a little and throw it aside as 
indifferently as they would a last year's almanac. 

Although I have but little of this world's goods 
I can truly say if all the wealth of the United 
States were poured at my feet as the purchase 
price of the glorious truth I have learned in the 
last two years from reading DAWN and TOWER 
and study of the Bible, it would be no temptation 
as I have learned that truly man doth not 
live by bread alone, but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Sometimes 
when reading passages that I have read a 
hundred times and thought I understood perfectly, 
such a flood of new light will break in 
upon me that I clap my hands and shout for joy 
while the glad tears run down my cheeks. 

I took none of your statements for granted, 
but kept my Bible beside me and looked up all 
passages referred to, so that I knew I had God's 
Word and not fallible man's; and while it has 
taken all Methodism and creed-doctrine out of 
me, I feel that I am a hundred-fold more a child 
of God than ever before. 

May you be spared many years to carry on 
the Master's work. E. H. BUTLER. 



R1288:page30 

West Virginia. 
EDITOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. DEAR SIR: 

I have read with pleasure and profit MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Volumes I. and II. I can now read 
my Bible understandingly and contemplate the 
loving kindness and masterly wisdom of the great 
Jehovah. All the doubts that hovered over my 



mind in years gone by have vanished, and I live 
in a new light that is more than all the world 
to me. Two years have passed since I read your 
first Volume, but I have read and re-read it, and 
it grows and expands the more I study it. 

I was a soldier of the "lost cause" in the 
days of "the Great Rebellion," was badly 
wounded at the fearful struggle at the "Wilderness," 
and I returned to my home that had been 
ruined, at the close of the war, and found myself 
a cripple for life with a life-struggle before 
me. I felt that my lot was a hard one, but I 
determined to honor God and keep up a resolute 
will. Sometimes dark and threatening 
clouds gathered about me, almost despair settled 
over my mind and fears almost paralyzed my 
hopes for the future. 

A kind friend lent me MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. I. I read it, and poverty vanished into the 
marvelous light of a bright and glorious hope 
that grows brighter and brighter until by faith 
I see the glorious day of the Lord God Almighty. 

I want some time to come to your city, enjoy 
one of your annual meetings and take 
you by the hand and thank you for the cheer 
that in the name of the eternal Father you have 
administered to your Brethren. 

May eternal sunshine gild your pathway. Go 
on in your magnificent work— the God of Israel 
is with you. J. R. PHILLIPS. 



page 30 

Ohio. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We received January 
TOWER and rejoice much in its new shape as 
well as in the matter. You mention in the 
article about the "talents" that the servant of 
one talent was an "idler," but the only motive 
or reason given when judged was "afraid"— 
fear of earthly loss, that would result from using 
the talent, is prominent. God judges this servant 
"out of his own mouth"— confession of slavish 
fear. I would like the parable of the "pounds" 
explained in connection with that of the "talents." 
We had another excellent meeting today. 
After reading and commenting on Eph. 5 
and Zech. 8, the meeting was open and we had 
good stirring testimonies— about six or eight. 

Dr. A said nothing had ever taken hold on 

him and wife like this truth, and he might have 
to give up his practice of surgery and circulate 
DAWN and preach. I sold several DAWNS and 
took two subscriptions for the TOWER. Next 



Sunday I lecture again. 

I add a few figures from Sadler's Catholic Directory, 
to show what a place Cincinnati is for 
Catholicism. Churches 196, chapels 35, priests 

page 3 1 

288, beside 10 ladies' academies, also colleges, 
convents, etc. Covington, with about 50,000 
souls, has 42 churches, 25 chapels, 19 convents, 
35 stations visited, 1 monastery, etc. Even Lower 
Canada can scarce beat that for "Mother" 
power. Jews are also plentiful, and "isms" 
abound: Swedenborgianism, Christian Science, 
Spiritualism, etc. Much love in Christ, 
J. B. ADAMSON. 



Michigan. 

DEAR BRO. AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I wish I 
could tell you how much help and comfort 
Poems and Hymns of Dawn have been to me. 
But if I should try I could not tell you. Only 
this I may say, that my faith has been quickened, 
and my spiritual strength has been renewed 
by their perusal. My husband, too, is 
delighted with them. We have just finished 
reading the December TOWER, and I want to 
say that the articles entitled "Christ in you the 
Hope of Glory," "The Easy Yoke" and "The 
Blood" seemed just suited to my present need. 

This morning I seemed so weak and unworthy, 
so incapable of doing anything to the glory 
of God, and the dear Christ, whom I do so 
want to honor. The tempter assaulted my faith 
so severely, that I cried out in my anguish, O 
Lord! can I ever be an overcomer? Then I 
seemed to hear some one ask, "Do you want to 
go back?" Quick as a flash, there arose before 
my mind recent victories and blessings, and 
from my full heart the answer sprang to my lips, 
No, Lord, no! O, what a sense of relief I felt; 
what a sudden peace came over my troubled 
spirit. It seemed to me I could almost see my 
King and Redeemer reach out his loving hands 
toward me, saying, Well then, child, come on. 

One thing I do know, that in all my Orthodox 
experience— and I believe I have been sincere 
and earnest in my Christian life— I have 
never felt such a sense of the presence of my 
Savior, as I have within the last few weeks. I 
humbly trust I am one of those who are looking 
for and hasting unto the appearing of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ. 

My husband wishes to continue his subscription 



for the TOWER. He has not the money 
just now, but if you will kindly send the paper, 
he will appreciate the favor, and will forward 
the money as soon as he can get it. He is a 
firm believer in the doctrine of the Millennium 
and Restitution as taught by you. He often 
wishes he could attend some of your meetings, 
especially your annual meeting. 
Very sincerely yours, MRS. D. S. W 



Illinois. 

God has wonderfully led me into the higher 
life, and I have surrendered to have his 
will worked in me to the highest, though it has 
cost me already my church and family and dear 
earthly companions— everything that I held dear 
in this world; but how little it is compared with 
what Christ can give and does give. I count 
every trial a joy; "my cup runneth over." 

Please send two more "Tabernacle" TOWERS. 
God bless you and teach you ever more of the 
truth. Yours in the blessed fellowship of Jesus 
Christ, S. I. S. 



Maryland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-This morning we 
received the shipment of DAWNS ordered. 

We are both well and are doing as well as 
can be expected for this time of the year. 
Dear sister Boehmer comes in every evening with 
glowing countenance, telling how she has found 
some who were ready to receive the truth. Her 
whole heart is in the work. Thus we all find 
some encouragement every day. I realize more 
fully every day that it is the work for the saints, 
and with Bro. West I wonder why more are not 
engaged in it. I hope I may be permitted to 
remain in the work. Pray for me. 

Yours in Christian love, A. ERLENMYER. 



Toronto. 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Bro. Brookman is 
very desirous that you should be with him at 
his hall on Sunday evening of the 22nd, so we 
have arranged thus, subject to your approval. 

The interest in the truth here is growing 
steadily, and we hope and trust that the meetings 
will be productive of much good. I think 
that you may expect audiences of from five to 
eight hundred in the morning and afternoon. 
But of course the opposition is growing also. 

Bro. Utley is with us now, and Bro. Eyres, 



Thompson and some others from outside the 

city will be with us at the meetings. The "Plymouth 

Brethren" held a meeting last night at 

which the small audience was advised to burn 

DAWN, and to give a wide berth to those who are 

circulating it. Yours in Christ, S. D. ROGERS. 



MEETINGS IN TORONTO, CANADA. 

At the urgent solicitation of friends in and near 
Toronto, the Editor of this journal has arranged 
to speak three times at Toronto on Sunday, 
Feb'y 22nd next. The hour and place will be 
announced in Toronto papers. TOWER subscribers 
present are urgently requested to make 
themselves known to the Editor. 



R1289:page33 

VOL. XII. MARCH, 1891. NO. 3. 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY SUPPER, 

-COMMEMORATIVE OF- 

OUR LORD AND HIS DEATH FOR OUR SINS. 



The Supper which our Lord instituted as a 
remembrancer of his great sacrifice for our sins, 
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of 
the whole world, is striking in its appropriateness 
and its simplicity. The world's great men 
have always sought very different means of perpetuating 
their memories. In whatever way 
they would remind their followers of their 
merits and their greatness, it surely has not 
been by a reminder and commemoration of 
their death— especially if, as in our Lord's case, 
it was a death of ignominy and shame, a death 
as a malefactor and criminal. Another more 
probably would have left instructions for medals 
to be struck commemorating some of his mighty 
works; such, for instance, as the awakening of 
Lazarus, or the stilling of the tempest on the 
sea, or the triumphal entry into Jerusalem, 
while the multitude strewed the way with palm 
branches, and cried, Hosanna to the King, the 
heir of David! 

But our Lord chose as his remembrancer that 
which represented what was, in his and in God's 
estimation, his mightiest work— his sacrifice as 
a sin-offering on our behalf; and that which 
his real followers, and they alone, would appreciate 
more than any other feature of his mission. 
True, his followers would have appreciated 
something commemorative of his wonderful 
words or works, but the worldly also 
could have appreciated those things. But not 
so the value of his death as our ransom-sacrifice, 
the basis of our reconciliation and atonement, 
which has never yet been fully apprehended 
and appreciated by any but the consecrated 
little flock— the elect. And it was for 
these that the remembrancer was arranged and 
instituted. And though a Judas was present, 
he was given a sop and went out from the others 
before the supper was ended; thus no doubt 
representing that in the close of this age, before 
the little flock will have finished their 
part of having fellowship with their Lord in 
his suffering, the sup of truth will have become 



so strong as to drive forth from the company 

and communion of the faithful all who do not 

rightly appreciate and value the ransom accomplished 

by the Lamb of God for the taking 

away of the sins of the world.— 1 John 2:19. 

As early as January letters of inquiry as to 
the date of the anniversary this spring began 
to come in; showing clearly that our Lord's 
death, the great event thus celebrated, is appreciated 
very highly as the very foundation of all 
our present and prospective joy in God. We 
rejoice that this great truth is so clearly seen 
and so dearly prized by so many WATCH TOWER 
readers. 

The date of the anniversary this year will be 
Tuesday evening, April 21st, after 6 o'clock P.M. 

R1289:page34 

But since the date is nearly a month later than 
the date recognized by the Church of England 
and the Church of God, who will celebrate Good 
Friday on March 25th, it will be more satisfactory 
to some to have the two methods of calculation 
explained. 

The date of the Paschal Supper at which the 
Jews ate a lamb, commemorative of their deliverance 
from Egyptian bondage and of the 
sparing of their first-born at that time, was of 
course calculated by the Jewish method of reckoning 
time— viz., lunar time. (Exod. 12:2-14). 
Instead of dividing the months as we do, 
they allowed the new moon to mark the beginning 
of a new month; and the difference between 
sun time (solar time) and moon time 
(lunar time) was equalized every year by always 
beginning the new year with the appearing 
of the first new moon after the spring 
equinox. In celebrating their religious festivals 
the Jews still maintain this method of reckoning. 
And since our Lord, the apostles and 
the early Church followed this same rule for determining 
the date for the annual celebration of 
our Lord's Last Supper, we follow the same rule. 

The spring equinox this year will be on 
March 20th; and the first new moon thereafter 
will appear on the afternoon of April 8th. And 
at 6 P.M. of that day begins the first day of 
the Jewish month Nisan, the first month of the 
Jewish sacred year. Beginning on the 1st of 
Nisan the Hebrews counted, and on the tenth 
day the Paschal Lamb was chosen. On the 
fourteenth day it was killed and eaten at the full 
of the moon;* and on the fifteenth day their 
Passover Feast began, lasting eight days, the 
first and the eighth days being observed as specially 



holy, as Sabbath days or high days. On 
the sixteenth day the omer of the first-fruits of 
the barley harvest was offered to the Lord, and 
fifty days after (Pentecost Day) they offered 
before the Lord two wave loaves.— Lev. 23:17. 

These things done by the Jews every year 
were, as we have already seen, types of greater 
and grander occurrences. The choosing of the 
lamb on the tenth day typified how, if Israel 
would be blessed and recognized as first-born 
in the antitypical Passover, they must accept 
of Jesus then, five days before that Passover, 
and four days before his crucifixion; and it evidently 
was on that very date that our Lord 
offered himself finally to that nation— when he, 
as their King, rode into the city on the colt. 
(Compare John 12:1,12.) They, however, neglected 
to receive the Lamb of God, and ceased 
from being the first-born, even in type. 

The 14th day (which this year will begin at 
6 o'clock on the evening of Tuesday, April 21st, 
and last until 6 P.M. of the 22nd) was the day 
in which the Paschal lamb was to be killed and 
eaten; and the counting of time (doubtless 
divinely arranged for this very purpose) permitted 
the eating of the Last Supper upon the 
same day that the Lord was crucified. The 
Passover Supper of lamb and herbs and unleavened 
bread (fulfilling the Law, which was 
not ended until the cross) was eaten shortly 
after 6 P.M. Then followed the institution of 
the Memorial Supper of bread and wine, representative 
of the death and eating of the antitypical 
lamb. This thereafter, as oft as the occasion 
returned (yearly), was to be observed instead 
of the eating of the literal lamb— as the 
commemoration of the antitypical lamb and the 
greater passing over of the antitypical first born 
which his blood effects. 

The waving of the barley sheaf of first-fruits 
on the 16th of Nisan ("the morrow after the 
Sabbath" or Passover of the 15th-Lev. 23:5,6,11,15,16,) 



*As the sun is a symbol of Christ's Kingdom, so a moon 
or month symbolized Israel as a nation. (Rev. 12:1.) 
The 12 and sometimes 13 lunations symbolize the tribes of 
that nation. The moon was at its full at the time of 
Christ's crucifixion. There it immediately began to wane 
and waned for as long as it had previously increased. So 
Christ's death was the turning point between the two equal 
parts of Israel's history. See M. DAWN, Vol. II., page 218. 

As those Jews who were unclean, and hence could not 
keep the Passover properly in its proper season, were permitted 
to do so on the 14th of the second month (at the 



full of the next moon— Num. 9:8-13), the lesson 
taught seems to be that all prevented by sin and ignorance 
from accepting Messiah as their Redeemer, when 
offered to them, will have an opportunity of doing so 
when, in the Times of Restitution of all things, their nation 
or moon shall again be full of blessings in the later harvest. 

R1289:page35 

typified the resurrection of 

Christ our Lord, as "the first fruits of them 

that slept."*-l Cor. 15:20. 

The two wave loaves offered on the fiftieth 
day represented the presenting of the Church 
before God and its acceptance through the 
merit of the great High Priest, indicated by the 
anointing of the spirit at Pentecost. The 
Church really is but "one loaf" (1 Cor. 10:17), 
the two loaves representing the same thing 
as the two goats presented on the Day of 
Atonement. It indicated that, although all presented 
were acceptable to God through Christ 
Jesus, he yet knew that all presented would 
not come up to the conditions of faithfulness 
unto the end. The two loaves represented, 
therefore, the two classes of the consecrated— 
the overcoming little flock and the "great company" 
of the consecrated servants of God who 
do not make the high calling theirs, by overcoming 
the world as they might and should do. 



*Here is the strongest possible confirmation of the 
correctness of the position taken in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
Vol. II.— that our Lord was not three full 24-hour days in 
the tomb, but only parts of three days and nights; that he 
was crucified on the day corresponding to our Friday 
afternoon, and rose on what corresponded to our Sunday 
morning. The showing of this type that the Paschal 
lamb was to be killed sometime during the 14th of Nisan, 
and the wave offering of the sheaf of first-fruits was to occur 
on the 16th, should settle the matter for all. It agrees 
with the repeated statement (1 Cor. 15:4; Luke 24:46) 
that our Lord rose on the third day, according to the 
Scriptures. This Scripture concerning the first-fruits is 
the only one which we recall as in any way pointing 
out the time of our Lord's resurrection. Then, too, the 
fact that history, as represented in the traditions and customs, 
points out Good Friday and Easter Sunday 
as celebrations of our Lord's death and resurrection, 
should have some weight on so trivial a matter, unless 
some motive or reason for misstating the dates can be assigned. 
The only scripture seeming to oppose all these 
facts is the one which declares that our Lord would be 
three days and three nights in the earth; and the only 



explanation that can be offered to this is that the expression 
is used in a general and not in a specific manner, 
the nights being mentioned to preclude the idea of any 
cessation of death until the third day. Thus understood, 
the expression would signify that during portions of three 
days and nights our Lord would be in the tomb. At all 
events, the evidence is overwhelming that he died on the 
14th of Nisan and rose on the 16th— the third day after. 

R1290:page35 

The method of calculating the date for Good 
Friday and Easter Sunday in vogue among 
Episcopalians and Roman Catholics differs 
from the foregoing in this: They celebrate, as 
Easter Sunday, the first Sunday following the 
first full moon after the spring equinox, and 
the preceding Friday is recognized as Good 
Friday. This method of counting was instituted 
by the Council of Nice, A.D. 325. The 
name Passover was used— and not Easter* 
Sunday— for a long time; but after Papacy 
had been established in political influence, and 
the ignorant pagans began to flock to the system 
which enjoyed the favor of the government, 
the name Easter was substituted for the Passover, 
because about the same time as the Passover 
the pagans had been in the habit of celebrating 
the festival of their Goddess Easter 
(German Ostera)— Estera, goddess of the East. 
This was one of the many methods adopted by 
an ambitious "clergy" for gaining numbers 
and influence. 

Sometimes the two systems of counting indicate 
the same days, but not often; and occasionally 
their results are nearly a moon or month 
apart, as in the present year, when the first full 
moon after the equinox is on March 25th, while 
the first new moon after the equinox marks the 
1st of Nisan on April 8th, and the 14th on 
April 22d-beginning at 6 P.M. of the 21st. 

We have given the details as to the counting 
as a general answer to many questions on this 
subject, and not because of any weighty importance 
or bondage attaching to the exact anniversary 
day. We recognize no such bondage 
upon those made free by Christ. For though 
desirous of observing the Memorial properly 
upon its proper anniversary, as intended by our 
Lord when he said, "This do ye (every time 
you celebrate this yearly memorial) in remembrance 
(lit., for commemoration) of me," we esteem 
it more as a privilege than as a duty; and 
if we should err in the matter of selecting the day, 
through ignorance or misunderstanding, we believe 



*The use of the word Easter in Acts 12:4 is a mistranslation; 
it should be rendered Passover. 

R1290:page36 

the Lord would accept our good intentions, 
and forgive the error and grant his 
blessing. Indeed, we believe that the Lord 
owns and accepts the good intentions of many 
of his children who, because of erroneous 
teachings and human traditions, select various 
other times and seasons for celebrating this 
memorial of his death, instead of its anniversary, 
which he designated. Similarly we would 
sympathize with the patriotic intentions of the 
man who should "celebrate" the independence 
of the United States three, four or fifty 
times a year, forgetful of the date, or ignorant 
of the fact that the Fourth of July is the anniversary 
of the event, and was appointed as the 
date for celebrating it. 

This, like other truths long buried under the 
rubbish of the dark ages, God is now making 
clear to his people. And all who are truly his 
people are anxious for the truth and the right 
upon this, as upon all other subjects revealed 
in God's Word. 

YE DO SHEW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH. 

"For I received from the Lord, what I also 
delivered to you— That the Lord on the night 
in which he was delivered up took a loaf, and 
having given thanks, broke it and said, 'This 
is that body of mine, which is broken on your 
behalf; this do ye in my remembrance.' In 
like manner also, the cup, after the supper, saying, 
'This cup is the new covenant in my 
blood; this do ye, as often as ye may drink, for 
my remembrance.' For as often as you may eat 
this bread or drink this cup you declare the death 
of the Lord till he come."-l Cor. 11:24-26. 

There is no necessity for discussing with honest 
minds what is and what is not meant by the 
expression— the Lord's death. Some, in an anxiety 
to get away from the doctrine of the ransom, 
or, rather, in their anxiety to get away from 
the logical deductions associated with the doctrine 
of the ransom, are claiming, regardless of 
all Scripture to the contrary, that our Lord Jesus 
had two deaths, one when he came into the world, 
and the other at Calvary; and that the death 
of "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a 
ransom for all," at Calvary, was of small importance 



as compared with the other. They seem 
willingly ignorant of the fact that the Scriptures 
declare, "In that he died, he died unto 
sin once;" and that that one death, and the 
only one ever referred to by our Lord or his 
apostles, was the death at Calvary. 

The Apostles declare that he spoke of the 
death which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. 
This one and only death of our Redeemer is 
what is symbolized by this Remembrancer— his 
body, his flesh broken for us, the merits and 
life of which all who would have life everlasting 
must partake. "Let no man deceive you 
by any means," on this important question. 

But as water baptism is not the important 
baptism, but only the symbol representing the 
real, so partaking of the emblematic bread and 
wine is only the symbol of the more important 
feast of our appropriation of the merit of Christ, 
which secures to us eternal life through his broken 
body and shed blood. Thus by faith accepting 
his finished sacrifice, and by similar 
faith, as instructed by him, appropriating to 
ourselves all the merits and perfections and rights 
which the man Christ Jesus possessed and laid 
down in death for us, we really feed upon the 
bread of everlasting life, the bread which God 
sent to us from heaven. This is the bread which 
if men will eat they will never die— the flesh 
which he gave for the life of the world, that all 
the dead and dying race might have life. This 
is, primarily, what the symbolic bread symbolizes 
and signifies to all who partake of it rightly 
and intelligently. It is a memorial of the ransom 
of Adam and his family from the bondage 
of sin and death. 

Secondly, the broken loaf was to symbolize 
another matter. It was to be a symbol of the 
entire Church— the entire Christ of God, head 
and body. As its breaking symbolized the 
death of Christ Jesus, the head, its breaking 
was also to symbolize the breaking or sacrifice, 
even unto death, of all the consecrated body 
of Christ, which is pledged to suffer and be broken 
with him, if so be that its members may also 
be glorified together with him. This the Apostle 
teaches in the preceding chapter, verses 16 and 17: 

R1290 : page 37 

"The cup of blessing, for which we 
bless God— is it not a participation of the 
blood of the Anointed one? The loaf which 
we break— is it not a participation of the body 
of the Anointed one? Because there is one 
loaf, we the many [members] are one body." 



"TILL HE COME." 

"Till he come." What is the full significance 
of this expression? 

Since our Lord who instituted the Memorial 
Supper placed no limit upon its observance, 
this expression by the Apostle is not to 
be understood as limiting the length of time in 
which it will be appropriate to commemorate 
the death of our Lord Jesus, our ransom-sacrifice, 
and our consecration with him to sacrifice. 
Rather, he is showing that it was not to be considered 
a limited arrangement, for a few years, 
but was to be continually observed until the 
Lord's second coming. Looking down to and 
speaking of the second coming of our Lord, 
the Apostle includes in that expression the gathering 
and exaltation with him of his Church or 
Kingdom, to rule and bless the world. This is 
yet a common and a proper way of speaking of 
matters so closely identified and so dependent 
one upon the other. The Christ, Head and 
body, is coming to rule the world, coming into 
power and great glory. The presence of the 
Lord or head is necessary first; then commences 
the change of the sleeping members of 
his body, the sifting of the living members, 
and their gradual gathering together unto him. 
And though the Kingdom may be considered 
as begun from the time the King began the 
exercise of his great power (Rev. 11:17) in 
1878, it will not be set up in the full sense of 
the word until the last member of the Kingdom 
has been changed or glorified— until the 
breaking of the loaf, the Church, the body of 
Christ, is completed. While one member suffers 
the body suffers. While one member is 
unglorified the Kingdom is not fully come into 
power and dominion. 

It is the coming of Christ as including the 
full exaltation of his Church or Kingdom that 
the Apostle evidently meant when he said, 
"As often as you may eat this [Passover] bread 
and drink this cup, you declare the death of 
the Lord [as your hope and confidence] till he 
come." The same thought of the Kingdom 
glory being the end of the symbol may be 
gathered from our Lord's own words on the occasion 
of the institution of the memorial— "I 
will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the 
vine, until that day when I drink it new with 
you in my Father's Kingdom."— Matt. 26:29. 

And surely if it was ever proper and expedient 
for those who believe that our Lord's death 
was the ransom-price for sinners to confess it— 



to show it forth as the basis of all their hopes 
—it is now, when this foundation doctrine of 
God's Word is being traduced and 
misrepresented. 

Let all who hold fast the confidence of faith 
in his precious blood [his sacrificed life] as the 
propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world, be more zealous and fervent than ever before 
in confessing this great truth; "for even 
Christ our Passover [sacrifice] is slain; therefore, 
let us keep the feast." None of the first-born 
shall be passed over, and become members 
of the Church of the first-born in glory, except 
those who, during this night, abide under the 
blood, and partake of the merits, of the Lamb of 
God which taketh away the sin of the world. 

R1291 : page 37 

WHO MAY PARTAKE. 

The Lord's Supper is not for the world, not 
for merely nominal believers, but for those who, 
accepting of Christ as their Redeemer and sin-bearer, 
are consecrated to him and his service. 
But it is not for us— nor for any man or set of men 
—to decide who may and who may not partake. 
It is our duty to point out from the Word of 
the Lord what are the proper qualifications for 
participation in the cup and participation in the 
loaf, and then to say as did the Apostle, Let 
every man examine himself, and then, if he 
think proper, let him partake.— 1 Cor. 11:28. 

Now that God's people are emerging from 
the errors of the dark ages, when this Memorial 
can be more clearly understood, the judging or 
examining of one's self can be more thorough 

R1291 : page 38 

than ever before. Let each ask himself— Do 

I believe the Scripture teaching that I, as a 

member of the human family, was under that 

condemnation to death which passed upon all 

because of original sin? Do I believe that 

my only hope of escape from that condemnation 

of sin and death was through the ransom-sacrifice 

of the man Christ Jesus, my Lord? 

Do I believe that he gave himself— his flesh and 

blood, his humanity— as my ransom price, pouring 

out his soul unto death, making his soul a 

sin-offering (Isa. 53:10,12) on this behalf? 

Do I see that the consecration to death, made at 

Jordan when he was baptized, was fulfilled by 

his sacrifice of himself for mankind, which, beginning 



there, was finished on the cross when 

he died? Do I see that the rights under the 

Law, which he secured by obedience to it 

(the right of lasting life and the dominion of 

earth), were what he through that same sacrifice 

bequeathed to the fallen, dying race— to as 

many as shall accept the blessings under the 

conditions of the New Covenant? Do I see 

that his flesh and blood, thus sacrificed, stood 

for, represented, those blessings and favors which 

they purchased for us? Do I see that the partaking 

of the bread and wine symbols of his 

flesh and blood signifies my acceptance of those 

favors and blessings which the flesh and blood of 

my Lord bought for me and for all? And if I 

do thus heartily accept of the ransom thus 

memorialized, do I consecrate my entire being 

—my flesh and my blood, justified through that ransom 

—to the Lord, to be broken with him, to 

suffer with him, to be dead with him? If we 

can answer these questions affirmatively we 

clearly or fully discern the Lord's body, give 

credit to his meritorious sacrifice and may eat— 

should eat— "Eat ye all of it." 

Those, however, who deny that a ransom 
for sin and sinners was required and given, 
who feel that they need not to partake of 
Christ's merit, who deny that the merit of one 
can be imputed to another, who have cast 
off the wedding-garment of Christ's righteousness, 
who feel "happier" and "freer" in the 
filthy rags of their own righteousness, and who 
now consider the precious blood wherewith they 
were once sanctified a not-holy or an ordinary 
thing— such we advise to stay away from memorializing 
that in which they no longer believe, 
as they would merely be adding hypocrisy to 
unbelief. For such to partake, is to add condemnation 
to themselves and their no-ransom 
theories. 

But, better still, let us advise all who have 
merely been entrapped into this error, by the 
sophistries promulgated through various channels 
by the great Adversary, to reject all vain 
human philosophies and to receive again the 
simple word of God, and to accept of the truths 
therein set forth— that all are fallen, and that the 
only way open for our reconciliation and restitution 
consistent with the divine law and sentence 
was the giving of the full and exact corresponding 
price or ransom for our sins. See 
that God declares that in no other way could 
he be just and justify sinners. See that our 
Lord Jesus as the Lamb of God bore the full 
penalty for our sins in his own body on the tree 
—that he gave the full ransom for you and for 



all. The philosophy of it is very plain, but if 

you cannot grasp it, at least grasp the fact that 

God declares it to be so. Return unto the Lord, 

and he will abundantly pardon. Ask for the 

guidance of the spirit and the anointing of 

your eyes, that you may be able to comprehend, 

with all saints, this, the foundation of all the 

grace of our God in Christ. Thus in true acceptance 

of the broken body and the shed 

blood— realizing that the sacrifice was for your 

sins and that the blood shed [life given] seals 

for you and for all the New Covenant— commemorate 

the greatest event of history, the 

shedding of the precious blood, the sacrifice of 

the precious life of God's dear Son for your 

sins. Nevertheless we know from God's Word 

that these words or any words will not succeed 

in turning back to the way, the truth and the life 

those who have wilfully and knowingly gone out 

from under the blood of sprinkling. There 

will be no pass-over for them. "It is impossible 

to renew them again unto repentance." (Heb. 6:4-10 

and 10:26-30.) We well know that 

R1291 : page 39 

even these words of loving admonition and 

these faithful references to the words of inspiration 

will be attributed to spite and malice and 

envy and every wicked feeling on our part instead 

of to the real motive— a desire to serve 

the Lord and the truth and any brethren or sisters 

unwittingly stumbling. 

Many indeed have in the past partaken of the 
emblems of the Lord's body and blood without 
fully appreciating the philosophy of the ransom, 
who nevertheless did so with reverent appreciation 
of the fact that the death of our Redeemer 
had purged us from our guilt and relieved 
us from its penalty. Such discerned the 
real significance of the Memorial, though, because 
of gross errors associated with the truth, 
they did not discern its simple philosophy as 
many of us may now do. 

ONLY THE BAPTIZED. 

But some Baptist brother will perhaps remark 
—You have forgotten to mention baptism as a 
necessary qualification to partaking of the 
Supper. 

No, we have not forgotten baptism. We 
agree with you that the baptism is necessary 
—that the Memorial Supper is only for the 
Church; and that baptism is necessary before 
one can belong to the Church. But we differ 



with you as to what the Church is. We hold 
that the Baptist Church is not the Church. Like 
all other churches organized and governed by 
fallen men, the Baptist Church contains tares as 
well as wheat; but the Church contains wheat 
only. Surely no one will claim for any sect of 
Christendom that his sect contains all the wheat 
and no tares. But the Church, whose names 
are written in heaven, includes all the wheat and 
has not a tare on its roll. This is the one Church 
which our Lord established, and of which all 
the elect must become members— the Church 
Passed-over— "The Church of the First-born 
ones, whose names are written in heaven." 
-Heb. 12:23. 

Nor can we admit your claim with reference 
to baptism. The Scriptural view is still 
more exclusive than yours. You have in the 
membership of the Baptist Church some who 
would be far from acceptable as members 
of the "Church of the First-borns." They 
passed your test of water-baptism, but they have 
not passed the test of the greater baptism which 
is required of all members of the Church whose 
names are written in heaven. The real baptism 
is a baptism into Christ's body— the Church- 
by a baptism or immersion into Christ's death, 
and a resurrection therefrom in his likeness. 
Water immersion is a beautiful symbol of the 
real immersion of the human will into the will 
of Christ, a beautiful illustration of a full sacrifice 
even unto death; but it is only an illustration 
or symbol— just as the bread and wine 
of the Supper are not the real life-giving elements 
of our Lord's sacrifice of which we are 
to eat, but merely their symbols. 

We agree, therefore, that none but the Church, 
the immersed, should partake of the Supper; 
but we recognize as really immersed all whose 
wills are dead and buried in the will of Christ, 
and who, as new creatures in him, are risen to 
walk in newness of life, while waiting for the 
consummation of their course in literal death 
and their awakening as actual new beings in the 
first resurrection. All such, whoever or wherever 
they may be, are the real members of 
Christ's body, the Church, whether they have 
performed the enjoined water-symbol or not. 
Of course, when such consecrated ones, dead to 
their own wills and alive only to the will of 
Christ, come to see that our Lord's commands 
include the symbol of water immersion or burial 
as well as the burial of their wills, they will 
be glad to follow and to obey their Head and 
Lord in all things— especially when they realize 
that as infants they were not "believers," and 



that a drop of water could not in any degree 
symbolize burial and resurrection. Such as see 
the value and beauty of this injunction of God's 
Word should, if possible, be buried in water also, 
as our Lord and his apostles showed us, before 
partaking of the Supper. See TOWER for May, 
1888, article headed "Baptism and Its Import." 

HOW TO PARTAKE. 

If there are in your neighborhood others of 
God's consecrated people besides yourself, you 

R1291 : page 40 

should know it. Your faithful love for them 
and for the truth should have led you to seek 
them out to bless them with the truth shortly 
after you yourself received it. If there are such 
with whom you can have communion and fellowship 
invite them to join you in the Memorial; 
but not if you know them to be deniers of the 
ransom, lest you assist in bringing condemnation 
upon them. 

Meet with few or many, as the circumstances 
will permit, but better far with a few who can enter 
with you into the spirit of the Memorial, than 
with a throng devoid of that spirit of fellowship 
and union in Christ. 

R1292:page40 

Provide for the occasion, if possible, unleavened 
bread (or crackers), such as the Lord used, 
and such as Hebrews now use; because the pure, 
sweet, unleavened bread best symbolizes the sinless 
flesh of the Lamb of God, who knew no sin 
[of which leaven is a symbol], who was holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from the race 
of sinners. Provide some drink from "the fruit 
of the vine," as the Lord directed. Undoubtedly 
he and the disciples used "light wines." 
Most unquestionably we regard wine as the more 
appropriate symbol; but since our Lord did not 
stipulate wine, but merely the "fruit of the 
vine," we can conceive of no objection that 
can be urged against the strained juice of 
boiled raisins, which are dried grapes. And 
surely this would be "the fruit of the vine" as 
really as wine is. We do not urge this raisin-liquor 
upon any who feel a conscientious 
desire to use wine; we merely remind all that 
our circumstances, climate, habits, etc., differ 
greatly from those of the early Church, and we very 
much doubt if our Lord would have us symbolize 
his blood with many of the intoxicating 



wines of our day— especially in view of the 
fact that some of the saints may have an inherited 
weakness of the flesh, which one taste might 
re-enkindle into a great temptation. "Let each 
judge not to cast a stumbling-block before his 
brother." If wine is preferred choose a "light 
wine," or mix a little wine with the raisin-juice. 

The memorial service should be very simple- 
it is chiefly a season of communion. Have a 
table in the midst of the assembly for the bread 
and wine. After the singing of a hymn one of the 
brethren should, in a few chosen words, express 
the object of the service and read a few verses 
from the Scriptures on the subject; another might 
then give thanks for the bread of life, the broken 
body of our Lord; after which the unleavened 
bread [or soda biscuit if more convenient] 
should be passed to all the communicants. An 
opportunity for remarks on the bread of life 
might here be given. Then a prayer of thanks 
for the cup and for the precious blood symbolized 
in it should be offered and the cup of 
"fruit of the vine" passed. Here an opportunity 
might be given for remarks on the precious 
blood. But avoid discussions at this meeting. 
However appropriate to contend earnestly 
for the faith on other occasions, this is not 
such an occasion. This is a meeting for fellowship 
and communion with the Lord, our Redeemer 
and present King. If any seem to be 
contentious, let him have his say, and let the others 
refrain from discussion, that the holy moments 
of special communion with him, which the Master 
appointed for our blessing, be not marred. 

Those who celebrate the Memorial with guileless, 
earnest hearts receive a great and refreshing 
blessing, and for this it is well to have seasons 
of quiet in the midst of the service, when no one 
will be speaking audibly and when the hearts of all 
can come very close to the Master in communion— 
in realization of his love, past and present, 
in reviewing the pledge made to be his faithful 
followers even unto death, in considering 
how that pledge has been kept or violated during 
the year preceding, and in resolving afresh to 
run with patience the race for the prize of joint-heirship 
with our Lord, to which we are invited. 

A beautifully appropriate hymn for closing 
the Memorial is No. 276 in the new hymn-book. 
And it will surely add to our joy to realize that 
some of like precious faith in all parts of the 
world are celebrating the same great sacrifice, 
thinking of the same gracious Lord, being comforted 
and encouraged by the same exceeding 
great and precious promises, resolving by the 
grace of our King to do greater service and to 



R1292:page41 

make greater sacrifices in his service and in the 
service of his people thenceforth, and closing 
with the same song of praise and worship. 
"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 
Thus before the cross we'll spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinner's risen Friend." 

Of the first Supper it is written: "They sang 
a hymn and went out." Let us do the same. 
Let each go to his home with his heart full. 
We suggest the omission on this occasion of 
the usual and generally proper after-meeting 
greetings, and all common-place remarks and 
thoughts, that we may prolong our communion 
and fellowship with the Master. Keep within 
sight of him throughout the next day. Hear the 
clamor of the people against the guileless one; 
see them incited by the clergy of Jerusalem; 
see him before Herod and his soldiers; see him 
arrayed in robes of mock -royalty and crowned 
with thorns, then buffeted and spat upon. 

See him crucified as a felon, and taunted with 
the very gracious deeds which he had performed 
—"He saved others, himself he cannot save." 
Remember that he could have saved himself; 
that he could have asked for, and would have 
received, "more than twelve legions of angels" 
to deliver and protect him; that he could have 
destroyed his enemies and vilifiers, instead 
of dying for them; and that our hope of a resurrection 
and everlasting life depended upon his 
willing offering of himself as our ransom-price. 
Consider his love for you and for us all, and it 
will surely strengthen you as his follower to 
endure more and more hardness as a good 
soldier of the cross. Aye, consider him who 
endured such contradiction of sinners against 
himself, lest ye become weary and faint in your 
minds under the light afflictions now permitted 
for your trial and discipline, which, if faithfully 
endured, will work out for each a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 

THE CELEBRATION AT ALLEGHENY. 

As usual the Church at this place will celebrate 
Christ our Passover slain for us; and as usual 
we will have in connection with it a general 
meeting for Bible study and spiritual feasting. 
But, contrary to our usual custom, the meetings 
this year will begin three days before the Memorial 
Supper. These three days before the Supper 
it is proposed shall be the time specially 



devoted to Bible study and conference on the 
various features of present truth. The day following 
the Supper, the anniversary of our Lord's 
crucifixion, it is proposed shall be specially devoted 
to worship and praise and communion 
and conference on themes close to our hearts. 
The remaining three days of the week will be 
devoted to considering the general interests of 
the harvest work, and especially the colporteur 
work, in which the more successful laborers will 
have opportunity to impart their zeal and a 
knowledge of their methods to the less successful. 
The desire is thus to lift up the hands 
which hang down, to strengthen the feeble knees, 
and to make straight paths for all who desire to 
pursue the good work as reapers in the present 
harvest. 

This convention for Bible study and for celebrating 
the Lord's Memorial Supper is called in 
the name of 

THE TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

IT WILL CONVENE IN 

BIBLE HOUSE CHAPEL, ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 

COMMENCING 

SUNDAY, APRIL 19TH, AT 10 A.M. 

It will continue, with adjournments for food 
and rest, until Wednesday evening, when the 
general session will close, and be followed by 
the conference on Harvest work and methods 
by the colporteurs and other laborers in the 
vineyard, which will occupy the remainder of 
the week. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

WILL BE CELEBRATED ON TUESDAY EVENING, 

APRIL 2 1ST, AT 8 P.M. 

On the same day, at 1 1 A.M., an opportunity 
will be afforded any who may desire to symbolize 
their consecration unto death by baptism 
into water. All services will be at the 
chapel above designated. 

The opening meeting of the Convention will 
be a Reunion and Testimony Meeting. It will 

R1292:page42 

open with the singing of Hymns Nos. 55 and 
170, and close with No. 1. Those who cannot 
be present can join their hearts and voices and 
prayers with ours, and think of the full and lasting 
reunion in the sweet by-and-by. 

HO! EVERY ONE THAT HUNGERETH AND 



THIRSTETH, COME YE TO THE FEAST. 

All who can heartily say— 
"I am trusting in Jesus for all, 
And my will is the will of my God," 
are most cordially invited to this Convention— 
to the fullest participation in its Bible-study, 
and in the Memorial Supper. Let all such who 
can, turn aside with us thus for special blessing 
and refreshing: for grace to help them over the 
difficulties of their own pathways, and thus to be 
enabled in turn to help others. Come, with 
your hearts full of love and loyalty to the Redeemer 
and his word, and to all the "body" 
possessing the same spirit; and with kindest 
sympathy for the spiritually halt and lame and 
blind. Come, seeking only the interests of the 
Kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, and 
you will not return without a blessing. Come, 
hungering and thirsting for truth, and you shall 
be filled. 

All the colporteurs, and those who have the 
special talent of time, which they desire to use 
more fully in the Lord's service, and those who 
have tried the colporteur work with only moderate 
success— all these are specially urged to 
attend the Convention. We assure such that 
the suggestive hints to be gathered from the experiences 
of those who are very successful in this 
ministry will much more than compensate them 
for the time and expense in coming, and enable 
all the unencumbered to pursue the harvest 
work. 

ENTERTAINMENT AND EXPENSES. 

It is proposed this year to divide this honor 
of serving the Lord's body, so as to give a 
larger number a share in the privilege, by dividing 
the visitors. One of the marks of female 

R1293 : page 42 

saintship in the early church was, "if she 
have washed the saints' feet." (1 Tim. 5:10.) 
Feet-washing, being a necessity of that time, became 
a synonym of service and kindly hospitality. 
To illustrate this same principle of service 
and humility, our Lord used this same custom 
on the night of the Last Supper; and the 
entertainment of any of the household of faith 
is really the fulfilment of our Lord's injunction, 
"See that ye wash one another's feet." But 
none should be permitted to overdo themselves 
in this blessed service, nor to deprive themselves 
of the spiritual communion of the meetings. 



To this end all have been urged to make 

only very simple arrangements, that both visitors 

and entertainers may have their principal 

feast upon the spiritual meat. Come, then, expecting 

a warm welcome to such plain things as 

we have ourselves. 

The only expense you need anticipate will be 
25 cents a day for dinner at a restaurant, and 
your railroad fare; and it has been arranged 
that the latter shall cost you only two-thirds of 
the usual full rate from points as far East as 
New York, as far West as St. Louis, as far North 
as Canada, and as far South as Florida. 

HOW TO PROCURE R.R. TICKETS. 

This concession or reduction of one-third 
the regular fare is made by what is known as 

THE TRUNK LINE ASSOCIATION OF RAILROADS 
(which includes roads Eastward from Pittsburg 
and Buffalo to Vermont); 

THE CENTRAL TRAFFIC ASSOCIATION OF RAILROADS 
(which includes railroads West of Pittsburg 
and Buffalo to Chicago and St. Louis- 
north of the Ohio river); and 

THE SOUTHERN TRAFFIC ASSOCIATION OF 
RAILROADS (which includes nearly all the Southern 
roads). 

We desire that all, as far as possible, even 
those coming short distances, shall avail themselves 
of this reduction, as we were obliged to 
pledge a certain number so as to obtain the 
reduction. 

If your home is on a railroad not a member 
of any of these R.R. Associations, ascertain 
which road nearest you has membership and 
write to the ticket agent at the nearest town, 
telling him of the kind of ticket and certificate 

R1293 : page 43 

you desire, and have him promise to have such 
certificate ready for you at such time as you 
will reach his station en route. 

The ticket agents for all railroads which are 
members of these associations should have 
printed certificates to fill out with ink, stating 
that you bought a ticket for Allegheny or Pittsburg 
(The two cities are connected by bridges 
and street-cars), on a certain date, for the purpose 
of attending a yearly convention called by 
the TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, that you 
paid full price for said ticket, and that you are 
entitled to purchase a return ticket at one-third 
the full rate. Such certificate must accompany 
each ticket to secure the return ticket at one-third 



the regular fare. Prefer tickets via the 
Penna. Co. R.R., or the B. & O.R.R. 

If you intend coming, make inquiry of your 
ticket agent at once (but do not purchase your 
ticket more than one day before starting). If 
there is anything about this which you do not 
understand, write us a postal card at once. 

Start so as to reach the WATCH TOWER office, 
Bible House, No. 58 Arch street, Allegheny, Pa., 
on Saturday afternoon, April 18th. Even if 
you have previously written that you are coming, 
please send us a postal card two weeks before you 
start, stating how many are in your party, and 
indicating which are males and which females, 
that suitable arrangements can be made. 



page 43 

THE WONDERFUL STORY. 

We have now sent to each WATCH TOWER subscriber 
a sample copy of The Wonderful Story, 
illustrated. It was our intention to send these 
out to all during the holidays, but other features 
of the work have delayed most of them until now. 
We make no charge for these samples. Please 
accept them as little remembrancers of the TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY. Should you desire other 
copies you will find the terms mentioned on 
the second page of the TOWER cover. 

Subscribers to the Old Theology Tracts have 
been sent proportionate quantities of these. 



R1295 : page 43 
"AT ALL TIMES." 



"I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall continually 
be in my mouth."— Psa. 34:1. 

"All times" with me are times of praise; 
Or rayless nights, or radiant days! 
The Summer bright, the Winter drear, 
The tearful Spring, the fading year, 
The stormy March, the tranquil June, 
Through each my harp to praise I tune. 

The changeful seasons come and go; 
No pause my grateful song shall know. 
The love of God glows 'mid the embers 



Strewn on the hearth of life's Decembers; 
And gold is mingled with the gray 
Of dim November's murkiest day. 

My bark on flowing seas may ride, 
Or strand, forsaken by the tide; 
There's music for me in the flow, 
Nor less when ebbing waters go; 
If now the chorus louder swell, 
'Twas then a sweeter cadence fell: 
Major or minor be the tone 
Praise still shall be the theme alone! 

All places echo with my song, 
Alone, or in the hurrying throng; 
The placid lake, the billowy sea, 
Shall hear and join the melody. 
In sunless rifts, on lofty steep, 
In desert vast, on ocean deep. 
In caverns dark, on golden heights, 
'Midst veiling mists, or flashing lights, 
In God I live, and am, and move. 
I'll sing, for while I live I love! 

Nor will I cease though Nature frown, 

Though trees be bare, and fields be brown; 

Life pulsates underneath the sod, 

Love palpitates within the clod. 

God lives, though all the earth seem dead; 

Though birds be mute, and sunshine fled, 

The universe is vocal still; 

While, down from heaven's holy hill 

Come floating strains of music sweet 

To those who worship at his feet. 

Take down again thy dusty lute, 
And tune each slack, discordant string; 
Nor ever let thy soul be mute. 
Lift up thy voice, exulting sing ! 
"At all times" let the measure move, 
For know "at all times" God is Love! 
—James Yeames. 



R1293 : page 44 

A JEWISH KINGDOM PROPOSED. 



Washington, D.C., March 5th, 1891. 

William E. Blackstone, of Chicago, to-day 
visited the President in company with Secretary 
Blaine, and presented a memorial in behalf of 
the Russian Jews. 



He explained that the memorial was the result 
of a conference of Christians and Jews recently 
held in Chicago, and called special attention 
to the fact that it did not antagonize Russia, 
but sought in a peaceable way to give the 
Jews control of their old home— Palestine. 

He pointed out many evidences of the possibility 
of great development of that country, both 
agriculturally and commercially, under an energetic 
government and said that the railroad 
now building from Joppa to Jerusalem, if extended 
to Damascus, Tadmor and down the 
Euphrates, cannot fail to become an international 
highway. 

He said that the poverty of the Turkish Government 
gives emphasis to the proposed indemnity, 
by funding a portion of the Turkish national 
debt through Jewish capitalists, and that only 
peaceable diplomatic negotiations are asked for, 
to the end that all private ownership of land and 
property be carefully respected and protected. 
In closing he said that, being on such friendly 
terms with Russia and having no complications 
in the Orient, it is most fitting and hopeful that 
our government should initiate this friendly 
movement, to give these wandering millions of 
Israel a settled and permanent home. 

The President listened attentively to Mr. Blackstone's 
remarks, and promised to give the subject 
serious consideration. 

THE MEMORIAL. 

The text of the memorial is as follows:— 
What shall be done for the Russian Jews? It 

is both unwise and useless to undertake to dictate 

to Russia concerning her internal affairs. 

The Jews have lived as foreigners in her dominions 

for centuries, and she fully believes that 

they are a burden upon her resources and prejudicial 

to the welfare of her peasant population, 

and will not allow them to remain. She is determined 

that they must go. Hence, like the 

R1294:page44 

Sephardim of Spain, these Ashkenazim must 
emigrate. But where shall 2,000,000 of such poor 
people go? Europe is crowded and has no room 
for more peasant population. Shall they come 
to America? This would be a tremendous expense 
and would require years. 

Why not give Palestine back to them again? 
According to God's distribution of nations it is 
their home— an inalienable possession from 
which they were expelled by force. Under their 



cultivation it was a remarkably fruitful land, sustaining 

millions of Israelites, who industriously 

tilled its hillsides and valleys. They were agriculturists 

and producers as well as a nation of 

great commercial importance— the centre of civilization 

and religion. 

Why shall not the powers which, under the 
treaty of Berlin, in 1878, gave Bulgaria to the 
Bulgarians and Servia to the Servians, now give 
Palestine back to the Jews? These provinces, 
as well as Roumania, Montenegro and Greece, 
were wrested from the Turks and given to their 
natural owners. Does not Palestine as rightfully 
belong to Jews? It is said that rains are increasing, 
and there are many evidences that the 
land is recovering its ancient fertility. 

If they could have autonomy in government, 
the Jews of the world would rally to transport 
and establish their suffering brethren in their 
time-honored habitation. For over seventeen 
centuries they have patiently waited for such a 
privileged opportunity. They have not become 
agriculturists elsewhere because they believed 
they were sojourners in the various nations, and 
were yet to return to Palestine and till their own 
land. Whatever vested rights, by possession, 
may have accrued to Turkey can be easily compensated 
for, possibly by the Jews assuming an 
equitable portion of the national debt. 

We believe this is an appropriate time for all 
nations, and especially the Christian nations of 
Europe, to show kindness to Israel. A million 
of exiles, by their terrible sufferings, are piteously 
appealing to our sympathy, justice and 
humanity. Let us now restore to them the land 
of which they were so cruelly despoiled by our 
Roman ancestors. 

To this end we respectfully petition his Excellency 
Benjamin Harrison, President of the 
United States, and the Hon. J. G. Blaine, Secretary 
of State, to use their good offices and influence 
with the governments of their imperial 

R1294:page45 

majesties— Alexander III., Czar of Russia; Victoria, 
Queen of Great Britain and Empress of 
India; William II., Emperor of Germany; 
Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austro-Hungary; 
Abdul Hamid II., Sultan of Turkey; Her Royal 
Majesty Marie Christina, Queen Regent of Spain; 
with the government of the Republic of 
France and with the governments of Belgium, 
Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Portugal, Roumania, 
Servia, Bulgaria and Greece, to secure the 
holding, at an early date, of an international 



conference to consider the condition of the Israelites 
and their claims to Palestine as their ancient 
home, and to promote in all other just and 
proper ways the alleviation of their suffering 
condition. 

[The memorial is signed by prominent men 
of all professions and creeds from Chicago, Boston, 
New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and 
Washington.] 



R1294:page45 

AS VIEWED BY OTHERS. 

A SELECTION. 



"The time will come when Bible prophecy 
with its chronology will be confirmed by history 
in so exact and signal a manner that malice and 
infidelity alone will be able to deny its inspiration. 
Then, too, the world will have had its last 
say, impiety will have let fall its last mask, intolerance 
will have practiced its last cruelties, superstition 
will have descended the lowest round of 
idolatry, faith will have won on the scaffold its 
most brilliant victories, and in presence of the last 
great revolution history will have learned from 
prophecy to comprehend and to judge itself. The 
transformation which it will experience will be so 
complete that a very small remnant will be found 
of what the world to-day calls its Philosophy.' 

"Thus wrote Frederic de Pougemont, the 
earnest Swiss pastor, nearly a generation ago, 
and behold, we are already standing upon the 
threshold of the days to which he alluded. 

"They must be blind indeed who fail to 
read the warning written upon the walls of the 
modern temple of theology. In its continued 
subdivision into sects the Protestant church has 
had its strength so decimated that, as the 
Master long ago predicted, it is doomed to fall. 
-Matt. 12:25. 

"We, Protestants, are prone to draw invidious 
comparisons against Rome, while she in turn 

R1295 : page 45 

points out the ever-widening breaches which divide 
our house against itself! Just where the 
balance of error actually resides is hard to tell. 
The fact is, the spirit of Laodicea presides over 
the whole city of modern Babylon, whatsoever 
be the particular ward in which we dwell, and 
the cry should now go up throughout all its precincts, 



'Come out of her, my people, that ye 

be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 

not of her plagues.'— Rev. 18:4. 

"This is the midnight cry itself, and it appeals 
to all 'the wise,' wherever they are domiciled, 
to go out to meet their coming Lord, and to 
take naught with them but that oil which burns 
with the bright flame of faith in the integrity of the 
whole Bible. That we ourselves are dwelling 
in this Laodicean Babylon is patent to all who are 
familiar with the methods upon which its 'primaries' 
are conducted, nor can we fortify our assertion 
better than by quoting once more from 
our trenchant Swiss pastor, who wrote as follows 
of a state of the Church, in his day future, but 
now, alas! only too realistic:— 

"The closing epistle of Christ to the seven 
churches (Rev. 3) is directed to Laodicea. It 
corresponds to the time of Jewish phariseeism 
and sets forth the state of the Protestant nations 
at the Lord's return, when there will be little or 
no faith left on the earth. The missionary zeal 
of the church of Philadelphia, which at one 
time inflamed the whole mass of reformed Christianity, 
will have subsided into lukewarmness. 
The whole area will be Christian, and pride itself 
on its profession. A high standard of morality, 
an upright life, a conservative creed, will 
be never so popular. There will be no open 
enemy of Christ, as in Philadelphia, no outspoken 
infidel; only phariseeism and lukewarmness, only 
the happy medium between impiety and pietism. 
There will be a little faith, but not too 
much; a profession of orthodox principles confined 
within wise limits. There will be some 

R1295 : page 46 

fear of God, but much fear of men; great respect 

for the Bible, but enough good sense to 

keep men from viewing its doctrines, its precepts 

and its denunciations in a serious light; 

society wholly given to the acquisition of temporal 

blessings, and yet diligent enough in 

public worship not to doubt the pardoning mercy 

of God. 

"They will consider themselves very rich in 
spiritual life, even as having need of nothing. 
But the Lord will vomit lukewarm Laodicea 
from his mouth. He will not fight against 
her, as against Pergamos, and Thyatira. He 
will not judge her like Sardis; but he will wholly 
cast her off with scorn, and leave her to her 
wallowing in the mire. Still, she is a church, 
and oh, mystery of grace! He even speaks to 
her of love. He counsels her, rebukes her, treats 



her like a child subjected to salutary discipline: 

'I would that thou wert cold or hot.' 'Be zealous, 

therefore, and repent.' He offers her a 

collyrium, that she may open her eyes to her 

wretched state; the white raiment of his righteousness, 

that the shame of her nakedness may 

not appear; gold tried in the fire of faith, that 

she may be truly rich. But his offers will not 

be accepted by the vast majority of the Laodiceans; 

few of them will ever hear his voice 

when he stands at the door and knocks to invite 

his guests to the bridal supper. Those, however, 

who in the midst of the universal apathy 

have persevered in love to the end will receive 

the highest honor of all the faithful: they will 

sit down with Jesus on his throne. 

"The church of Laodicea is no far-fetched 
type; it mirrors the Protestant world to-day, 
and its distinct presence is not one of the least 
of the sign-posts that guide the weary pilgrim 
along his midnight highway." 

C. A. L. TOTTEN. 



R1294:page46 

HARVEST WORK AND MEETINGS IN CANADA. 

A WORD FROM BRO. S. D. ROGERS. 

As some parts of a wheat field are ripe at one 
time and some at another, so with the field in 
which the Lord's children are scattered: one 
part sometimes appears to be more fully ready 
for the sickle than another. And we can safely 
trust the Lord of the Harvest to direct the reapers 
in the several parts of the field. 

While I have been in Canada but a short time, 
it has been my privilege to see an excellent 
interest awakened and the harvest work well 
started here. The Master has some "faithful 
servants" here who are seeking to walk in the 
light that shineth more and more. There are 
over 5,000 DAWNS out in Ontario now, and the 
work is only well begun. Bro. Utley, Bro. Zink 
of Manitoba and Bro. G. F. Rogers and myself 
have been working in and near Toronto 
for the past few weeks. After getting out about 
2,000 DAWNS in this city and awakening many 
to a study of God's great plan as now opened up 
to us, we decided to ask Bro. Russell to come 
here to speak. And though over-crowded with 
work at home, he kindly consented to speak 
here on the 22nd of February. 

The first meeting was appointed for 10:30 



A.M. Subject:— "The Times of Restitution of 
All Things." When he arrived there were over 
four hundred gathered to learn more of these 
times, concerning "which God hath spoken 
through the mouth of all his holy prophets." 
Most of those present of course belong to the city, 
but some came 50, 60, 70, 100, and one Bro. 
came over 200 miles; and those who were 
hungry indeed had a feast. At the first meeting 
Bro. Russell spoke over two hours, reasoning 
from the Scriptures on the deliverance of the 
groaning creation from the bondage in which 
it has so long been held. Some who have been 
used to husks could scarcely contain their joy 
when being fed on the oil and wine and strong 
meat of the Word. About 1 o'clock the meeting 
adjourned for dinner. The second meeting 
was appointed for 3 P.M., and at that time there 
were about seven hundred gathered to hear Bro. 
Russell speak of "God's Kingdom." After 
speaking about two hours on this interesting 
theme, permission was given to any who desired 
to retire. But the majority remained to hear 

R1294:page47 

clear and logical views on the manner and object 
of the setting up of the Lord's Kingdom. All 
present seemed delighted with the truth brought 
to light, and longed for more. Some of those 
present expressed their intention to attend the 
Anniversary meeting at Allegheny. 

In the evening, from 7 to 8.30 P.M., Bro. 
Russell addressed Brother Brookman's congregation 
in the other end of the city at their usual 
place of meeting (Jackson Hall, Cor. Yonge 
and Blood streets), returning before 9 o'clock 
to the place of the day meetings to take part in 
a Questioner's Meeting, which followed an address 
by myself on the "Plan of the Ages," 
and which did not conclude until after 10 
o'clock. The evening meetings, like the others, 
proved very interesting, and we trust were very 
helpful to all present. 

There is another side of the work to look at 
briefly. While the harvest work is thus progressing, 
and the wheat is being gathered, we 
cannot expect that the tares will all be gathered 
into bundles for burning without some resistance, 
and so we are not surprised to find some 
gnashing of teeth and gnawing of tongues. And 
this will no doubt be seen more and more as the 
servants of the Master are the more faithful and 
enterprising in proclaiming the message of present 
truth. The "hirelings" say: It is all right for 
you to hold these views but you should not go about 



telling them to others. The Good Shepherd says: 
"Feed my sheep." And the more we feed the 
sheep so much the more will the false shepherds 
complain. In Canada, as well as elsewhere, some 
of the would-be shepherds are speaking all 
manner of evil things against the messengers of 
the truth. They do not understand us a bit better 
than the Jews understood our Lord and his little 
band of disciples. Light hath no concord with 
darkness. At least two nominal ministers in 
Ontario have publicly burned the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and heaped all kinds of reproach on the 
author and those who are circulating this peculiar 
book. But is not this a fulfilment of our 
Master's words: "If they have persecuted me 
they will also persecute you"? The "furnace" of 
trouble for the tares is getting well heated, and 
soon shall the righteous shine forth as the sun 
in the Kingdom of their Father. 
Toronto, Feb. 25th, 1891. S. D. ROGERS. 



R1293 : page 47 
THE PLANK BEARS. 



"The BLOOD maketh Atonement for the Soul." 
-Lev. 17:11; Exodus 12:13,14. 

The BLOOD of Christ... purge your conscience 
...to serve the living God. Heb. 9:14. 

The BLOOD of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth 
us from all sin. 1 John 1:7. 

My BLOOD of the New Testament, which is shed 
for many. (1 Tim. 1:2) Mark 14:24. 

My BLOOD. ..which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins. Matt. 26:28. 

Ye were. ..redeemed. ..with the precious 

BLOOD of Christ. .as of a Lamb without blemish. 1 Pet. 1:18,19. 

Ye who... were afar off are made nigh by the 
BLOOD of Christ. (1 Pet. 3:18) Eph. 2:13. 

Boldness to enter into the holiest by the 

BLOOD of Jesus, by a new and living way. Heb. 10: 19,20. 

Unto obedience and sprinkling of the 
BLOOD of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1:2. 



Ye are come unto Mount Zion and to the 

BLOOD of sprinkling that speaketh better things. Heb. 12:18-24. 

Washed... and made them white in the 
BLOOD of the Lamb. Rev. 7:14. 

They overcame him (Satan the accuser) by the 
BLOOD of the Lamb and. ..their testimony. Rev. 12:1 1. 

(Jesus Christ) having made peace through the 
BLOOD of his Cross. Col. 1:1-20. 

Much more, then, being now justified by His 
BLOOD, we shall be saved from wrath. Rom. 5:9. 

In whom we have redemption through His 
BLOOD, the forgiveness of sins. Eph. 1:7. 

In whom we have redemption through His 
BLOOD, even the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1:14. 

Set forth. ..a propitiation through faith in His 
BLOOD, to declare His righteousness. Rom. 3:25. 

This cup is the New Testament in My 
BLOOD, which is shed for you. Luke 22:20. 

Thou... hast redeemed us to God by Thy 

BLOOD out of every kindred and tongue. Rev. 5:9. 

Washed us from our sins in His own 

BLOOD, and hath made us kings and priests. Rev. 1:5,6. 

That He might sanctify the people with His 
BLOOD, suffered without the gate. Heb. 13:12. 

Purged with BLOOD; and without shedding of 
BLOOD is no remission. Heb. 9:22. 



-Sel. 



R1295 : page 49 

VOL. XII. APRIL, 1891. NO. 4. 

ACCEPTABLE TO GOD. 



"Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my 
heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and 
my redeemer."— Psa. 19:14. 

How beautiful in the sight of right-thinking 
men is a well balanced, self-possessed and disciplined 
character; and in contrast with such, 
how unlovely are the undisciplined and ungoverned 
—the selfish, the unjust, the unkind and 
the violent-tempered. Naturally, the one awakens 
in us emotions of pleasure and admiration, 
and the other, of pain. And if such is the appreciation 
of virtue and the abhorrence of the 
lack of it among men who have lost much of 
the original image of God, with what a keen 
appreciation must they be observed by a pure 
and holy God. 

Men of the world, who have no personal acquaintance 
with God, have no special thought 
as to how they appear in his sight; but with what 
carefulness should those who love him and who 
value his approval study to conform their conduct 
to his pure and holy mind. True, all the 
justified and consecrated, notwithstanding their 
imperfections and short-comings through inherited 
weaknesses, are acceptable to God through 
Christ, whose robe of righteousness amply covers 
us; but the measure of our acceptableness 
to God, even through Christ, is only to the extent 
that, while availing ourselves of his imputed 
righteousness, we are earnestly striving to 
attain actually to the standard of perfection. 
By so doing we manifest our actual appreciation 
of the divine favor. With what confusion and 
chagrin would one be covered who, in the midst 
of a fit of violent temper, or an unjust or mean 
transaction unworthy of his dignity or his profession, 
should be suddenly surprised by the unexpected 
appearance of a beloved friend of high 
and noble character. And yet the eye of such 
a one is ever upon us. And only to the extent 
that we dismiss this thought from our minds, or 
else that we undervalue the Lord's opinion and 
approval, can we allow the evil propensities of 
the fallen nature to run riot. 

R1296:page49 



Realizing the downward tendency of the old 
nature, how constantly should the above prayer 
of the Psalmist be in the minds of God's consecrated 
children. But how, one inquires, may 
the difficult task of subduing the inherent depravity 
be accomplished? It is hard for one, 
particularly under exasperating circumstances, to 
control a hasty or violent temper, for another 
to bridle a gossiping tongue; and especially 
when the trials of life have put their colored 
glasses on the eyes and slightly soured the disposition. 
It is hard for another to be strictly 
just in his dealings with his fellow-men. And 
then what a host of inherent weaknesses there 
are, which every one realizes and knows that he 
must strive against, if he would be acceptable with 
God. The thoughts of our hearts are not manifest 
to fellow-men until we express them in words 
or actions; but even the very thoughts and intents 
of the hearts are all open and manifest to 

R1296:page50 

God. What a comfort to the honest-hearted! 

The Psalmist repeats this inquiry, saying, 
"Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his 
way?" and then replies, "By taking heed thereto, 
according to thy Word." And then he frames 
for us this resolution: "I will meditate on thy 
precepts and have respect unto thy ways. I will 
delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget 
thy word." (Psa. 119:9,15,16.) Here is the 
secret of a pure and noble life, acceptable to 
God. It is to be attained, not merely by prayers 
and righteous resolutions, but in addition to 
these, by careful, painstaking heed, by systematic 
and diligent effort at self-cultivation, by 
the careful and persevering weeding out of evil 
thoughts and the diligent and constant cultivation 
of pure, benevolent and noble thoughts, 
and by nipping in the bud the weeds of perversity 
before they bring forth their hasty harvest 
of sinful words and deeds. 

But observe, further, that this heed or care is 
to be taken, not according to the imperfect 
standard of our own judgment, but according to 
God's Word. The standard by which we test our 
lives makes a vast difference in our conclusions. 
The Psalmist further commends this standard 
to us, saying: "The law of the Lord is perfect, 
converting the soul." [That is, if we take heed 
to our ways according to God's law, it will turn 
us completely from the path of sin to the path 
of righteousness.] The testimony [the instruction] 
of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple 
[the meek, teachable ones— clearly pointing 



out to them the ways of righteousness]. The 
statutes [the decrees, ordinances and precepts] 
of the Lord are right [the infallible rules of 
righteousness], rejoicing the heart [of the obedient]. 
The commandment of the Lord is pure, 
enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is 
clean [not a menial, servile fear, but a noble 
fear, begotten of love— a fear of falling short of 
his righteous approval], enduring forever. More 
to be desired are they [the law and the testimony 
of the Lord] than gold; yea, than much 
fine gold; sweeter also than honey and the 
honey-comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant 
warned [concerning the dangers of the way and 
the snares of the adversary, and concerning 
everything which is calculated to discourage, or 
to hinder his growth in grace], and in keeping 
of them there is great reward." 

"Who [in the use merely of his own fallible 
judgment and without the standard of God's 
law] can understand his errors [can rightly 
judge himself]?" But when, as we measure ourselves 
by this standard, we detect and deplore 
our short-comings, let us remember the Psalmist's 
prayer: "Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults"— thus supplementing our efforts by our 
prayers. 

But there is still another part of this prayer 
which the Lord thus puts into our mouths. It 
reads: "Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous 
sins; let them not have dominion 
over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be 
innocent from the great transgression." Let us 
consider what kind of sins would be presumptuous 
sins. To presume signifies to take for granted 
without authority or proof. A presumptuous sin 
would therefore be taking for granted and asserting 
as truth something which God has not revealed, 
or the perversion of what he has revealed. 
To claim and hold tenaciously as a 
part of God's plan any doctrine, merely on the 
ground of fallible human reason and without 
divine authority, would therefore be a presumptuous 
sin. Of this nature is the sin of those who 
malign the divine character by boldly teaching 
the blasphemous doctrine of eternal torment 
without warrant from the Scriptures, and in direct 
contradiction of them. And there are many 
other sins of greater and less degree which partake 
of the same character. But the words here 
seem to refer directly to some particular error 
into which there is danger of drifting— "Then 
shall I be innocent from the great transgression" 
—evidently, the sin unto death referred to by the 
apostles also (1 John 5:16; Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31). 
Such a sin would be that of presuming 



upon the love of God to bring us salvation, 
even though we should wilfully refuse it through 
the channel which he has appointed— the precious 
blood of Christ, shed for our redemption. 

Well indeed may we pray and strive to be 
kept back from presumptuous sins— sins of pride 
and of arrogant self-will which does not meekly 
submit to the will of God. Let us, beloved, beware 
of the slightest tendency toward pride and self-will, 

R1296:page51 

or the disposition to be wise above what is 
written, or to take for granted what God does 
not clearly promise. "Then," indeed, if we 
watch and strive against the very beginning of 
that proud and haughty spirit which surely presages 
a fall, we shall be "innocent from the 
great transgression." 

"Blessed is the man whose delight is in the 
law of the Lord, and who doth meditate therein 
day and night. He shall be like a tree planted 
by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his 
fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, 
and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." (Psa. 1:1-3.) 
If we make the Word of God the 
theme of our constant meditation, its principles 
will soon be assimilated and become part of our 
mental make up, making our characters more 
beautiful and commendable both to God and to 
our fellow men; and in harmony with this habit 
of the mind the acts of life will speak. The 
purified fountain will send forth sweeter waters 
than formerly, bearing refreshment and good 
cheer to all who come in contact with it. It 
will make happier homes— better husbands, better 
wives and better children. It will sweeten 
the temper, soften the voice; dignify the language, 
cultivate the manners, ennoble the sentiments 
and lend its charming grace to every 
simple duty. It will bring in the principle of 
love and cast out the discordant elements of 
selfishness. Thus it will make the home the 
very garden-spot of earth, where every virtue 
and every grace will have ample room to expand 
and grow. 

It will not only thus favorably affect the individual 
and the home-life, but it will go out into 
the avenues of trade, and truth and fair-dealing 
will characterize all the business relations; 
and thus will God be honored by those who 
bear his name and wear the impress of his 
blessed spirit. 

While the heights of perfection cannot be 
reached so long as we still have these imperfect 
bodies, there should be in every child of God a 



very perceptible and continuous growth in grace, 

and each step gained should be considered but 

the stepping-stone to higher attainments. If 

there is no perceptible growth into the likeness 

of God, or if there is a backward tendency, or 

a listless stand-still, there is cause for alarm. Let 

us constantly keep before our eyes the model 

which the Lord Jesus set for our example— that 

model of the complete fulfilment of the will of 

God, in which the whole law was kept blamelessly. 

Let us follow his steps of righteousness and self-sacrifice 

as nearly as a full measure of loving zeal 

and faithfulness and loyalty to God will enable us 

to do, and we shall have a blessed sense of the divine 

approval now and the glorious reward of 

divine favor in due time. 



R1300:page51 
THE JEWISH HOPE. 



"Thou art the land of all my dreams— 
Thy wanderer's heart is thine, 

And oft he lingers by thy streams, 
O holy Palestine! 

"A stranger in a stranger's land, 

O'er hill and vale I roam; 
But hope forever points her hand 

Towards my fathers' home. 

"I know that Israel's weary race 

Is scorned on every shore. 
They scarcely find a dwelling place 

Where they were lords before. 

"Yet 'mid the darkness and the gloom, 

A light begins to break; 
O Israel, from the dreary tomb 

Thy buried hopes awake,— 

"And lips that raise the fervent prayer, 
'How long, O Lord, how long?' 

Shall change the wailings of despair 
To the triumphant song. 

"And I may live to see the hour— 
The hour that must be near— 

When in his royalty and power 
Our Shiloh shall be here. 

"Till then my prayers will rise for thee, 



Till then my heart be thine, 
O land beyond the stormy sea, 
O holy Palestine." 



R1296:page52 
"JERUSALEM REVIVING." 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Knowing that all true 
reports of signs of our times are of interest to 
the TOWER readers, I venture to give first a short 
description of Jerusalem, and second a fresh letter, 
written by a German, Pastor Schlicht, of 
Jerusalem. The letter is styled thus: "Jerusalem 
Reviving ! " 

It may be well to mention, for those who are 
little familiar with the different names of this 
ancient city, that before Jerusalem became a 
place of residence, its sacred hill was called 
"Moriah" (2 Chron. 3:1), northeast of the hill 
Zion, and was early hallowed by God's trial of 
Abraham's faith. (Gen. 22:1-19.) Its most 
ancient name was "Salem." (Gen. 14:18; Psa. 76:2; 
Heb. 7:2.) Afterwards it was called 
"Jebus," as belonging to the Jebusites. (Judg. 19:10,11.) 
Several other significant names 
were given it: "Ariel" (Isa. 29:1,2,7); "The 
Holy City" (Neh. 11:1; Mat. 4:5; 27:53); 
"The City of David" (2 Sam. 5:7); and "The 
City of the Great King. "--Psa. 48:2; Mat. 5:35. 

Jerusalem is situated on elevated ground, south 
of the centre of the Holy Land, about thirty-three 
miles from the Mediterranean sea, and about 
nineteen miles from the river Jordan. From the 
time it was called "The City of David," according 
to 2 Sam. 5:6-9 (where the storming of its 
fortress by David is given), it also became the 
religious and political centre of the typical Kingdom 
by the divine, great King Jehovah's appointment. 
(1 Kings 11:36.) After the division 
of the tribes, "The City of David" continued 
for a time to be the capital of the kingdom 
of Judah, though several times plundered, 
until at length it was made "desolate" at the 

R1297:page52 

Babylonian captivity.— 2 Chron. 12:9; 21:16; 
25:23; 36:3,10,17-20; 2 Kings 14:13. 

After seventy years of desolation, on the return 
of the Israelites from captivity (536 B.C.) 
it was rebuilt the second time (Ezra 5:2); but it 



did not remain long, for only a century later it 
was conquered by the Romans under Pompey, 
and plundered by Crassus, B.C. 54. 

The third time it was rebuilt by Herod the 
Great, commencing in B.C. 20; and the city 
and its grand temple remained until they were 
taken by the Roman Titus, and totally destroyed, 
A.D. 70. This ancient city Jerusalem suffered 
in all thirty-two wars, was stormed and taken 
seven times, and was twice totally despoiled. 
Thus it has remained until recently— a "desolate" 
city— as Jesus, the Great Prophet, predicted: 
"Behold, your house is left unto you desolate;" 
and "Verily I say unto you, There shall not be 
left here one stone upon another, that shall not be 
thrown down. "-Mat. 23:38; 24:2. 

History tells us that the Emperor Julian, the 
Apostate, endeavored to rebuild the temple in 
A.D. 363, with the object of making void and 
of none effect the prophecy of Christ as above 
quoted; but his design was frustrated by an 
earthquake, and by fire bursting forth from the 
foundation-walls of the "thrown down" temple. 

But though the "due time" for the rebuilding 
of the fourth temple (Ezek. 40-48) has not 
yet arrived, nevertheless "The City of the Great 
King" has been wonderfully reviving for the past 
sixteen years; and not only the city, but also 
the land, "a land [once] flowing with milk and 
honey."— Exod. 3:8. 

We give now the letter from the pen of Pastor 
Schlicht, which was addressed to the editor 
of a German monthly journal, published at 
Gernsbach, Germany:— 

"It is wonderful, and comprehensible only to 
those who truly believe the prophecy of the inspired 
Scripture; it is remarkable how the city 
of Jerusalem for the past sixteen years is growing 
in size and grandeur— a city, remember, in 
the midst of a rocky and for the most part 
unfruitful mountainous district, which, since its 
destruction, had nothing left of its ancient beautiful 
surroundings. Thus for the past eighteen 
centuries it had no commerce, no industry, no 
outward brightness, lustre and splendor. No! 
it had nothing of that which in general will elevate 
and advance a city. It has been truly a 
'trodden down' city as predicted.— Luke 21:24. 

"But, nevertheless, this 'desolate' city is 
mightily reviving, blooming up, and continually 
expanding. This is demonstrated by its continual, 
unceasing, new-arising business buildings, 

R1297:page53 

factories and dwellings. Surely this ought 



to be a measuring-scale of its being favored 
AGAIN from on high. 

"The walls of ancient Jerusalem, which once 
enclosed all the buildings of the city, are no 
more, of course; and if they still remained, the 
enclosure would prove too small. For the past 
sixteen years the city is rapidly and continually 
expanding. Outside the ancient city wall, the 
school of Bishop Gobat, and the orphan asylum 
of Pastor Schneller, in the western district of 
the city, have stood for the last few years; and 
in that time dwellings have been arising all 
around them. Yes, dwelling-houses with surrounding 
gardens, asylums, church-buildings, 
business-blocks, factories, etc., are rapidly arising. 
It is wonderful that Jerusalem is now reviving 
to such an extent that from West to 
North there are streets from two and a half to 
three miles long, being filled with buildings. 
And notwithstanding this, the applications for 
dwellings and business-places are continually increasing, 
and the rents of these gradually rising. 

"And not only is the city reviving, but the 
Holy Land also. For the past eighteen centuries, 
what the prophet Jeremiah says has been 
true: 'The ground is chapped, for there was 
no rain in the earth [land], the plowmen were 
ashamed, they covered their heads.' (Jer. 14:4.) 
But this state of the land is rapidly changing, 
and is becoming as David says: Thou waterest 
the ridges thereof abundantly;. ..thou 
makest it soft with showers; thou blessest the 
springing [forth of fruit] thereof,' etc. (Psa. 65:10-13.) 
And more than this, we may even put 
the words of the prophet Jeremiah thus:— The 
ground is no more chapped, for there are NOW 
rains in the land, the plowmen are no more 
ashamed, and do not need to cover their heads 
any longer— for the favor of Jehovah is causing 
the city of Jerusalem to revive!" 

J. A. WEIMAR. 



R1297:page53 
STRONG DELUSION. 



"For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a lie, that they all might be 
condemned [as unfit for the honors of the high calling] 
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
-2 Thes. 2:11,12. 



A delusion is an error which, when viewed from 
certain standpoints of observation, has the appearance 
of truth. A delusion is more or less 
dangerous according to the importance of the 
truth which it misrepresents, beclouds or falsifies; 
and, if followed, it leads accordingly to 
more or less disastrous consequences. If a merchant 
be deluded and misled by an apparent 
boom in his line of industry, the result to him 
may be financial disaster. If a man or woman 
be deluded by false ideas of life or by false appearances 
of character when choosing a partner 
for life, the result may be long years of domestic 
misery. And, likewise, eternal interests may 
be, and are, continually affected by the delusions 
of error on religious subjects. 

When a man is deluded he verily thinks he 
is right. He claims to be honest in his convictions, 
and he is so. "There is a way that seemeth 
right unto a man; but the end thereof [where 
the subject of delusion is of vital interest] are 
the ways of death." (Prov. 16:25.) The world 
to-day is full of delusions, and of deluded people 
who verily think they are right, and who expect 
in due time to realize their delusive hopes. 
There are political delusions, financial delusions 
and religious delusions of every shade and hue; 
and thousands and millions of people are following 
them, and devoting all their time and 
energy to them, only to realize in the end a 
whirlwind of confusion, disaster and the utter 
wreck of all their hopes. 

The questions then arise, Who can escape 
these delusions so common among men? or how 
may we know that we are not ourselves among 
the number of the deluded ones? The fact is 
that no member of the fallen race is, of himself, 
proof against them. We are all, in consequence 
of the fall, both physically and mentally impaired; 
our experience is brief and varied, and 
our knowledge is necessarily very limited. 

Though we see that financial delusions are 
continually misleading men and blighting their 
hopes of temporal advantage; and though we 
see that political delusions are forming various 
factions among men and leading them to strive 
for the realization of numerous delusive hopes, 
which, in the end, will bring only anarchy and 
a time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation; yet those which chiefly concern 
the children of God are the religious delusions, 
or those capable of affecting their eternal interests. 

R1297:page54 

The saints have little to fear from financial 



delusions or disasters, since they are generally 
the poor of this world who have little to lose, 
but whose bread and water are sure (Isa. 33:16), 
and whose treasures are not laid up here, but in 
heaven. Nor are they specially concerned with 
the political delusions which we are told shall 
ere long lead to the great political disaster, 
which is even now imminent. These are important 
to the world, whose only concern is 
their temporal interests. But the questions with 
us are, How shall we escape the religious delusions 
so prevalent everywhere? and what proof 
have we that we are not now under such 
hallucinations? 

These are important questions which no child 
of God can afford lightly to set aside. But note 
the words of the Apostle above quoted, which 
seem to imply that God is desirous that some 
should be snared, and to the very intent that 
they might be condemned— "God will send 
[permit to come upon] them strong delusion, 
that they should believe a lie, that they all 
might be condemned." 

Who are these whom God thus desires to be 
snared and condemned? Paul answers, They 
are those who believed not the truth, but had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. They are not those 
who never heard the truth, but those who, having 
once heard and understood it, turned from 
it, rejected it and had pleasure in unrighteousness 
—not necessarily in gross unrighteousness, 
such as crime, but in some measure of unrighteousness; 
often a desire for a little more liberty 
of self-will instead of close conformity to the 
divine will, and consequently a preference for 
the error which would grant such liberty and 
silence the promptings of conscience and the 
voice of truth. Such prefer the error to the truth. 
Those who receive not the truth in the love of 
it are not worthy of it, and they, therefore, 
must go away from it into the outer darkness 
that envelops the world. To these error comes 
in its most deceitful forms, and they quickly 
fall a prey to the delusion. 

With the Psalmist, therefore, we may well inquire, 
"Who," then, "shall be able to stand? 
—who shall ascend into the hill [kingdom] of 
the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy 
place?" Now mark the answer: "He that hath 
clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not 
lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. 
He shall receive the blessing from the 
Lord, and righteousness from the God of his 
salvation." (Psa. 24:3-5.) Here is the class 
among whom the delusions of error can make 
no headway. These have a standpoint of observation 



from which every error appears in its 

true colors, and every truth in its proper light. 

Mark the particular features of this class: 
They have "clean hands:" Their work for the 
Lord may be very imperfect; they may tell the 
story of his love and grace in a very halting, 
awkward manner; they may minister to the 
temporal or the spiritual necessities of the 
saints, or others, from a very frugal and plain 
store of their own; but their work will be clean; 
their story will be free from self-emulation and 
human glorying, and their works will be free 
from both ostentation and parade. What they 
do will be done with simplicity and meekness, 
as unto the Lord, and not for the praise of men. 

They have "pure hearts:" Under divine inspection, 
their motives are seen to be pure. 
Their whole purpose and endeavor is to glorify 
God and to bless their fellow-men, especially 
the household of faith. They "have not lifted 
up their soul unto vanity:" They have no vain 
worldly ambitions, either secretly or openly 
cherished and ministered to behind the outward 
profession of entire consecration to God— no 
ambition to be great, or good, or wise in the 
eyes of men, nor to grasp the fleeting earthly 
treasures once consecrated to God. Nor have 
they "sworn deceitfully:" They have not made 
a covenant with God of entire consecration to 
his service, with a secret determination to keep 
back part of the price; nor have they since 
making the covenant repudiated its obligations. 

The whole course of this class is one of sincerity 
and truth. Their character is that of 
meekness and faith; they love righteousness and 
desire to be molded and fashioned after the principles 
of righteousness; and they correspondingly 
hate wickedness and every evil way. With 
a realization of their own short-comings from 
the standard of perfection, they put no confidence 
in the flesh, but humbly and implicitly 

R1297:page55 

submit their will and judgment to the will and 

plan of God. So they have no schemes or plans 

of their own, but are fully devoted to the accomplishment 

of God's plan, in God's own 

way and time, having full faith in his sure word 

of prophecy and promise. 

Those who have such a spirit come reverently 
to the Word of God to learn God's will 
and way, and with a desire to walk accordingly; 
and here they receive the divinely-provided 
armor of God, which will protect all who carefully 
put it on from all the fiery darts of the enemy. 



Without this complete armor, no child of God 
is safe in this evil day. "Wherefore," says the 
Apostle, "take unto you the whole armor of 
God, that ye may be able to withstand in 
the evil day, and having done all, to stand."— 
Eph. 6:13. 

The evil day here referred to is this Day of the 
Lord, in which we are now living, wherein every 
man's work shall be tried, so as by fire. These 
are the "perilous times" of which the Apostle 
forewarned the church— times peculiarly perilous 
to Christian faith, because of the many subtle and 
delusive forms of error now springing up to intercept 
the progress of the truth. But God's 
provision for his saints is equal to the emergency 
of the perilous hour. Never before this 
"evil day" was it possible for the saints to put 
on the whole armor of God; and never before 
was it needed. For some years past the Lord 
has been handing us this armor, piece by piece, 
and has been telling us to put it on and wear it 
that we might become accustomed to it and feel 
at ease and at home in it, because the time 
was shortly coming when it would be impossible 
to stand without it. 

Some— a few— have been heeding the counsel. 
Carefully they have buckled on every part of the 
armor as fast as they received it, and in consequence, 
to-day they stand completely clothed 
with the truth. Their loins are girt about with 
it; their feet are shod with it; and it covers 
their head [their intellectual faculties] as a helmet 
of salvation [salvation from the snares and 
delusions of error]. Then they have on the 
breastplate of righteousness— a righteous character, 
which the truth has developed in them; 
and in their hands they bear the sword of the 
spirit, which is the Word of God, which they 
are now able to handle with ease and vigor in 
defense of the doctrines of Christ; while their 
ample shield of faith is an able defense against 
all the fiery darts of the enemy, so that the flying 
arrows do not even jar the armor or for a 
moment stun the inner man. 

Praise God for such an armor! Brother, have 
you put it on? Do not rest satisfied with the 
idea that you can get along as well as your 
fathers did with only a part of it. The time is 
coming, yea, and now is, when you must have 
it complete, or you will surely fall. The portions 
of the armor presented to the saints of the 
past were sufficient for their day and trial; but 
a greater trial of faith in this "evil day" necessitates 
a more complete defense. 

Do not say to the Lord, "Well, I have the 
breastplate and the shield; no, thank you, I think 



I shall not need the helmet;" or, "I think I can 
get along without the sword." I tell you, you 
will need them all; make haste and put them 
on without delay. Some of you should have 
had them on long ago, and should be able to 
help others don them now. Many are already 
falling, and sadly many are feeling their lack of 
the helmet. Some with mere curiosity-interest 
have spent much valuable time in looking at the 
various parts of the armor as presented to them 
for the past few years, instead of earnestly buckling 
them on and proving them: and they have become 
so used to merely looking at the beautiful 
pieces of the armor that they expect the process 
of bringing forward new pieces to continue forever. 
Let such wake up to the fact that the 
armor is already complete and that no more can 
be added to it. That is to say, the plan of God 
is now rounded out to completeness and no more 
can be added to it, because anything more 
would be a superfluity. The Lord has graciously 
shown us its entire outline, as well as the 
manner in which the various parts of it work 
together. Look at your hand: it has four fingers 
and a thumb. You do not say, Well, perhaps 
another thumb or finger will appear by and 
by. You know there will be no such thing. That 
hand is complete and another member added 
to it would be superfluous. 
Just so those who have come to view the full 

R1297:page56 

completeness of God's plan, as now unfolded to 
us, know that nothing more could be added to 
it. It is gloriously complete and worthy indeed 
of its great Author. But, while the outlining, 
the general harmony and the working together 
of the various parts are all clear to us now, we 
yet have room for profound thought and study 
of it, and probably will still have even after we 
are glorified. Some make a great mistake in 
continually putting on and taking off various 
proffered armors. There is but one armor that 
will be of any use or protection to us, and that 
is that which is stamped with the scarlet stamp 
of the precious blood of Christ. Every piece 
of this divine armor is so stamped, and it all 
fits together. If you think to change your helmet 
of salvation for some other helmet, you will 
very soon want another breastplate to match 
it. And you will want another sword; for this 
sword will not match with any other helmet. 
And this shield of faith will not match with any 
other armor. Do not allow your head to grow 
too big for the helmet which the Lord has provided, 



and then go around hunting a new helmet 
to fit your swelled and wrong ideas. If the 
helmet supplied in God's Word will not fit you, 
do not fancy that the increase is real wisdom, 
and try to stretch the old one or to get a new 
helmet; but freely apply the liniment of humility 
and reduce it till the helmet does fit. 

Put on the whole armor of God. And make 
sure that you accept no spurious brand. Every 
piece of the genuine is stamped with a cross 
and the words— To be worn only by the redeemed. 
Put on piece by piece, quickly; buckle 
it on securely; and having done all, STAND. 
The position thus suggested implies an attack: 
the attack will surely come, and indeed has already 
come to many. Are you ready now to 
do good service as a valiant soldier of the cross 
of Christ? Stand! do not run away; stand your 
ground and battle for the truth. 

As we have already observed, it is as truly a 
part of God's purpose to let some fall in this 
evil day, as it is to enable others to stand. He 
therefore permits the strong delusion to take 
possession of all who have pleasure in unrighteousness, 
and who therefore do not believe the 
truth. Such are unworthy of the truth, and 
sooner or later every such an one must fall. All 
such are condemned as unworthy of membership 
in Christ, the vine; and as the time for the 
exaltation of the Church draws nearer and 
nearer, the testing may be expected to increase 
until all the unworthy ones are weeded out. 
He will gather out of his Kingdom all things that 
offend [those who put off the wedding garment of 
Christ's imputed righteousness, etc.], and all 
that do iniquity [those who practice sin]. And 
then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun 
in the kingdom of their Father. 

If, then, we would escape the delusions of this 
evil day, let us see to it that we are in deed and 
in truth lovers of righteousness; let us receive 
the truth in meekness, hold it with humility and 
thankfulness, and serve it with energy and zeal. 



R1297:page56 
A CRITICISM. 



The following, from Bro. R. Wakefield, was 
written to assist a weaker brother caught in the 
meshes of no-ransom sophistry, and stumbling 
into one of the worst forms of infidelity. Bro. 



W. sent a copy of the same to us also, which 
we publish for the benefit of any who may be 
caught in the same snare of the adversary. 

DEAR BROTHER J.: -I have read carefully and 
critically, as you requested, Mr. Adams' book, 
in which, under a pretense of harmonizing the 
Bible, he labors to undermine and overthrow its 
entire teachings. Before I mention some of the 
conclusions at which I have arrived relative to 
your author's teachings, I may say that I have 
found in the book so many departures from the 
truth, that to give an answer to every point 
would be nothing less than to write an answer to 
the entire volume. I shall study brevity, however, 
and try not to impose too much upon your 
patience. In answering this writer's doctrine, 
you will observe, too, that the same will apply 
to several other no-ransom theories which differ 
from this only in a few minor points. 

Let me begin, then, with almost the last pages 

R1297:page57 

of the book. On page 322 your author says, 
"Man is not yet created: but is in the creative 
process." On page 202, "Man is yet in the grub 
condition (the grub, as contrasted with the butterfly) 
—a mere tadpole, unfinished, crude, in the 
rough." On page 97, "Adam at his creation was 
in this unfinished condition. He was not created 
in God's image!" 

Now what saith the Scriptures? Gen. 1:26: 
"And God said, Let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness:— And God created man in 
his own image: in the image of God created he 
him: male and female created he them. And 
God blessed them." This is repeated twice in 
Genesis. In 5:1: "In the day that God created 
man, in the likeness of God made he him." 
And 9:6: "In the image of God made he man." 
In the New Testament the same fact is re-affirmed. 
In 1 Cor. 1 1:7: "For man is the image and 
glory of God;" and James 3:9: "Men are made 
after the similitude of God." To argue against 
such unqualified statements of fact, and to try to 
make them mean something else, is, in my estimation, 
a wresting of the Scripture. When you 
read "And God blessed them," you might as 
well say God did not bless them, as to say, as 
your author so complacently does, that Adam 
was not created in God's image. 

On page 100 "the creative process" is more 
particularly stated. "God's creative work only 
began in Eden: redemption, resurrection, judgment, 
probation, are simply steps and stages 
in the same creative process: and man, as yet, 



is only passing through one stage of his creation" 
(page 202). The first stage of the creative process 
is to be followed by the second, or finishing 
stage; the first is the animal, the second is the 
spiritual. And in the finishing stage the entire 
race is to be elevated to the glorious spiritual 
condition of our Lord Jesus, who is "the restored, 
perfected man" (pages 158, 165). They are 
to come forth from their graves unto the beginning 
of the spiritual stage of creation, and when 
they shall have passed through their probation, 
when the thousand years are finished, then they 
will have reached the same spiritual life as the 
elect: having attained to the possession of the 
divine nature they will live in the true sense, 
"the life that is life indeed" (pages 163, 275, 276). 
"Thus will be accomplished God's original purpose, 
to create a race of intelligent beings in 
his own image, divine, Godlike, as himself" 
(page 101). 

A single text of Scripture will show the utter 
fallacy of this fanciful theory. Jesus is retained 
in the heavens until the times of "the restitution 
of all things spoken by the mouth of all his holy 
prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:21.) 
If God set out at the beginning to create such a 
"divine, Godlike race," and if he finishes his 
work, as your author describes, wherein comes 
the restitution or restoration? According to his 
plan, Jesus, at his resurrection, was not in any 
sense a "restored" man— he was "finished" according 
to the original design; and so, too, if 
God bestows upon "every member of the human 
race" the divine nature, which they never had, 
and so had never lost, to call that restitution, or 
restoration, is simple nonsense. The idea of a 
"new creation" is likewise excluded, since the 
consummation of the work is but the finishing 
up of "the creative process." 

Thus in these, as in many other places, your 
author convicts himself of falsehood, according 
to his own rule. He says (page 41), "Truth out 
of place becomes falsehood: instead of upbuilding 
it is misleading." On page 1 16 it is admitted 
that "most of the epistles are directed to the 
elect, who are chosen in Christ before the foundation 
of the world." And yet in numerous 

R1298:page57 

instances, language thus addressed to the elect 
he applies to the entire race. Thus on page 
101 Paul's declaration: "As we have borne the 
image of the earthy, so shall we bear the image 
of the heavenly" (1 Cor. 15:49); and "Ye are 
God's workmanship" (Eph. 2:10); "Ye are 



God's husbandry" (farm, margin); and "Ye are 

God's building" (1 Cor. 3:9), are all made to 

apply to "God's work in the creation of a race 

like himself." On page 164 also, the text 1 Cor. 1:30, 

"But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who 

of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, 

and sanctification, and redemption," is 

made to apply to "every member of the race." 

On page 239 he says: "Bear in mind that it is 

God who is creating the race in his own image 

and likeness— man's probation is a part of the 

creative process; and for its accomplishment 

R1298:page58 

God's own honor and credit are at stake." 
And he quotes, "Being confident of this one 
thing, that he which hath begun a good work in 
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ." 
(Phil. 1:6.) What greater perversion of language 
could there be than this of applying to the 
race the divine assurances of interest in, of care 
for, and of faithfulness toward, "them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus," "called saints," 
"whose hope is laid up in heaven?" And these 
are but samples of many misstatements of the 
truth. 

Another example of your author's crookedness 
is found in his treatment of the statements that 
"God was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself;" and, "As in Adam all die, even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive:" insisting that 
nothing less can be meant than the ultimate exaltation 
of every member of the human race to 
that glory and immortality to which Christ has 
attained, and to which he has called his saints, 
"the elect:" and then, on page 307, admitting 
that there will be some "who shall not inherit 
the kingdom of God," and who "shall not obtain 
the high-calling." And here he makes 
reference to Phil. 3:18,19, where the Apostle 
says, "Many walk (according to the flesh) who 
are enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is 
destruction." Of the same class of evil workers 
the same Apostle says (Rom. 6:21,23), 
"the end of those things is death." "For the 
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." 
And it is positively certain that this death is not 
the death of the sin in the sinner, so that he 
may be transformed into a saint, but it is the 
death of "the enemies of the cross of Christ." 
In this connection your author, arguing against 
the popular doctrine of eternal torment, says 
very truly that the Scriptures never use any such 
terms as "eternal death," or "endless punishment." 



But why does he use those very terms 

in laboring to establish his own theories? Commenting 

on Psa. 9:17, he says, "What is there 

in Scripture, take it how you will, to prove that 

future punishment is endless?" 

What is there indeed! Had he been willing 
to put that test fairly before his readers, I imagine 
he would have found in it a death-blow 
to his fanciful interpretations, and his theories of 
the ultimate salvation of every individual member 
of the human race. "The wicked shall be 
turned into hell." The word, literally rendered, 
is "turned back," "returned." Turn to Gen. 3:19 
and read, "Till thou return unto the ground; 
for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." And to Psa. 90:3,13: 
"Thou turnest man to destruction; 
and sayest, Return, ye children of men." "Return, 
O Lord, how long?" etc. Now if Psa. 9:17 
affirms that the wicked shall be "turned 
back," or "returned," into sheol, several things 
are self-evident: First, to be in sheol is to be in 
a condition of "destruction;" second, in order 
to be returned, those who are in sheol must first 
be brought out: this will be the coming forth 
of "all that are in the graves," when hades or 
sheol "shall give up the dead which are in it." 
If then, after being thus brought forth, the wicked 
shall be "turned back" into "destruction," 
since there will be "no more a sacrifice for sin" 
(Heb. 10:26), it would certainly seem that their 
punishment is final, and beyond the hope or 
possibility of reversal. 

A similar line of thought is suggested in connection 
with your author's treatment of Matt. 25:46. 
We can readily admit that the passage 
gives no support to the hideous dogma of endless 
torment, against which he makes such a vigorous 
fight; but the question remains, What is 
the true teaching of our Lord in this place? 
Is it, as your author says, that the punishment 
indicates a course of "correction, discipline, 
improvement," so that the "goats" shall be ultimately 
turned into "sheep," or is it something 
else? Turn to verse 41 and read, "Depart, ye 
cursed, into the aionion fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels." If the "end" of the 
devil is that he shall be "destroyed" (which 
your author admits on page 233), why should his 
"angels," "messengers," "servants," fare any 
better? If the Lord intended to teach that the 
fire should ultimately prove a blessing to those 
servants of the wicked one, is it not most singular 
that he should send them into it under a 
curse? In verse 46, the "aionion fire" of verse 41 
is defined as signifying "aionion punishment." 



Now, what is the punishment? The 

R1298:page59 

word is "kolasin," and signifies primarily "to 
cut off," as "lopping off branches of trees, to 
prune." These, the goats, "shall go away into 
kolasin aionion [the cutting off enduring]; 
but the righteous into zoen aionion [the life 
enduring]. Now if the life of that age, or of 
the ages, is to be an endless life, by the same 
rule, and of necessity, the cutting off from that 
life, which is the punishment, must also be endless, 
perpetual. 

And here your author makes a fatal mistake. 
He applies to these wicked ones, whom the Judge 
cuts off from life, the idea of pruning for their 
good, and ultimate blessing. Let the Lord explain 
and defend himself. Turn to the 15th of John 
and read: "Every branch in me that beareth 
not fruit he taketh away; and every branch 
that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring 
forth more fruit." Here then is the whole truth. 
The branches that are "taken away" are "cut 
off, removed." The word carries with it the sense 
of "to destroy, to kill;" but the fruit-bearing 
branches are "pruned, purged," that they may 
be yet more fruitful. Thus, according to his 
own rule, by putting "truth out of place," your 
author makes himself a teacher of "falsehood." 

But glaring as is this perversion of the truth, 
your author is still more deeply involved in his 
treatment of Jesus as the Savior of the world. 
The "precious blood," of which the Apostles 
all make so much account, has no place in his 
plan of salvation. On page 137 we read, "The 
death of Christ on the cross, without the gate, 
was the fulfilment of that part of the type of the 
sin-offering that pertained to the disposal of the 
dead body without the camp, after it had been 
slain and its blood poured out to make an atonement.' 
"Thus does it appear that the sacrificial 
death of Christ was not his death on the 
cross, but previous to that, since his death on 
the cross was the antitype of the disposal of the 
already dead carcass of the sin-offering;" for 
Christ, he claims, "was in a condition of death 
while here in the flesh." On pages 132 and 133 
it is set forth that the sacrificial death of Christ 
was the death that he suffered when "he laid 
down" his "pre-existent life" in order to be made 
in the likeness of sinful flesh. And this erroneous 
doctrine concerning the sacrifice of Christ 
is based on a manifest perversion of two texts of 
Scripture. (John 10:17,18, and 2 Cor. 8:9.) 
Your author claims that the correct rendering 



of John 10:17,18 is, "I laid down my life; no 

man took it from me, but I laid it down of myself:" 

making the laying down of his life an act 

already in the past, and applying this to his pre-existent 

life. The verb taketh in verse 18 he 

declares, should be took, as in the margin of the 

revised version: putting it in the past tense. 

Now to discover the fallacy of all this, it is 
only necessary to read the Scriptures. In verse 11: 
"The good shepherd giveth (literally, lays 
down) his life for the sheep:" is giveth in the 
past tense? In verse 17: "I lay down my 
life:" is lay in the past tense? The word is not 
laid, but lay, and it is correctly rendered. The 
word taketh also, in verse 18, is correctly rendered. 
In the Diaglott the text reads, "No man 
takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself." 
This is an entirely different thing from saying, as 
your author does, "I have already laid it down" 
(page 180). The Lord was speaking of something 
he was about to do, not what he had already 
done. The word giveth in verse 1 1 is 
"lays down" in the Diaglott; it is also "lays 
down" in the Variorum Testament; and Young 
gives the meaning, "to put, set, place." 

In perfect harmony with this is the Lord's 
saying in Matt. 20:28: "The Son of man came 
to give his life a ransom for many." O, says 
your author, that was his pre-existent life, that 
he had already laid down! Was it? You will 
please notice that the Son of God did NOT die 
in order to come here in the likeness of sinful 
flesh. He said to the Jews, pointing back into 
the past, "Before Abraham was, I am." The Father 
sanctified the Son, and sent him into the 
world, and he did not die on the way. He was alive 
before he came, and he was alive when he came: 
there was no death, nor cause of death in him! 
He was not a dead carcass, as your author says, 
page 137, but he was the living representative of 
the living Father who had sent him. (John 5:26; 14:9.) 
And even if he had laid down his 
pre-existent life, it would have been worthless 
in the way of making atonement. Was there 
any blood-shedding in connection with the laying 
down of that pre-existent life (supposing that 

R1298:page60 

he did lay it down)? Certainly not; it was a 

bloodless offering; and "it is the blood that makes 

atonement" (Lev. 17:11); and "without shedding 

of blood there is no remission." (Heb. 9:22.) 

Redemption is "through the blood." 

(Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14; 1 Pet. 1:18,19.) It 

is "the blood that cleanseth from sin." (1 John 1:7; 



Heb. 9:14; Rev. 1:5.) It is "the blood 

of the cross" that makes peace. (Col. 1:20.) 

R1299:page60 

"By the blood we have access to the Father." 
(Heb. 10:19; Eph. 2:3.) "The Church of 
God he hath purchased with the blood of his own 
Son."-Acts 20:28. 

So it was by his death on the cross, in the 
shedding of his precious blood, that Christ made 
atonement for the sins of the world, and through 
it men obtain forgiveness and salvation. 

In 2 Cor. 8:9 your author thinks he finds 
proof of the sacrifice of Christ's pre-existent life. 
But the unanswerable disproof of such a notion 
is found in the careful reading of the Diaglott 
rendering of the 8th and 9th chapters. The 
idea of sacrifice is not even hinted at, much less 
is there any allusion to Christ's pre-existent life. 
The Apostle was making an appeal to the Corinthian 
brethren for liberality in their contributions 
to the fund which the churches were 
making up for "the supplying of the wants of 
the saints" (9:12); and to strengthen his appeal 
he reminds them of the favor which the 
Lord Jesus manifested toward them, in that, 
"though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became 
poor, that ye through his poverty might 
be rich." Evidently he hoped by this reference 
to the gracious act of our Lord to excite them 
to generosity in helping on the benevolent work 
in which he was engaged. Thus once more, by 
putting "truth out of place," your author convicts 
himself of "falsehood." 

Your author's rejection of the ransom by the 
blood of the cross is certainly of vital consequence. 
On page 139 he says, "The real sacrifice 
and death of Christ was when he gave up 
the glory which he had with the Father before 
the world was, and entered the condition of 
fallen man." And, page 141: "This was the sacrifice 
and the death of the atonement;"— "His 
death on the cross was not his sacrificial death:" 
It had no more significance than the death of 
a martyr; and it was only "the antitype of the 
burning of the already dead carcass of the sin-offering 
Now notice: perhaps for the sake 
of maintaining an appearance of consistency, 
your author is obliged to admit that it was the 
blood of the sin-offering that made atonement, 
but in the great antitype of the sin-offering, the 
"precious blood" is utterly and contemptuously 
ignored. He says, "The ordinary view belittles 
the whole affair, making the sacrifice and 
death of Christ simply one among thousands of 



such events. The great sacrifice, and the one 
death that could bring about atonement, was 
the laying down of his pre-existent life."— Pages 
132, 133, 140. 

Was it indeed? We have already seen that 
even if he had laid down that life, the shedding 
of blood in connection therewith was an impossibility; 
and equally impossible was it to have made 
atonement without the shedding of blood. 

Thus your author ranks himself with the 
"enemies of the cross of Christ," and with the 
despisers of "the blood." No words can be 
plainer than those which declare that Christ 
gave his "life a ransom:"— "The life is in the 
blood." "He poured out his soul unto death." 
"The blood of Christ, who offered himself without 
spot to God." He gave "himself a sacrifice 
and an offering to God." "He bare our 
sins in his own body on the tree." "Ye are 
bought with a price:" purchased with the 
blood of God's own Son. He was "the man 
Christ Jesus" who gave himself a ransom for 
all; he was not a man in his pre-existent condition, 
and only a man could be a ransom or 
corresponding price for man. 

Say, beloved, both you and I have known too 
much of the value of the "precious blood" to 
permit ourselves to be seduced away from following 
our Lord and Redeemer in his own appointed 
way of life. Have we not together rejoiced 
in the privilege of entering "into the 
holiest by the blood of Jesus Christ?" Have 
we not known that "the blood of Jesus Christ," 
God's own Son, "cleanseth us from all sin"? 
How often have we feasted together in heavenly 
places, and on heavenly things in Christ 
Jesus, and rejoiced in the knowledge that 
the "cup of blessing" was to us "the communion 

R1299:page61 

of the blood of Christ"? And when 
at last we shall "Fall at his feet, and the story 
repeat," will not the burden of our song of 
praise and thanksgiving be, "Thou hast washed 
us from our sins in thine own blood"? This is 
the testimony that I would blazon on the very 
heavens in characters of living light, so that all 
the world might see and read, and if they will, 
believe and live! 

Let me now briefly notice your author's doctrine 
that "All things are of God." That includes 
(page 53) "absolutely all things, the bad, 
as well as the good; all the crime, and sin, and 
wickedness. All things include evil things, and 
we shall find that these are of God, as well as 



those things that we call good" (page 55). The 
case of Joseph, which is first given to illustrate 
how evil things are of God, will sustain this 
doctrine as applied to every other case, or else 
it will prove your author's teaching a blasphemous 
falsehood. Joseph's brethren were jealous 
of him: their jealousy quickly turned to hatred, 
and hatred developed into murder. Envy, hatred, 
murder, are evil works of the flesh: they are 
of the devil, for "he that committeth sin is of 
the devil." (1 John 3:8.) They are "enmity 
against God."— Rom. 8:7. 

Your author says, "Evil things are of God, as 
well as those things that we call good." And 
he further says that "There is no evil but moral 
evil" (page 225). Now the question affecting Joseph's 
brethren is, Did God work in them those 
evil passions, and lead them on through envy, 
jealousy and hatred, to the commission of murder? 
for in heart and purpose they were murderers. 
If he did, then he violated his own 
laws and the moral principles that he enjoins 
upon his creatures, and lifted his hand against 
himself. "Thou shalt do no murder," is his 
law; and hatred is the moral quality that is 
equivalent to murder. Did God incite Joseph's 
brethren to hatred and murder? Listen! "Let 
no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted 
of God: for God cannot be tempted of evil, 
neither tempteth he any man! But every man 
is tempted when he is drawn away of his own 
lusts, and enticed." (James 1:13,14.) Here 
then is an unqualified and authoritative statement 
of the truth that "evil" is not of God. The 
evil passions of men, "their own lusts," lead them 
on to the commission of evil deeds, and they are 
not of God, but of the devil. 

If God incited evil passions in men, and led 
them on to the commission of evil deeds, he 
would simply convict himself of lying and hypocrisy, 
for he constantly forbids and denounces 
such evil things; and to pronounce men 
guilty, and punish them under such conditions, 
would be to declare himself an unprincipled despot. 
Your author says, page 208, "It is absolutely 
certain that man is not a free agent (actor);" 
and on the preceding page— "Man goes the 
way that God desireth: his steps have been prepared 
beforehand, and are all ordered of the 
Lord." Where, then, does man's responsibility 
come in? But, if as he shrank from the results of 
his own teaching, he takes pains to explain, as 
in Joseph's case, and that of Abiathar, which is 
quoted to show how evil things are of God: 
"The awful deeds of wicked men are of God in 
such a sense that he makes them conducive to 



the carrying out of his own plans, and brings good 
out of them in the end" (page 57). Yet over 
and over again he declares that absolutely all 
things, evil things, crimes and wickedness of 
every kind, as well as what we call good things, 
"are of God," literally "out of God," and 
man (all men, every man) goes the way that 
God desires, and has marked out beforehand 
for him. 

In Eph. 2:2, the prince of the power of the 
air is said to be the spirit "that now works in the 
children of disobedience." To say, as your author 
does, that God controls and overrules for 
good, and for the accomplishment of his own 
purposes and plans, the evil doings of evil men, 
is an infinitely different thing from saying, as he 
also does, with constant repetition and emphasis, 
that "absolutely all things, crime and sin and 
wickedness, as well as good things— absolutely all 
things are of God." The former is truth; the 
latter is a blasphemous falsehood. 

As to the declaration of Jehovah, "I make 
peace and create evil;" and "Shall there be 
evil in a city and the Lord hath not done it?"— 
take such Scriptures as Jer. 21:10-14; 25:29; 
26:2-6; Ezek. 14:12-23; Amos 4:4-11; 9:8-10, 
and study carefully their connections, 

R1299:page62 

and you will find that the evil the Lord creates 
and does is the calamities and judgments that 
he visits upon the ungodly nations— "the sword, 
famine, pestilence and noisome beasts"— on account 
of their abominable iniquities; and that 
it is always in opposition to, and in condemnation 
of, the evil of sin, which is an abomination 
in his sight. R. WAKEFIELD. 



R1299:page62 
PROGRESSIVE JAPANESE. 



The U.S. Minister Plenipotentiary to Japan 
reports to the Government at Washington a remarkable 
religious movement in Japan. The 
natives, who had adopted the Presbyterian faith, 
concluding not to await the revision of the Confession 
proposed by the Presbyterians of the 
United States, have revised their creed to suit 
their own ideas. They also made an addition 
to the so-called Apostles' Creed by inserting 



the following as a preamble:— 

"The Lord Christ, whom we worship as God, 
for us men and for our salvation was made man 
and suffered. He offered up a perfect sacrifice 
for sin, and all who are one with him by faith 
are pardoned and accounted righteous; and faith 
in him, working by love, purifies the heart. 
The Holy Ghost, who, with the Father and Son, 
is worshiped and glorified, reveals Jesus Christ 
to the soul, and without his grace, man, being 
dead in sin, cannot enter the kingdom of God. 
By him the prophets and apostles and holy men 

R1300:page62 

of old were inspired; and he, speaking in the 
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, is 
the supreme and infallible Judge in things pertaining 
unto faith and living. From these holy 
Scriptures the ancient Church of Christ drew 
its confession, and we, holding the faith once 
delivered to the saints, join in that confession, 
with praise and thanksgiving." 

The American and European Presbyterian 
missionaries, seeing that the Japanese were determined, 
assented to the proceedings— no doubt 
fearing a general deflection toward some other 
denomination in case of opposition. 

Minister Swift's report says that it is a frequent 
and common claim made by native Christian 
converts that the spirit and meaning of 
Christianity, in its broader and more universal 
scope, has never been properly comprehended 
among Western nations, and that the faith needed 
to be transported to Japan for final development 
and perfection. Consequently he apprehends 
that this change will be followed by other 
and more radical changes. We congratulate 
the Japanese on their progressiveness. 



R1300:page62 

"ROGUE CATCH ROGUE." 



This old adage is now being illustrated in 
Italy. For centuries Roman Catholicism has 
devoured the substance of the Italians for 
masses for the dead and for the living, until 
they are poor as well as ignorant and superstitious. 
Latterly pride and independence are 
reviving, and the civil government, anxious to 
be known as one of the great powers of Europe, 



has spent money lavishly upon the army and 
navy. As a result, between the demands of the 
Pope and of the king for taxes, and between their 
threats for the present and for the future life, 
the people are in bad condition— nationally and 
individually the Italians are on the verge of 
bankruptcy. 

The king shrewdly sees that to enable the 
people to pay the taxes he demands, they must 
be relieved of some of the Pope's taxes for 
masses, etc. Accordingly, as a financial measure, 
he has recently cut off some of the Papal 
revenues, and thus inflicted fresh "torment" 
upon "the seat of the beast." 

The following is the cable dispatch: 

"ROME, March 19.— The laws for the suppression 
of religious guilds and fraternities, 
which have existed for centuries, and for the 
abolition of chaplains in hospitals, asylums and 
prisons, began to go into effect in February last. 
The result is extraordinary. Until two Sundays 
ago there were 5300 masses celebrated in 
Rome every Sunday. The number is now reduced 
to 800. One hundred and fifty-two 
churches are to be closed also, and their altars 
demolished. 

"The pictures and statues, except such as 
the State thinks proper to reserve for public 

R1300:page63 

galleries, are to be sold by public auction. In 
the rest of Italy they will be destroyed, and 
not even remote villages will be exempt from 
this stern decree. Steps are also to be taken 
to prevent officers and soldiers from attending 
mass on Sundays, military duties being imposed 
on them during church hours. All sacred 
names are being erased from the school books 
and sacred emblems removed from the 
schoolrooms. 

"These laws have created the utmost bitterness 
among the clergy. The Pope is resolved 
to spare no efforts to assist emigration to America 
and Africa. An enormous number of ecclesiastics 
have been receiving salaries from religious 
institutions now suppressed." 



R1300:page63 
SPECIAL NOTICES. 



We are anticipating a large attendance at the 
Memorial Services this year. Pressure of the 
work has hindered us from replying to all the 
dear friends who have written us of their coming, 
but they may all rely upon a warm welcome. 
We made the invitation as hearty as 
possible in the March TOWER. 

Come with your hearts burning with love for 
our Lord and for all who have his spirit, and 
with sympathy for all who have not yet attained 
much of his likeness. Come intent upon doing 
good to some one else, as well as praying and 
seeking a blessing upon your own soul. 

Some have written us that their Ticket Agent 
had no blank certificates, etc. We reply: It 
is his place to secure such certificate for you; 
but should he not receive them in time, ask 
the Agent to give you a ticket over the proper 
lines of railroad, and to give you a written 
paper stating that you applied for a certificate 
for excursion rates to the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 
Convention, at Allegheny, Pa., that he 
had no such blanks, and that you paid full fare 
for your going ticket. 

The Convention assembles Sunday, April 
19th, at 10 A.M. The Memorial Supper will 
be celebrated on the evening of Tuesday, April 
21st, 8 P.M. See March issue of the TOWER. 

On arrival come direct to the WATCH TOWER 
office, No. 58 Arch street, Allegheny. 



page 63 

THE TAGS on your paper will, hereafter, inform 
you of how your subscription to the TOWER 
stands on our books. 

Changes in dates will be made only at the 
beginning of each quarter. 

Subscriptions will not, hereafter, begin at any 
time, but only with the quarters, January, 
April, July and October. For instance, new 
subscriptions sent in during February or March 
are reckoned as beginning with January issue, 
and marked as ending December 91, and to 
such the TOWER issues for the months already 
elapsed are sent at once. 

Our list is not yet perfected, but will be so 
next month, we trust. Should there be anything 
about your credit on the tag not in harmony 
with your records we shall be pleased to 
know of it and to correct or explain the matter. 

Those who have renewed since January have 
been given credit, and will find it indicated on 
their tags next month. 



R1300:page63 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I sent you a Money 
Order for $10.00 a few days ago, and request a 
renewal of my subscription to the TOWER for 
another year, and ten copies MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
paper cover, for distribution. The remainder 
of the money I place in your hands, to be used 
in the service of the Lord for the advancement 
of his Kingdom and glory. 

About a year ago I asked the Lord in all sincerity 
and prayer to assist me in quitting the use 
of tobacco, and promised him in all good faith 
to use the money, formerly spent for it, to the 
advancement of his interest, as I now see it 
through the light I have received from the two 
volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN and the TOWER. 
I had used tobacco for thirty years, and often 
tried to quit, but could not succeed in resisting 
the strong desire for its use; but since I 
quit this time, with the help of the Lord, I have 
lost all desire for it, and only twice (shortly 
after quitting) have I had the least desire for it. 

R1300:page64 

Since comparing carefully your views with the 
Bible, I am thoroughly satisfied it is the only 
true interpretation of God's plan I have been 
able to find. I have been a member of the Presbyterian 
church for thirty-five years, but recently, 
thank God, the scales of sectarianism have 
dropped from my eyes, and I can now see the 
glorious plan of God, in that he sent his Son 
Jesus Christ to be a ransom for all: the Church, 
the little flock, first; then the world. "Glory 
to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good 
will toward men." 

May God prosper his work in your hands, and 
may the blessing of the Lord Jesus be with you 
and all those laboring for the glorious Kingdom 
which he has come to establish, is the prayer 
of your humble friend in the Lord, 
A. W. LEE. 



Missouri. 



DEAR BRETHREN:-Enclosed find Money Order 
for which send me Vol. I., THE PLAN OF 
THE AGES. Through the kindness of Bro. T. 
Carr I got Vol. II., THE TIME IS AT HAND, and 
have read it nearly through. The truth is so 
clearly pointed out, and everything is so plain, 
that, although I have not seen the first volume, 
I have read it. 

After preaching in the M.E. church for three 
years, during all of which time I have been 
earnestly seeking the truth, I am now, by the 
help of God, able to "come out of her." 

Notwithstanding you advised your readers not 
to read the second volume before reading the 
first, I ventured on, and I feel that I am amply 
paid. May God ever bless you in your labor 
for the truth. Yours in Christ, 

S. P. JOHNSON. 



page 64 



Scotland. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-With 
much gratitude I have to acknowledge the due 
delivery of the tracts and ZION'S WATCH TOWERS. 
Being in bad health for some time I have 
not been able to do much myself, but the Postman 
who brought the books, after reading Vol. 
I., has become greatly interested, and is now 
joyfully working for the Master. He gives away 
The Old Theology tracts, and loans MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. He has meetings with young men 
in his own house on Sundays for the purpose of 
reading MILLENNIAL DAWN along with the Word 
of God. In this way much good is being done, 
I hope. 

I should like to write you a long letter, telling 
you much, but am not able. Enclosed is 
Money Order of L.2 for subscription and Tract 
Fund. Yours in Christian fellowship, 
E. ALLAN. 



Ontario. 
EDITOR WATCH TOWER, DEAR SIR:-I will 
never be able to repay you for the light you have 
thrown upon God's Word, by your writings— 
THE PLAN OF THE AGES, etc. When I first 
read it, I was surprised at its revelations. Had 
I been asleep? No! but I had been trusting my 
salvation to a false theology, and giving unbounded 
faith to professed teachers of God's Word, 
and had failed to study closely for myself. I had 



gotten my eyes open to the fact, that the watchmen 

on the walls were giving uncertain sounds, 

and I began to search the Scriptures, when your 

priceless work fell into my hands in a way that 

I regard as providential, and it saved me years of 

study. I have read it over carefully several 

times, and practically mastered its teaching, and 

have gained immensely in my faith in God's 

dear Son. I find it does not require half the 

wisdom to understand the Bible as it is written, 

as it does to show that it means something different 

from what it says. I can now hold up 

Jesus, as God's dear Son, sent into the world 

to save sinners, to any of Adam's lost sons and 

daughters, and prove that he is a loving Savior, 

and will save his people from their sins. For 

twenty-five years, as a Methodist, I was tongue-tied, 

because I could not explain why Christ 

died for all, and could not save all. I could not 

recommend a Savior who could not do all that 

he professed to do. I thank God that I now 

realize that Jesus is all powerful, and will save 

all from the effects of Adam's sin, and give to 

all a personal offer to live forever on the same conditions 

on which Adam had life offered to him. 

I have been trying to open the eyes of some 
of my brethren in the church, but find it harder 
work than with the outside sinner. Having 
consecrated my life to God, I shall go on to the 
end; and I know that if I am faithful I shall 
obtain the "crown of life"— Immortality. 

Wishing you every success in your glorious 
mission, I remain, yours in Christ, 
J. E. AUGER. 



England. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Thanks to you beyond 
expression, for the parcel of tracts, the envelopes, 
and then the TOWER, in quick succession. 
And I trust by a judicious use of them 
to disseminate the truth to those who are in 
bondage to sectarianism. As to the new appearance 
of my old favorite, the TOWER, I did not 
know its face, until I opened the cover, which 
made my eyes sparkle with joy. How good the 
motto— to bear the cross, then wear the crown. 
May we be found worthy. Yours in Christian 
fellowship, GEO. SHORT. 



R1301 : page 65 

VOL. XII. MAY, 1891. NO. 5. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Those of our readers who were not privileged 
to attend the Convention and Memorial Supper, 
recently held in Allegheny, will be anxious 
to learn something of it. 

It was a most blessed occasion in every sense 
of the word; and it was the general sentiment 
among those who had attended on previous occasions, 
that for spirituality this meeting not 
only surpassed any of the previous ones of the 
same order, but also any other religious convention 
they had ever attended. Truly it is good 
to be here, was the testimony of all. 

The attendance from surrounding towns and 
States was about 140. They came various distances 
—Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Virginia, West 
Virginia, Maryland, District of Columbia, Ontario, 
Manitoba, Nebraska, Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, 
and Kentucky being represented. A 
goodly proportion of our regular Allegheny 
congregation was also in constant attendance. 

The requests made in the March TOWER, that 
only those trusting in the merit of the precious 
blood of Christ should come, and that all coming 
should do so with a desire and prayer to do 
some good as well as to get some profit, seems 
to have been heeded. The spirit of meekness, 
gentleness, brotherly kindness and zeal for 
God's Word— all elements of the spirit of love 
—which pervaded the meetings and displayed 
itself privately as well as publicly, was very 
marked. Some, in the closing testimony meeting, 
said they had not supposed such perfect 
heart-union and sympathy possible on earth, 
especially in such a promiscuous gathering from 
far and near of people used to thinking for 
themselves, and without a bond of any sort except 
that of the spirit of the truth— the spirit 
of Christ— Love. 

The program announced in the March TOWER 
was carried out. The morning and evening 
sessions of the first day (Sunday, April 19th) 
were testimony meetings, and were truly feasts of 
fat things, spiritually. One after another, many 
related, briefly, how the Lord had graciously 
led them out of darkness into his marvelous light, 
into the sunshine of his truth, into love, into 



the fellowship of his sufferings and joys, and 
into the glorious and sustaining hope of ultimately 
attaining his likeness and joint-heirship 
with him in his Kingdom. Early in the first 
session it was decided by general consent that 
the trials, difficulties and discouragements, in 
which each one had a large experience, should 
be forgotten and passed by to give room for the 
more blessed consideration of our present joys 
and future hopes through the Anointed One, thus 
putting in practice the Apostle's injunction to 
forget those things which are behind and to 
reach forward for those things which are before, 
and thus to press along the course for the great 
prize of our high-calling, looking unto Jesus, the 
author and soon to be the finisher of our faith. 

R1301 : page 66 

Many of the testimonies will never be forgotten. 
They came from all classes and ages, and from 
those gathered out of nearly every sect of the 
nominal church, and from some reclaimed from 
Infidelity. Those who once called themselves 
Baptists, Methodists, Adventists, Episcopalians, 
Presbyterians, Roman Catholics and Infidels, 
here united their hearts and voices in praising 
God for leading them out of darkness and bondage 
into the marvelous light of present truth. 
Christians in the vigor of life joining with the 
aged and the new beginners formed a scene 
long to be remembered. One brother, with 
tears, told how he had once been an unbelieving 
blasphemer, how he had examined the creeds 
of the various sects, and had concluded that 
Christianity was a tissue of nonsense, but how 
the truth had finally reached him, how he at 
first treated it lightly, but how he was finally 
convinced and converted, and how he had given 
himself fully and unreservedly to God and his 
service, and was now trying to let the true light 
shine, by living a consistent Christian life and 
by scattering the reading matter through which, 
under the blessing of God, his gross darkness 
had been dispelled and the light of truth let 
into his heart. 

The discourse of Sunday afternoon was designed 
to show that while the whole armor of 
God, fastened with present truth, is necessary 
to those who would be overcomers of the world 
in this evil day, and will be supplied to all the 
consecrated ones seeking it, yet more than this 
is necessary. It is necessary that the spirit of 
the truth shall be received as well as the letter 
of the truth. The spirit of the truth was shown 
to signify the true, proper influence of the truth, 



the influence which God designed it should exert 

upon all who rightly receive it. The spirit 

of the truth is a spirit in full accord with the 

truth; a spirit or disposition which, so far from 

wishing to warp or twist the truth to suit former 

prejudices, gladly surrenders all else and seeks 

to know and to do in fullest harmony with God's 

will and plan. The spirit of the truth leads 

those possessed of it to count it all joy to sacrifice 

conveniences, time, money and influence in 

the service of the truth. And it was shown that 

none could have the full spirit of the truth without 

becoming a living sacrifice to its service, 

and thus following in the footsteps of Jesus. 

Then some scriptures were noticed which teach 

that all who do not become partakers of the 

spirit of the truth will surely lose the form of 

the truth and go into the outer darkness in 

which the world is enveloped— upon whom 

will come, in the great time of trouble now approaching, 

the chagrin, disappointment and vexation 

figuratively described as weeping and 

gnashing of teeth. 

The Master's words, recorded in John 15:2-6, 
were found to be in full accord with this. 
He there addresses only the consecrated ones, 
who have by faith and consecration been admitted 
into membership in the one true Church 
—as branches of the Vine, which is Christ. 
And his warning is explicit as to the only terms 
and conditions upon which this membership 
may be retained. "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit he [the Father, the great Husbandman] 
taketh away; and every branch that 
beareth fruit, he pruneth it, that it may bring 
forth more fruit." "If a man abide not in me, 
he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered." 

We noted carefully that while God in Christ 
had opened up the way and made it possible for 
us to become members of his body, his Church, 
yet the joining of that Church is our part under 
that arrangement, and can be accomplished only 
by a full consecration or baptism into his death. 
(Rom. 6:3). And we noted likewise that as 
no man could join us to Christ but ourselves 
only, so no man could "pluck us out" or separate 
us from Christ but ourselves only; and 
hence the admonition of the Lord, "Abide 
in me." The resemblance between this thought 
and that illustrated in the parable of the Wedding 
Garment was noted. The latter parable specially 
marks the present time, the end of the Gospel 
age, and shows how some will cease to abide 
in Christ by putting off the wedding garment- 
Christ's imputed righteousness. This we saw 
clearly fulfilling on every hand by some who, 



having been admitted into the light of present 
truth under and because of the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, are now discarding that robe by 
claiming that Christ's death was not a corresponding 
price (a ransom) or covering for our 

R1301 : page 67 

sins— thus attempting to stand before God without 
any imputed righteousness— standing, therefore, 
in all that they have left, which the 
Apostle pointedly describes as the filthy rags of 
their own righteousness. 

Such, we saw from the parable, were to be 
forced out of the light of present truth as unworthy 
to have part in the feast to which they 
had been admitted only because clothed in the 
garment of Christ's righteousness. And having 
ceased to abide in Christ, the Vine, they can no 
longer bear the real fruit. 

We noted, too, the words of the Apostle regarding 
this evil day, as to how God would send 
strong delusions for the very purpose of separating, 
cutting off, such branches as do not bear 
fruit— such as receive the truth, but not the spirit 
of it, the love of it. Then, remembering the 
justice and love of the great Husbandman, we 
sought to ascertain what principle he recognized 
when he would thus send strong delusions to 
cut off and cast forth some whom he declares 
no man can separate from him and his love, or 
pluck out of his care, or sever from membership 
in Christ. We found the answer in the Master's 
words: "Every branch in me that beareth not 
fruit he taketh away." 

Seeing, then, the importance of this fruit-bearing 
quality in God's estimation, we sought the 
meaning of the words "fruit," and "much fruit." 
We found that the fruits of the spirit are Meekness, 
Gentleness, Patience, Brotherly Kindness, 
Love; and that these develop gradually, and 
not instantaneously— that as with the grapes, 
first came a fruit-bud of promise, next the flower, 
next the tiny green grape, next the developed 
but unripened fruit, and lastly the ripe, luscious 
fruit, so with these fruits of the spirit: 
they are all the same fruit, Love, only in various 
stages of development, just as the flower and 
the green grape are developments toward the 
fully ripe grape. 

The husbandman, as he looks at a new branch, 
does not expect to find immediately a ripe cluster 
of grapes; nor does the great Husbandman 
expect perfect Love in a new branch or member 
of the body of Christ. But as the fruit-bud is 
looked for very early, and the branch which has 



none is counted merely "a sucker," and is cut 
off from being a member of the vine, so, says 
the Great Teacher, will be God's dealing with 
those who have joined the body of Christ: if 
they put forth no effort to bear the fruits of the 

R1302:page67 

spirit, they can have no place among the branches. 

We noted, too, a difference between the present 
probationary membership and the full membership 
in the Church of Christ as it will be 
when glorified, neither a member too many nor 
one too few. They shall be pillars in the temple 
of God to go no more out forever. We saw 
that the Church in its present condition of 
trial or probation contains many who will not 
be accounted worthy of a place in the glorified 
Church of the Kingdom— the real bride. 
We saw that all who come unto the Father 
through the merit of the Son (during the acceptable 
time) are accepted and counted in as 
probationary members of the one Church; that 
their names are recorded as such in heaven; 
that crowns are apportioned to all these; and 
that if they do not attain full, everlasting 
membership and glory with Christ, the fault will 
be entirely their own. And in this connection 
each seemed to hear the Master's words: I will 
not blot out the names of the overcomers who 
abide in me and bring forth fruit; and also 
his warning: Take heed, let no man take thy 
crown. 

These considerations seemed to stir up all to 
greater attention to fruit-bearing, and especially 
to hastening forward the full ripe fruit of Love, 
which every branch must bear to be worthy of a 
place in the glorified Church. We marked the 
tendency of even fruit-bearing branches to reach 
out and take hold of other things than those 
provided for their support by the husbandman, 
and noted the same tendency among the consecrated 
to seek supports outside the Word of 
God and to lay hold upon the things of this 
world. Yet we felt encouraged by the Master's 
assurance that if we are really fruit-bearers the 
great Husbandman will prune us, cut us loose 
from all things contrary to his truth and to our 
best interests, and will thus make us more faithful. 
We rejoiced, then, in the loving care of 
God which keeps all who abide in the Vine, and 
which will not cut off from membership in Christ 
any who bear fruit. 

R1302:page68 



Finally, we examined what must be the use of 
the ripe fruit; and we saw that as the ripe grapes 
are always sacrificed, thus to yield pleasure and 
profit to others, so Love, fully ripe Love, always 
leads those who possess it to sacrifice themselves 
—first, to the will and pleasure of the Lord, 
the Husbandman, and secondly, to the pleasure 
and profit of those to whom he sends them to minister. 
This showed us that all possessing the 
real spirit of the truth, Love, must be active 
sacrificers of self in the service of the Truth; 
and when we remembered how this was the very 
spirit of our Master, we gladly owned that to 
have the spirit of the Truth is to have the spirit 
of Christ— Love. 

Monday the 20th and Wednesday the 22nd 
were all-day sessions with intermissions for necessary 
physical food. They were devoted to the 
answering of questions, because it was believed 
that in that way a larger field of investigation 
could be covered than in any other. The questions 
were plentiful, and generally of a sort that 
indicated deep thought, and careful study of the 
plan of the ages. 

Tuesday's meetings: In the forenoon a discussion 
on "Baptism— the real and the symbolic" 
was followed by an opportunity for 
questions on the subject from those contemplating 
obedience to the watery symbol. The 
afternoon session was fully occupied by the 
immersion of such as desired thus to symbolize 
their death with Christ, their begetting to the 
new nature and their hope of full birth to the 
divine likeness as sharers with Christ in his 
resurrection. (Phil. 3:10,11.) It was deeply 
impressive to see first fifteen sisters and then 
thirty-six brethren buried in the water in 
the likeness of death and raised from it in the 
likeness of a resurrection to newness of life. 

Most of those immersed were Christians of 
long experience and well advanced in years, the 
youngest being a brother in his twentieth year. 
These, recognizing the force of the symbol, 
of their own choice, without any constraint, 
desired to follow the Master in the symbol 
as well as in the reality. The solemn scene of 
this token of the entire consecration of fifty-one 
of the Lord's dear children to his blessed service 
was one never to be forgotten. 

Following this service, the immersed ones 
gathered in the front of the chapel, and, in the 
name of the one Lord and the one Church, his 
body, consisting of all the faithful consecrated 
ones, from Pentecost to the present, they were 
accorded the right hand of fellowship. May the 
sweet memories of that occasion long abide 



with each of them and with us all. 

On Tuesday evening, the anniversary of our 
Lord's last Passover Supper, we celebrated the 
memorial of his great sacrifice as our Paschal 
Lamb— the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world. There were about three 
hundred present. The significance of the emblems 
representing the flesh and blood of our 
Redeemer was shown, and how his sacrifice of 
the human nature and its rights was for us, that 
we, who had lost these in Adam, might receive 
them back again as the gift of God through 
Christ, our Lord. It was explained that our 
eating (partaking) of the merit and rights thus 
provided was by faith— an acceptance and appropriation 
of his ransom-sacrifice, and of the 
blessings thus secured, by each. 

Then we looked further and saw that the emblems, 
as explained by the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:16), 
represent not only the death of our 
Lord Jesus as our ransom, but also our participation 
with him in death— not as ransomers, but 
merely as joint-sacrificers with him, that we 
might be accounted worthy also to be his joint-heirs 
in the glory of his Kingdom. We seemed 
to hear him explain that to drink of his cup 
meant on our part a pledge to die with him; and 
then his inquiry, Are ye able to drink of the 
cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized with? 
And our hearts replied in the words of James 
and John, We are able. We pledged ourselves 
to faithfulness to him, to his Word and to all 
the fellow-members of his body, and then rejoiced 
to hear his assurance, Ye shall indeed 
drink of my cup and be baptized with my baptism. 
We sang in conclusion that precious old 
hymn— 

"Sweet the moments, rich in blessing, 

Which before the cross I spend; 
Life and health and peace possessing 
From the sinner's dying Friend." 

R1302:page69 

Then we quietly adjourned to our abodes, reflecting 
the while upon the scenes and incidents 
of eighteen centuries ago— Gethsemane, 
Pilate's judgment-seat, and Calvary. 

The succeeding days were devoted chiefly to 
the Colporteur work and to private counselling 
with those who desired to enter it. The interest 
in the Colporteur work seems to be growing. 
Several persons, by previous arrangement, 
started out to give their lives thenceforth as missionaries 
in this, which more and more seems to 



commend itself as the best method of preaching 
the gospel at the present time. Beside these, 
some nine others declared their desire to engage 
all their talents in this fruitful quarter of the 
harvest field, and left the convention determined, 
by the grace of God, to lay aside present 
weights and hindrances, and to shape their affairs 
so that they may soon be able to give their 
entire time to the work of spreading the good 
tidings, and thus serving the Lord by helping his 
body, the consecrated Church. Thus it is that the 
Bride is to make herself ready.— Rev. 19:7. 

The Colporteurs' meetings included several 
lessons and illustrations of the best methods of 
presenting MILLENNIAL DAWN to the attention 
of the people so as to interest them without exciting 
their prejudices. The more experienced 
and more successful of the Colporteurs in this 
way did great service to the less experienced and 
less successful, and thus to the cause in general. 

We have heard from a number of those who 
were present from a distance, since their return 
to their homes, that the blessed influence of the 
meetings, as a sweet perfume, abides with them 
as a foretaste of the General Assembly of the 
Church of the First-born Ones, whose names are 
written in heaven. 



R1302:page69 

JOS. RABINOWITZ AND HIS MISSION TO ISRAEL. 



THE REPORT OF THE LONDON COUNCIL 
FOR AIDING HIS WORK, FOR 
THE YEAR 1890. 

During the last few months the persecutions and 
sufferings of the Jews in Russia have called forth 
the deep sympathy of the English nation. No 
philanthropist can read the descriptions of their 
manifold and severe trials without profound 
pity. To the student of God's Word they suggest 
solemn thoughts. They remind him both 
of the "severity of God," and of the wonderful 
purpose of mercy, which will finally be made 
manifest. The condition of Israel is, indeed, 
very sad; yet amidst all the political, social, 
moral and physical evils which oppress them, 
we can see the upholding and sheltering faithfulness 
of the God of Abraham; we can trace 
indications of the blessed influence of the law 
of God, which they still reverence and study; 



and we have reason to hope that in the furnace 
of affliction some are led to inquire into the 
meaning of God's dealings with his people 
during the long period of their exile. We are 
thankful that at a time like the present the testimony 
of our dear Brother Joseph Rabinowitz 
continues to go forth with great clearness and 

R1303 : page 69 

power. And while the injustice and cruelty 
which they suffer must greatly deepen and embitter 
the opposition of the Jews to Christianity, 
the present distress seems to incline many to 
listen eagerly to the voice of one of their brethren, 
who, filled with a deep love to his nation, 
directs them to Jesus, as to the promised 
Messiah, and unfolds to them the testimony of 
Scripture. 

Since the publication of our last statement, 
the new Hall has been finished, in which the 
meetings of the Congregation of the New Covenant 
are to be held. 

The following document, in the Hebrew language, 
was placed in the foundation stone, and 
will be read with deep interest by all who love 
Israel and pray for the conversion of God's 
people: 

"1. Every house is builded by some man; 
but he that built all things is God."— 
Heb. 3:4. 

"2. The stone which the builders rejected 
has become the head-stone of the corner."— 
Psa. 118:22. 

"3. Not by might, nor by power, but by 
my Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts."— 
Zech. 4:6. 

R1303 : page 70 

"4. The foundation of this house to the 
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who forever 
reigneth over the house of Jacob, was laid by a 
Hebrew, Joseph, son of David Rabinowitz, on 
the coronation day of the exalted Emperor of 
Russia (may he prolong his days and be prosperous), 
on the 15th day of May, by the help 
and money support contributed by the brethren 
in the Lord that dwell at London, Edinburgh 
and Glasgow, in the land of Great Britain, in order 
to preserve (literally, increase) the name and 
remembrance of that dear man and servant of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Rev. A. N. Somerville, 
D.D., who, in his great love towards the 
Jews, came in the month of February, 1888, and 
visited Rabinowitz in the city of Kischineff to 



hear from his mouth the word which he proclaimeth 
to the Jews. 

"Tuesday, the 15th day of the 5th month, 
May, 1890 years since the birth of the Messiah, 
in the city of Bethlehem, Judah." 

In a letter dated November 6th, Mr. Rabinowitz 
gives the following retrospect of the last 
six years: 

"The beginning of my labors among Israel 
was not owing to the influence of any church 
or person, but solely through the grace, compassion 
and love of God, which convinced me 
that the synagogue and the wisdom of the Jews 
were utterly unable to bring help to our nation, 
and that the only salvation was in Jesus Christ, 
who is the Redeemer of each individual soul 
and the Messiah of Israel. This direct and 
personal origin of my labors has given to them 
a peculiar character, different from the ordinary 
missionary methods, and providentially the 
method thus assigned to me is more in accordance 
with the political and legal condition of 
Russia. 

"My one desire from the beginning was to 
bring my brethren into contact with the words 
of Christ, which are spirit and life, that by the 
power of the Holy Spirit they may believe in 
Jesus, the Son of the living God. 

"In order to lead my brethren, who were 
languishing in the exhausted atmosphere of the 
synagogue, to the reviving fountain of the divine 
Word, as we possess it in the Scriptures, 
it was necessary to possess a meeting-place, separated 
from the synagogue and distinct from the 
existing churches. 

"It seems a small thing in itself, but it is of 
great importance to the work of evangelization, 
that by God's mercy the Russian Government 
has allowed us to meet as a congregation of 
Israelites of the New Covenant and to build a 
hall for our services. For six years we have 
met, and in the same place the services have 
been held, and I can now trace the effects on 
the synagogue and on the churches. 

"The synagogue excommunicated me in 
1884, and the Jewish papers predicted that I 
would have no hearers except my brother. Instead 
of this my Hall has been a centre, where 
every Saturday public services are attended by 
a large number of Jewish men, women, and 
youths, to listen to the Gospel of Jesus Christ 
and to worship the Father in the name of our 
Lord. 

"The synagogue notices that the Hebrew 
language, which is still regarded by the Jewish 
nation as sacred, is at present more in the service 



and to the glory of the Gospel, than of 
the Talmud and Judaism. My hearers openly 
express their conviction that they never heard 
before the true meaning of Scripture. We can 
see indications of misgivings on the part of the 
synagogue that Israel is about to free itself from 
the fetters of Talmudism and to follow the example 
of us children of the New Covenant. 
One leading member of the Jewish synagogue 
congratulated me cordially, when he saw our 
beautiful new Hall, and wished me success in 
my work, adding: 'I am convinced that our 
leaders are in error and unable to help us.' 
Another earnest Jew, when he entered our Hall, 
exclaimed, 'This does feel like a holy place.' 
(Ex. 3:5.) This impression is not confined to 
Kischineff and Bessarabia, but it is throughout 
the whole of Russia, as is evident from letters 
received by me from earnest Israelites in all 
parts of our Empire." 

Mr. Rabinowitz explains the difficulties he has 
had to encounter in maintaining his position of 
perfect independence from all "churches," 
and laboring quietly in the simple testimony 
of Christ to his brethren. 

Another feature, noticed by Mr. Rabinowitz, is 
the remarkable change in the attitude of the 
Jews toward himself and the other believing 
Israelites. Instead of the bitter opposition and 
undisguised contempt of former days, they meet 
now with respect and kindness. The behavior 
of the Jews who attend the services is strikingly 
calm and reverent. The New Testament is 
read in many houses, and the Lord's prayer 
offered in Hebrew, and many verses of the New 
Testament are known by heart. "Some years 
ago," says Mr. Rabinowitz, "I was pelted with 
stones and mud by hundreds of Jews, and now, 
from the highest to the lowest, respect and kindness 
are shown to me, and there is great willingness 
to speak on the truths of the Scripture." 

R1303 : page 71 

During the months when the new Hall was 
being built, much interest was excited, and it 
became the occasion of many discussions on 
the teaching of Rabinowitz. The fact of a permanent 
meeting-place being built greatly impressed 
the Jews, as a sign of his fixed purpose 
to devote himself to the work of the Gospel 
among Israel. We can sympathize with our 
dear brother when he writes: "I cannot describe 
to you in words the hope that gladdens 
my heart now I possess this beautiful and quietly 
situated Hall, and our own printing press. I 



intend to have, besides the meetings on the 
Sabbath day, two public meetings during the 
week for Bible teaching, also to have some 
classes for young men and conversational meetings 
with strangers passing through our town." 

A very important branch of Mr. Rabinowitz's 
work is the publication of his interesting and instructive 
addresses, which are peculiarly adapted 
to the Jewish mind. Of these pamphlets there 
have appeared sixteen numbers in Hebrew and 
Jargon. Twenty-seven thousand two hundred 
copies have been printed, and the stock is nearly 
exhausted. 

The friends of Israel will unite with us in 
thanksgiving, that the Lord has raised up our 
brother and upheld him in his important work, 
which is full of difficulties and daily trials. The 
Word of God is his strength, and by constant 
meditation and prayer his own heart is sustained 
and refreshed, so that he is able to preach Jesus 
with joyful opening of his lips. We long to 
hear of far greater blessing, and to see the power 
of the Word in bringing Israel to repentance 
and faith. ADOLPH SAPHIR. 



R1304:page71 

A SEASONABLE WORD ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 

FROM BROTHER W. E. PAGE. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Meeting so much 
"Christian Science" out this way, I was led to 
investigate the basis of its claims by the lamp 
of the Word, and I find it a most noxious weed. 
First, for my own profit, I wrote out what I 
found, and have since remodeled and chiseled 
it down. You may find good use for it as 
it is, or can use it as a foundation for a criticism 
in the TOWER on this most manifest perversion. 
I send it to you for such use as you deem best. 
Put it in the waste basket if that is the best 
place for it, and do not hesitate a moment to 
tell me so, if these articles bother more than 
they help. I only want to do good work, but 
with our weak judgments we cannot always discern 
where we help and where we hinder. 

The Lord is gracious to us, bearing with us 
in our infirmities, and ever and anon giving us 
deep draughts at the fountain of truth, and its 
blessings of peace and love in justification and 
sanctification. O! that this year may prove the 
one of most sincere consecration and abundant 
zeal to us all, who are of this way. 



May grace and mercy and peace be multiplied 
to you, your household, and the brethren and 
sisters with you. 

Yours in fellowship, W. E. PAGE. 



When presenting various features of the Father's 
great "Plan of the Ages," we have not 
infrequently met professed believers in Christ 
who seemed to accept the truth, and apparently 
warranted expectations of full fellowship. 
However, as the acquaintance grew, an almost 
indefinable barrier to communion would arise; 
and being anxious to receive those whom the 
Lord sends (Matt. 10:40), and desiring to esteem 
all professed brethren as most worthy 
(Phil. 2:3), we have often been perplexed and 
in straits as to what course we should pursue in 
our association with them. The grounds of the 
older sects are so well defined that we have but 
little difficulty in understanding our proper attitude 
toward them; nor is there particular 
danger of confusion from those forms of error 
which plainly and fairly present their teachings 
in well defined terms. Since our eyes were 
anointed that we might understand present privileges 
and labors (Rev. 3:18), we have been 
most perplexed and confused by the newer 
forms of doctrine which, on investigation, we 
find deny the Lord that bought them (2 Pet. 2:1), 
while with much feigned reverence and 
humility they profess allegiance to him, thus 
falsely presenting themselves as angels of light 
—messengers of truth. (2 Cor. 11:13-15.) 
However considerate we may desire to be, when 
we meet such false, seductive teaching, we must, 
without strife and to the best of our ability, unmask 

R1304:page72 

it (2 Tim. 2:24-26), and be careful neither 

in word nor deed to wish it God-speed (2 John 9-11), 

remembering that it is required in stewards, 

that a man be found faithful.— 1 Cor. 4:2. 

One of the most wide-spread of these later 
forms of subtle error that we meet is "Christian 
Science." Many of its votaries are kind, well-intentioned 
people, but they are completely 
blinded by the perversions of the system; and 
we believe many such will gladly free themselves 
from this dominion of the Devil, when the 
shackles of ignorance and prejudice which now 
bind them are stricken off in the advancing light 
of this dawning day. As our conclusions and the 
grounds for them may be of use to some others 



of the brethren who may be perplexed as to the 
proper attitude they should assume towards this 
heresy, we have decided, with the Lord's help, 
to present what we have found. Our quotations 
on the subject are wholly from the writings 
of a Mrs. Eddy, who is the chief apostle of 
the various forms of this doctrine, which are 
legion. 

When setting forth our faith regarding the 
"restitution of all things," and God's wonderful 
plan for selecting the "Seed" which is to 
bless all nations, to those entangled in this 
doctrine, we almost invariably meet with the 
claim, "That is just what we believe; you must 
be a Scientist." The claim is so sincerely made 
that we are led to hope that we have met with 
another grain of wheat. To make sure of our 
ground, we present the ransom and its necessity, 
which seem to meet their approval, yet 
from various remarks, especially those made in 
a general way, we are conscious of a vital disagreement, 
somewhere, on the fundamental principles 
of the Lord Jesus' work. A short investigation 
into Mrs. Eddy's work disclosed the 
cause for this, and developed the fact that her 
teachings are based upon private meanings put 
upon words. Hence, when we present our 
views to one of her followers, the words we 
employ do not convey our meaning to them, 
and until we learn this, and find out what interpretation 
they put upon our words, we are 
sorely perplexed. Mrs. Eddy very cunningly 
lays the foundation for her master-piece of word-jugglery, 
as follows: 

"Aside from the opposition to what is new, 
the greatest difficulty in introducing our metaphysical 
system is to express metaphysics in 
physical terms and then be understood physically. 
This difficulty is overcome only by teaching 
the student the metaphysical meaning of terms in 
common use." 

What a preparation to deceive! Surely any 
teaching that must rest on special meanings 
placed on "terms in common use," should arouse 
the suspicions of those who are sincere and pure 
in heart. The Master did not find it necessary 
to employ so questionable a course, but so taught 
that the "common people heard him gladly." 

In examining Mrs. Eddy's teachings, we do 
not follow the order of her books, but take up 
the essential truths she perverts, as seems best. 
Among Webster's definitions of person we 
find, "A self-conscious being;" and being is 
defined as "existence, opposed to non-existence; 
that which exists in any way, whether it be 
material or spiritual;" and we submit that the 



universally accepted meaning of person today 

is, "a self-conscious being." Again, we submit 

that to the unprejudiced and candid reader 

the unqualified teaching of the Bible, in language 

in common use, is that God is the great 

and only self-existent, "self-conscious being." 

But Mrs. Eddy says, "Jehovah is not a person. 
God is principle." How elusive and vague this is! 
The first meaning in Webster given to principle 
and which is marked obsolete and rare, is, 
"beginning, commencement;" second, "hence 
a source or origin; that from which anything proceeds; 
fundamental substance or energy;" and 
third, "an original faculty or endowment of the 
soul." Ah yes! "The serpent was more subtle 
than all the beasts of the field." (Gen. 3:1.) 
How this cunningly-laid perversion illustrates 
his full subtlety! While we stand aghast at the 
bold belittling of the great Jehovah, we cannot 
but wonder at the consummate skill shown. 
(Read Ezekiel 28:12-19.) We know that God 
is the source of all good things: he from whom 
every right thing proceeds: the self-existent, 
"self-conscious being," possessing and originating 
all qualities of moral perfection. Owing 
to the inexactness of language, the wedge of 
error here introduced (if, as common people, 
we follow Webster) is very slim, and not readily 

R1304:page73 

detected at first glance. If not detected, the 

next step will entangle the unwary very seriously. 

To the alert, however, the danger is not so 

great as it seems; for Mrs. Eddy does not accept 

the common meaning of the word principle, 

but proceeds to put a private interpretation upon 

it. Following her statement regarding Jehovah, 

she defines principle as "life, truth, love, substance 

and intelligence." These (in language 

in common use) are all qualities or attributes of 

beings; and thus God is reduced to the position 

of the sum of certain qualities of conscious existence, 

and is dethroned from his rightful 

position as the Creator of all these qualities. 

Those misled by these teachings are speedily so 

befogged that they are utterly unable to discern 

between honest treatment of the Scriptures and 

this woful perversion of them. 

Having dethroned God, the next natural step 
is the deification of man; and this work these 
teachings do in a less subtle form, and in one 
more easily followed, although the word-twisting 
is dexterously kept up. Webster defines entity 
as "a real being, whether in thought or 
in fact: being, essence, existence." Mrs. Eddy 



says— "Entity signifies the particular nature of 

being; and God, without the image and likeness 

of himself, NAMED MAN, would be nonentity" 

—without existence. Following this we 

give from her book a series of quotations deifying 

man. 

"God cannot destroy man, because he is the 
reflection of God." "The science of being 
reveals man perfect, even as the Father is perfect." 
"If man went out for a single instant 
in death, or sprang from nothingness into existence, 
there was an instant some time without 
man, when Jehovah was without entity and there 
was no reflection of Mind or Soul, and Principle 
had no idea." "God, Soul, is, and was, 
and ever will be; and man is co-existent and co-eternal 
with this Soul." "The science of man, 
understood, would have eradicated sin, sickness 
and death in a less period than six thousand 
years." 

Surely pride and boastfulness could assume no 
more than is here claimed. None of the "meek" 
would arrogate such position and virtue to 
themselves. To show the foolishness and the 
fruit of such exaltation of man, we quote the 
following: 

Man is "The infinite idea of infinite Spirit,... 
the spiritual image and likeness of God,... 
the full representation of Mind: hence the idea 
of Principle, not person. [Man is] The compound 
idea of God, including all other ideas, 
the generic term for all that reflects God's image 
and likeness. ...Woman is the highest term for 
man. ...[Man is] The conscious identity of 
being as found in Science, where man is the reflection 
of God, Mind, and therefore is eternal; 
that which hath no separate mind from God; 
that which hath not a single quality underived 
from Deity; that possesses no life, intelligence, 
or creative power of his own, but reflects all that 
belongs to his Maker." 

'"And God said let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness: and let them have dominion 
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, and over all the earth, and over every 
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth' 
(Gen. 1:26)— what is incapable of sin, sickness 
and death, in so much as it derives its esse from 
God, and possesses not a single original or underived 
power: hence, cannot depart from holiness. 
Nor can God from out himself, whence 
man was evolved, engender a capacity or freedom 
to sin. In divine Science, God and man 
are inseparable, as PRINCIPLE AND ITS IDEA." 

Of course this enthronement of man necessitates 
a perversion of the entire Scripture teaching 



regarding his creation and fall. To allay 

the suspicions that might arise if this work were 

too abruptly done, the approach is very gradually 

made, and the error introduced under 

high pretensions to spirituality and learning. As 

a sample we quote the following: 

"As crude forms of mortal mind yield to 
higher significations, the metaphysical Genesis 
of the Scripture will be hailed with head and 
heart. The following brief comments are the 
spiritual or scientific version of the text." 

Space forbids full quotation, and we simply 
give the "spiritual or scientific version" of the 
fall, set forth by Mrs. Eddy as the true meaning 
of the account in Genesis 3:1-5, as follows: 

"The serpent is introduced into the Scriptural 
record without any specified origin; but some 
maintain he was a veritable demon, even the 
climax of subtlety and falsehood, created by a 
perfect and divine spirit.... Adam, or error, 
even the belief of mind in matter, began 
this reign of mortal man somewhat mildly, increasing 
in jealousy and falsehood until his days 
were numbered by the law of Truth, and the 
mortality of error made manifest. The garden 

R1304:page74 

was a term used to signify the body, in the first 
records of Mythology; sexuality and self-abuse 
the forbidden knowledge. Man was not to presume 
upon the prerogatives of his Creator, but 
to recognize God, the Father and Mother of us 
all— Compare with Genesis 3:4,5. 

"This Allegory represents error in every one 
of its beliefs, always asserting itself as Truth 
and over Truth: and giving the lie to Truth, 
saying, I can open your eyes, I can do more for 
you than God (good) has done. Bow down to 
me, have other gods, admit I am right, and more 
real to the senses, pleasant to the eyes and more 
to be desired than Truth. The history of Adam, 
or error, is a dream without a dreamer: 
first, a supposition of assertion; secondly, that 
nothing says I am something; and third, that 
something springs from nothing, and is life, substance 
and intelligence. The order of the allegory 
describing the mythological creation, even 
a creation springing from dust instead of Deity, 
is maintained in about this form. Mortal man, 
starting from chaos, or old night, from the lowest 
propensities; non-intelligence becoming intelligence; 
the basal portions of its formations 
of mind indicating the appetites and passions: 
its upper portions the sentiments, implying the 
hope that mind will sometime escape from matter, 



giving a material sense of things as the 

sense of mind, and matter having dominion 

over mind: body originating in non-intelligence, 

and mind afterward inserted, the creation a 

propagating principle in vegetable and animal, 

alias God in matter, or matter without God: a 

man's life consisting of the things that he eateth, 

and having no connection with God, Spirit; 

his senses unable to perceive Spirit, and 

matter dooming them to die. This mythological 

history of man, so unlike the scientific 

record of man as the image and likeness of God, 

having dominion over the earth, and whose 

Mother is Spirit, first creates man of dust, and 

without a Mother, afterwards gives him a Mother 

who is governed by mesmerism, controlled by a 

belief, called serpent, her origin a rib, her capacity 

for knowledge gathered through material 

sense and from the tree of knowledge, whereof 

if a man eat he shall die, and her progeny, self-constituted 

suicides, hastening towards death in 

pursuit of life. The word Adam, divided into two 

syllables and reading A-dam, indicates more 

closely the character and the curse of the divine 

spirit, or Mother of man bestowed upon it." 

The fall being "spiritualized" out of existence, 
and man being "perfect even as the Father," 
there is no necessity for a man, Christ 
Jesus, to give his "life," a ransom— a corresponding 
price— "for the life of the world," 
and to redeem the race with his precious blood. 
Hence Christ Jesus, the Anointed Savior, simply 
becomes a fine example, a "good man." We 
quote again from Mrs. Eddy: 

"Jesus was the son of a virgin mother by 
whom scientific being was so far understood that 
she knew that God was the Father of man, and 
man the offspring of a divine Principle. Jesus 
was the name of the man, and Christ but another 
name for God, the Principle and creator 
of that man. The signification of God being 
'good' (?!), the term Christ Jesus may be 
rendered as good man, or God-man." 

Christ not being a ransom-sacrifice, no atonement 
work was done by him, and a new signification 
must be found for the Scripture teaching 
that he is the "propitiation [satisfaction] for 
the sin of the world." (1 John 2:2.) To keep 
the case clearly before us we will give Webster's 
definition of the word atonement, and then its 
"spiritual" signification as given by Mrs. Eddy. 

"Atonement: (Webster) Reconciliation after 
enmity or controversy. Satisfaction or reparation 
made by giving an equivalent for an 
injury." 

"Atonement: (Mrs. Eddy) The teachings, demonstrations 



and sufferings of the man Jesus, when 
showing mortals the way of salvation from sin, 
sickness and death. ...Soul's triumph over 
material sense. The supremacy of spirit asserted, 
man reassuming the image and likeness of God 
in his scientific atonement with him. Jesus of 
Nazareth gave the all-important proof that when 
God is understood, it will be seen that Soul 
creates its own body, and cannot for the smallest 
instant do without a body. This divine 
Science overcame death and the grave, and was 
Jesus' final demonstration that the body is the 
same after as before death: hence there is a 
state of probation and progress, whereby to grow 
out of a material and into the spiritual sense of 
existence beyond the grave. The meek, mighty 
Nazarene exhibited a material body after the 
crucifixion, to show his followers the great need 
there is of spiritualizing thought and action to 
make man God-like before death, that after it 
he may be fit for the higher school of the just 
made perfect. Not death, but the understanding 
of Life, God, spiritualizes man, and determines 
forever his progress and the state of his 
body. Mortality disappearing, and immortality 
coming to life. Self-abnegation and love blessing 
its enemies. Not blood flowing from the 
veins of Jesus, but his out-flowing sense of life, 
truth and love, so much higher, purer and more 
God-like than mankind's, shedding its hallowed 

R1304:page75 

influence on the whole human race and marking 
out the only way to heaven. Not the death of 
the cross, but the cross-bearing deathless life, 
that Jesus left for the example of mankind, 
ransoms from sin all who follow it." 

Salvation from the present "evil world" Mrs. 
Eddy thus makes a matter of works, and is not 
through faith in Jesus, as taught by the apostles. 
Thus the Adversary again undertakes to 
set forth "another gospel, which is not another." 
-Gal. 1:8,9. 

Again she says, "The way is straight and narrow 
that leads to the understanding that God is life. 
It is warfare with the flesh whereby we conquer 
sin, sickness and death, now or hereafter; but 
certainly before we can reach the goal of Spirit 
or Life, which is God. The truth of man makes 
a new creature. Old things have passed away, 
behold all things become new. Passions, selfish 
appetites and every sensuality yield to spirituality, 
and the balance of being is on the side of 
God. Christian perfection is won on no other 
basis. The scientific unity between God and 



man must be wrought out in demonstration." 

Man being "co-existent and co-eternal with 
God," death must be an illusion, and is so set 
forth: 

"Death: an illusion; there is no death. Matter 
has no life, hence it cannot die, and mind is 
immortal. The flesh warring against spirit frets 
itself free from one belief only to be fettered by 
some other one, until all belief yields to the 
understanding of God. Any material evidence 
of death is false, for it contradicts the spiritual 
facts of life. The unreal and untrue. The opposite 
of God, or life." 

The fall and death being done away with, 
there cannot, of course, be any resurrection from 
among the dead, or raising of the race up to 
something lost in Adam. Hence in this new 
"Science" resurrection becomes mere development. 
We quote her definition of resurrection 
as follows: 

"Resurrection: spiritualization of thought; a 
new and higher idea of immortality or spiritual 
existence. Material belief yielding to spiritual 
understanding." 

Those taught of God can have no difficulty 
in tracing the sinuous course of that "old dragon," 
in these unstable and unlearned perversions 
of Scripture, which soon cause their teachers 
to become "raging waves of the sea, foaming 
out their own shame." Those who have watched 
the effect of these doctrines upon those proclaiming 
them readily discern that the "evil 
tree" is yielding its proper fruit. 

Again, Mrs. Eddy sets forth her claimed many 
miracles of healing as the basis of her religion, 
and the proof of its divine origin. To those 
uninstructed in the way of truth, this claim is 
very weighty, and many are ensnared by it. 
These, seeing no wisdom in the permission of 
evil, and having no conception of the great 
things God has in store for those who, under the 
severest tests, maintain a love for righteousness 
and a hatred of wickedness, quickly fall in this 
evil day of subtle sophistries. Supposing "Godliness 
to be gain," i.e., a means to secure present 
temporal ease in finances or social life, freedom 
from aches and pains, etc., some, in their 
eagerness to escape from the hardship of enduring 
unfavorable conditions, are blinded to the opportunity 
for discipline thus offered, and rush 
headlong into any specious promise of relief 
that is made, without applying the rules and tests 
provided in the "sure word of prophecy," and 
are quickly ensnared by the Adversary. Being 
one of the highest order of God's created beings, 
who wilfully left his first estate and does 



iniquity (Ezek. 28:12-15), the devil can loosen 

the bonds of suffering on those who give heed 

to his seductive teachings, until he gains full 

and complete control of their moral powers, 

and can thus use them as his pliant, even if unsuspecting 

tools, simply releasing them temporarily 

to gain his own purposes. When these are 

served, or when the time for binding him has 

fully arrived (Rev. 20:2,3), he will execute 

his full malignity, not only upon his own willing 

coadjutors, but also upon those who have 

been his dupes. We unhesitatingly brand this 

whole system of Christian Science, so-called, as 

another form of spiritualism put forth by the 

father of lies, who is a liar from the beginning. 

That there is a power, even superhuman, in it, 

we admit; but we believe it is the power of Satan, 

the great deceiver of men, which will be 

used only for the destruction of man. 

[Satan's dominion is a dominion of death, 
and he undoubtedly has the power to slightly 
relieve the sick when his delusive purposes and 
doctrines would be best subserved thereby. 
(Heb. 2: 14.) The fact that Satan's kingdom 

R1304:page76 

and its methods are thus divided and in opposition 
—working evil, sin and death as ever, and 
at the same time turning in to heal the sick 
in order the more securely to bind and blind his 
dupes in subtle errors— shows that "the god of 
this world" realizes that his reign of sin, ignorance, 
superstition and death is nearly at an 
end.-EDITOR.] 

Let God's children beware lest they be entangled 
by this siren song. The system perverts 
everything it touches, and not even the 
Lord's prayer escapes its contamination. For 
the information of the brethren, we give the following 
"spiritualized" version of it. 

"Principle, eternal and harmonious, 

Nameless and adorable intelligence, 

Thou art ever present and supreme. 

And when this Supremacy of Spirit 

Shall appear, the dream of matter will 
disappear. 

Give us the understanding of truth and love; 

And loving we shall learn God, 

And truth will destroy all error, 

And lead us into the life, that is soul, 

And deliver us from the errors of sense, 

Sin, sickness and death. 

For God is life, truth and love, forever." 
Trusting completely in our Lord, the Anointed 
Savior, who has bought us with his precious 



blood, we can quickly escape this evil, and 
enter into and retain a present rest in Christ, 
and be prepared for that perfect and everlasting 
rest that "remaineth for the people of God."— 
Heb. 4:9,10; Isa. 26:3; Psa. 91. 



R1304 : page 76 

A VOICE FROM THE JEWS. 



The American Hebrew Free Thinkers' Association 
has just published an altogether notable 
utterance. It was brought out in reply to an article 
by a Jewish Rabbi, arguing that Jesus was 
either a myth or an impostor. This association 
appointed three of its number to examine this 
attack on Jesus and to report their views of it. 

Their remarkable report states substantially 
that Christianity cannot be a fraud or delusion, 
because it has stood all tests, and has gone ever 
forward with giant strides until it is now the 
most liberal and progressive religion the world 
has ever seen— a religion adapted to every 
country and every people on the globe; that 
this progress is an occasion of wonder to 
the Jews themselves; that this world would 
have been in a sorry condition had not the religion 
of Jesus come into it; that Christianity 
broke down the Jewish narrowness and bigotry 
which sought only the welfare of the Jews and 
despised all others; that the Jews to-day enjoy 
the greatest benefits in those countries where 
the people live nearest up to the teachings of 
Jesus Christ; that his teachings, whether he be 
a myth or a reality, do without doubt improve 
all who follow them; that the Christian religion 
to-day shows no sign of weakness, but is all 
the time gaining strength while all other religions 
are declining before it; that Judaism itself 
alone remains immovable— a fossilized monument 
to God's truth, with a glorious record in 
the past but with little hope for the future; that 
the elaborate ceremonies of the old dispensation 
and the predictions of the Jewish prophets 
must have meant something; that the ancient 
Jews looked for a fulfilment of these at 
some future time; that the Jews of the present 
day do not look for the fulfilment of anything; that 
for eighteen hundred years not a Jewish prophet 
has arisen to oppose the claims of Christ; that as 
a consequence Christ must be believed by the 
Jews to have fulfilled the law; that the Targum, 



one of the best Jewish authorities, applies a part 
of Isaiah 52nd and all of the 53rd chapter to 
the Messiah; that the Pesekta, the Tanchuma, 
the Siphre, and other eminent books, are fulfilled 
in Jesus Christ; that though it is a common 
thing for Jews to say that Jesus Christ never 
existed, and is only a myth, a fable, yet there 
is good proof that he did live, and that he came 
at the very time when the Jewish nation was 
looking for the promised Messiah; that if Christ 
were God then his death and resurrection 
amounted to nothing, since God could leave 
his earthly body and assume it at pleasure; that 
with the light of two thousand years shining on 
Jesus they want something better (in opposition 
to Christ) than mere assertion; that as 

R1304:page77 

honest, free-thinking men they are in doubt; 
and finally, that if any one is able to prove that 
the Messiah is yet to come they would like very 
much to hear from him. 

This paper, thus representing the Hebrew 
Free Thinkers, is signed by their committee, 
viz.: Meyer Rode felt, Israel Pasner, Marx 
Levy. —Selected. 



R1304:page77 
ITEMS OF INTEREST. 



NOW READY. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III. 
"THY KINGDOM COME." 
380 PAGES. 

Orders will be filled in rotation as received. 
Prices to TOWER subscribers: 
In cloth binding (Retail price $1.) . 50c. 
" paper " 25c. 



Dr. Agnew, of Philadelphia, expresses the 
opinion that the climatic changes which are now 
going on in this country will, in time, cause the 
flora of the tropics to flourish up north. 



The Times of Morocco says that so habitual is 



drunkenness among foreigners there that the 

natives think that it is a part of the religion of 

Christians and Jews. When a wearer of the blue 

ribbon explains its meaning to them, they exclaim: 

"What! you a Christian and don't 

drink, and you are not a Jew? You must be 

a Mohammedan!" 



Something like a preachers' trust has been 
organized by the Iowa Presbytery, that body 
having decided to discourage theological students 
from preaching, as it interferes with ordained 
ministers seeking places. The Word, it 
would seem, is not, in the estimation of the 
Iowa Presbytery, something to be scattered 
broadcast free of charge, but is to be considered 
partly in the light of a premium to secure places. 
This is something of a departure. 



Count von Moltke, Germany's greatest general 
in modern times, whose death has lately 
been announced, in a recent speech before the 
Reichstag left no one in ignorance as to his 
views of the next European war. The powers 
of Europe, he declared, "are armed as they 
never have been armed before. No one of them 
can be so completely shattered in one or two 
campaigns as to confess itself beaten and to conclude 
peace on hard terms, or as not to recover 
in a year or two and renew the conflict. It may 
be a seven-years' war; it may be a thirty-years' 
war. Woe to him who sets fire to Europe." 
The old warrior dispelled the idea that the next 
war would be short, sharp and decisive. In his 
opinion such a war would be both fierce and 
protracted. 



The locomotives for the Jaffa and Jerusalem 
railroad recently reached Palestine. They bear 
the names of "Jerusalem," "Ramleh" and 
"Jaffa." A Philadelphia company has the honor 
of supplying the motive power. The most 
interesting fact about the appearance of the iron 
horse in the Holy Land is that the Jewish rabbis 
have already figured out a fulfilment of 
prophecy. In the book of Nahum is found that 
which is now interpreted as a revelation of the 
locomotive. Consul Gillman, of Jerusalem, 
tells this in a recent report to the state department. 
He sends the passage. The words are 



significant. They are found in Nahum 1 1:3,4, 

and are as follows: "The chariots shall be 

with flaming torches in the day of his preparation. 

They shall seem like torches; they shall 

run like the lightning." Mr. Gillman, also reports 

that there is quite a boom in Jerusalem 

real estate on account of the building of this 

railroad. More visitors arrived in the holy city 

last year than in any previous year, and Americans 

outnumbered any other nationality. "The 

Jews from all lands," says Consul Gillman, 

"continue to come to Palestine to reside in increasing 

numbers. Many of them are aged 

persons, who immigrate with the sole object of 

dying in Jerusalem, in accordance with their 

religious belief, so that they may be buried on 

the Mount of Olives." 



R1303 : page 78 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I wish to say a word 
about the Anniversary Meeting, which has 
just closed— held for the commemoration of 
our Lord's death, and for Bible study. It is 
the third one I have been privileged to attend. 
It was a sweet and precious spiritual feast, as 
well as a good, profitable investment of time- 
as also were the two former meetings. "How 
sweet to my soul is communion with saints." 
"And if our fellowship below 

In Jesus be so sweet, 
What heights of rapture shall we know, 
When on his throne we meet?" 

This meeting was the nearest approach in its 
character to the New Testament idea of the assembling 
of the saints, for worship and study 
("Search the Scriptures"), that I have ever 
seen or heard of. How I wish every consecrated 
child of God on earth could have been 
present, and seen and heard all that was done 
and said. It certainly was the most satisfactory 
religious gathering I ever participated in. We 
now enter upon a new Christian year. May it 
be to us all the grandest year of our lives in our 
dear Redeemer's service. God be with you 
and all the members of the Church of the Firstborn, 
till we meet again. Yours in the forefront 
of the battle, contending earnestly for the 
faith, JAS. A. WEST. 



page 78 

Pennsylvania. 
BROTHER RUSSELL:-We could not remain 
at the meeting until it closed, for which we 
were very sorry, as it was of great benefit to me, 
only six weeks old in the truth. I have been 
fighting for it to the best of my ability. The 
nominal church members get offended. Some 
say we are Infidels, and some think we are 
studying so hard that our minds are affected. 
Well, we do study hard, and it is so grand. We 
have consecrated our all to the Lord and to his 
service to be used to his glory; and, the Lord 
willing, I am going to try the colporteur work 
as soon as I can get things arranged, and if the 
Lord accepts of my service and blesses me in 
doing his work, then we will break up housekeeping 
and both wife and I will engage in the harvest 
work. We dare not delay long, but will have 
to work while the "winds" are held, as there 
is commotion in the elements and it may break 
out soon and we would be too late to gather 
any grain into the garner of the Lord. I expect 
to begin reaping by selling the DAWNS, by 
the 15th or 20th of this month, the Lord willing. 
There have been several here to hear 
what new doctrine we are preaching, and, with 
the help of the Lord, we have tried to explain 
it to them. They listen very attentively, and 
some, before going away, have remarked, This 
is so different from anything we have ever heard, 
yet we think you are right. We are beginning 
to see God in his true character and to worship 
him in a spirit of love and not of fear. Thanks 
be to God, we are not joined to Babylon in any 
sense, having left all secret orders, and on Saturday 
evening, at prayer-meeting, we publicly 
asked that our names be dropped from the class 
book of the M.E. Church. What joy came 
to our hearts in doing so no one can tell. Write 
to us and advise us. 

Yours in the Lord, 

W. L. KELLY AND WIFE. 



Illinois. 
DEAR BROTHER:-I greatly fear I cannot attend 
the meeting in April, although I would 
like so much to do so. I am settling up my 
business, with a view to entering the "harvest" 
work, which I intend to prosecute with earnestness 
when I am once started and fully equipped 



for the Master's work. Much light has been 
let in on me from day to day, which is very 
noticeable since I was at Allegheny a year ago. 
And I fully expect more when I am once out 
giving all my time and talents to our Lord. 

The more I study the Master's plan and work, 
the plainer I see there is no time to "prove 
oxen," "marry wives," or "go to see land" 
(Luke 14:19), or to do anything that draws 
one away from his work; and I hope, as soon 
as I can "let go" here, to become totally lost 
in his service. 

The March TOWER reached me on time and 
was, as usual, full of "meat" for the truth-hungry, 
and those articles in reference to the 
work and meeting came near prompting me to 
attend whether or no. 

If I can or cannot attend, I trust the good 
Lord will bless, guide and direct the whole proceedings 
to the accomplishment of grand, good 
and glorious results. Truly the gathering will 
have my heartiest and best wishes and my petitions 
for its success. 

Remember, dear brother, that as you wield 
the sword of truth against the mighty foes 
which we know exist, and, as a result, meet with 
much opposition and discouragement, that you 
are remembered by me from day to day, and 
almost from hour to hour, in a spirit of kindness, 
co-operation, sympathy and love, and 
prayer to God for your sustenance, guidance, 
support and care. 

page 79 

May we all be guided aright as we step along 
from stone to stone in our daily walk in the 
footsteps of our Master and Lord. 
Yours in the blessed Redeemer, 
H. J. STEVENS. (M.D.) 

[The Doctor did find it possible, finally, to 
come to Allegheny, and we had the pleasure of 
reading in his happy face the joy and peace that 
filled his heart, as, during those days of blessed 
communion, we sat together in heavenly places 
in Christ Jesus. -EDITOR.! 



Wisconsin. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Although I was 
compelled to leave Allegheny before the close 
of the meetings, I am glad to say it was good 
to be there. I was much impressed by the spirit 
of love and brotherly kindness manifested on 
all occasions. I met quite a number who were 



there four years ago, and I rejoiced to see evidence 
of growth in grace and knowledge of the truth. 
The meetings will no doubt be a source of 
strength to all. All will go forth with renewed 
vigor for another year's labor in the harvest 
field. These meetings are certainly very refreshing 
oases in the desert. However, there 
was one man in the congregation who, from his 
argument in private conversation, was without 
the wedding garment, denying the ransom, and 
trying to show some how to climb up some 
other way. Such are branded in the Word of 
God as thieves and robbers. I am sure he received 
no sympathy there. The sheep were on 
the alert, and he was bound hand and foot by 
the truth. Let each of those enlightened steadily 
hold up the standard of truth through opposition, 
sure that the victory will finally be ours, 
and looking for the glorious Kingdom of God, 
soon to be established. 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
JOSIAH PARKES. 



R1303 : page 79 

Pennsylvania. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-No doubt many 
of the brethren have written to you to tell how 
they observed the Passover Supper, and of the 
sweet communion they had with the Master 
upon that occasion; and I feel that I cannot 
allow this opportunity to pass without also bearing 
a word of testimony to the same. Three 
of us, Brother Enbody, Sister Remmel and 

R1304:page79 

myself, met together in an "upper room" in 

our quiet little home, and, after specially reviewing 

the events of the five days immediately 

preceding "that same night in which he was betrayed, 

we partook of his flesh and his blood, 

renewed our consecration to him, communed in 

prayer, and, after comforting one another with 

his words, departed in peace. It was a glorious 

hour, and we were greatly strengthened in 

spirit by his presence. Glory and honor be to 

his name. As I look out upon the world and 

see the tottering of the nominal house, the 

shaking of church, state and society, the gathering 

of the vast armies among the so-called 

Christian nations, all giving evidence of the 

nearness of that "battle of the great day of 

God Almighty," I humbly lift my heart to him 



in praise, knowing that "our deliverance draweth 
nigh." The sifting still continues, and the 
question of the hour is, "Who shall be able to 
stand?" May God continue his blessing with 
you and your labors, and eventually crown you 
in his kingdom. Your brother in Christ, 
E. C. REMMEL. 



Texas. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-My 

heart is overflowing with joy since the Memorial 
Supper. I prayed the Lord to be specially 
present with me, as I must be separated from 
all of the dear ones, and my prayer was more 
than answered. I sang hymn 276 and prayed 
the fulfilment of hymn 277 upon myself. What 
a sweet privilege, too, to be reckoned with the 
saints so soon to be glorified with the Head. 
I am in good hope that I shall be with you at 
your next annual gathering. 

Yours in Christian love, 

MRS. A. J. SAUTER. 



page 79 

Kansas. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Your good letter was 
duly received. I have been very busy, hence 
have not been able to put in any regular work at 
canvassing. But now I have my work in shape, 
and am studying (wife and I) preparatory to the 
work. When Brother James sent me your PLAN 
OF THE AGES God had me where I could learn. 
We have been sorely tried. It was all right; 
bless his holy name forever! Wife and I have a 
Bible reading by our fireside every night. Have 
prayers morning and night, and read a chapter 
at table after eating dinner. O, what a fountain 
the blessed Bible is! I do want to pour out 
my life daily in service to my blessed Jesus. 
The MILLENNIAL DAWN has saved us from terrible 
darkness, and has been a wonderful help to 
us. How could I stand without present truth? 
O, thank God for his goodness to us! We daily 
remember you and Sister Russell at the throne 
of grace. 

I expect to commence canvassing soon. Will 
commence at home, and then canvass towns 
near here for the present. Will let you hear 
from time to time. I know I shall have your 

page 80 



prayers continually. Yours in the love of the 
truth, EDWARD R. WEST. 

A later communication from the same brother 
says:— 

Please send me the TOWER and the Emphatic 
Diaglott, for which find enclosed the amount in 
Money Order. 

I am rejoicing as never before. The light 
keeps coming, and O, how glorious it is! I cannot 
tell you how very precious the blessed Bible 
is to us. It rejoices my heart to see how some 
of our citizens take hold of your books. I have 
sold about sixty of them in this little town of 
four or five hundred inhabitants. They are creating 
quite a stir. Wife and I are studying together, 
daily and happily. We are rejoicing in 
the Lord. 



New York. 

MR. & MRS. RUSSELL:-Dear brother and 
sister in Christ. A short time ago I had the 
pleasure of visiting with a much esteemed friend 
(Mrs. E. M. Garrison) who gave me a copy of 
the WATCH TOWER, and also told me of you and 
your noble work. Now I love the image of my 
Master wherever I find it, and I love to be in 
communion with God's workmen, although I 
may not understand much. If wrong I am anxious 
to be set right, but I always tread carefully and 
prayerfully upon new ground for fear of being led 
astray. I do not wish to make any mistakes, 
for I wish to "come again with rejoicing," and 
not that my works shall be burned. 

I have a great deal of confidence in Mrs. Garrison's 
judgment concerning Christian work and 
workmen; therefore on her recommendation I 
enclose twenty-five cents to pay for your work, entitled 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. I am one of the Lord's 
poor, but he often gives me a little surplus to 
purchase some good thing or to assist some good 
cause. On account of poor health I cannot do 
what I would be glad to do for the dear Master. 
Will you kindly remember me in your earnest 
prayers. May the Lord bless you and your work 
is the prayer of yours lovingly, 

MRS. A. E. BILLS. 



England. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a few 
lines whilst sending subscriptions for TOWER. A 
few here are enjoying the precious truth, and are 



being helped by the TOWER as it comes month 
by month. We pray that you and it may still 
be kept in the narrow way to Life. Truly the 
Day shall declare what otherwise would be hidden. 
I believe with you that the kingdoms and 
governments of the world have nearly run out 
their time. How thankful we should be that 
we are the holders of the Lord's promises. I am 
glad of the stand the TOWER makes for the ransom 
by our blessed Master. I never have had 
any doubt about it, but I have seen of late that 
there is great necessity to hold that truth firmly 
and clearly. 

My wife, with Brother Sharpies, Brother Watkins 
and Sister Upjohn, join with me in wishing 
you much joy in the Lord, and you have our 
prayers for your continued usefulness in the 
Master's work. Yours affectionately in our one 
Lord, JESSE HEMERY. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Times are still 
very hard with me, but as I must have the TOWER, 
I enclose remittance for it. I have tried to use 
it in the spread of the "Glad Tidings," but I 
find so few whose hearts are open even to read. 
I feel, dear brother, that the pathway grows 
brighter and brighter. Through suffering I am 
being perfected. The last year's study of the 
life of our dear Lord has brought me into closer 
fellowship with him. He is the one altogether 
lovely. I am not idle. I have two large Bible 
classes on Sunday: one in the town, and the 
other two miles in the country. Two evenings 
in the week I meet a class of large boys, and talk 
to them about Jesus. My greatest desire is to 
be about my Master's work. O! the preciousness 
of the Gospel. May God's richest blessings 
rest with yourself and wife in spreading the glad 
news. Pray for me. Yours in the love of the 
Master, G. C. HITCHCOCK. 



Maryland. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose to you 
a money order for $25.00, for which you will 
send me tracts numbers one, two, five, six and 
seven; also about three thousand Arp slips, and 
one thousand envelopes, and $3.00 of this goes 
to Tract Fund. I feel as though I must supply 
the neighboring towns and villages with tracts, 
to prepare them for DAWNS. The Anniversary 
was held at Bro. R.'s house, with love and 



joy. God bless you all! Pray for me, that I 
may be more fervent in spirit, and that I may 
go with willing steps for the Lord. I would 
love to lay in a larger supply of tracts, etc., 
but as my family expenses cut this off I must 
make this suffice at present. 
Your brother in Christ, 

H. WILLIAMS. 



R1305 : page 81 

VOL. XII. JULY, 1891. NO. 7. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"THE POWERS OF THE HEAVENS SHALL BE SHAKEN. 

"Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also 
heaven. "--Heb. 12:26. Compare Matt. 24:29. 

Those who, when reading the above and similar 
expressions of Scripture, suppose them to 
refer to the heaven of God's throne and to literal 
earthquakes, fail to comprehend their true 
signification, and are unprepared to see that 
they are now in process of fulfilment. When, 
however, it is recognized that, in Bible symbolism, 
the earth represents the law-abiding classes 
of society, that mountains represent kingdoms, 
that seas represent the restless and anarchistic 
classes, and that heavens represent the religious 
powers and influences of the world, then it can 
be seen that the shaking of "the heavens" is 
already begun. 

A great and very general storm is even now 
in progress. The thunders roll and the lightnings 
flash in every quarter of the ecclesiastical 
heavens— among the Presbyterians, Reformed 
Presbyterians, Baptists, Methodists, Episcopalians, 
Roman Catholics— yes, the entire heavens 
are being shaken; and many stars [bright ones] 
are falling from heaven. The true gospel sunlight 
is already darkened; and the light of the 
moon (the reflected sunlight of the gospel, 
shining in the typical sacrifices of the Jewish 
law) has become obscured. The effect already 
is to cause the hearts of the great and rich and 
mighty (ecclesiastically and socially) to fail for 
fear and for looking forward to those things 
coming upon the earth— society. (Luke 21:26.) 
They see that the creed-smashing already begun 
will, if it continue, release from the bonds 
of superstition and ignorance many who know 
no other restraints. And they see that the result 
of such a liberation of such a class means 
a shaking of the earth (society) as it has never 
before been shaken. 

Nor are these fears of the great ones of earth 
unfounded; for the Scriptures reveal the fact 
that the shaking, unsettling and incidental 
trouble will be such as was not since there was 
a nation (Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21), the only 
settlement of which will be accomplished by 
the establishment of the kingdom of God, for 
which his saints have long prayed, "Thy kingdom 



come! Thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven!" 

But not in a day, nor in a year, will the great 
crisis be reached, though events are progressing 
to that end at tremendous speed, and the storm 
is daily gathering momentum. True, if things 
were to continue as at present, three years of 
such commotions would shake the present heavens 
to fragments; but this is merely a time for 
the letting loose of opinions by men who think 
it a favorable time to strike the chord of 
public sympathy to the advancement of themselves 
to public notice. Men who lacked the 
courage of their convictions, and who did not 
speak out their sentiments before, are now vying 
with each other as to which can most loudly 
proclaim that he does not and never did hold 

R1305 : page 82 

the doctrines of the sect with which he has 

stood associated. They thus declare, to thinking 

people, that they joined those sects and subscribed 

to those confessions and vowed to teach 

what they believed to be false doctrines simply 

for the purpose of grasping, wielding and diverting 

to their own aggrandizement the denominational 

influences. However much or little 

truth such men may utter, they surely have forfeited 

the respect and confidence of truth-loving 

people. Does it not seem that any man who 

solemnly avows faith in and allegiance to certain 

doctrines which he does not believe, is unworthy 

of belief in matters of subsequent utterance, 

even though he may again vow that he 

speaks the truth? And does not the man who 

has outgrown the creed he once held, and who, 

for the sake of financial and social advantage 

or other reasons of policy, continues a representative 

of doctrines which he no longer believes, 

equally forfeit the respect of the truly noble and 

truly honest? And now that public sentiment 

and sympathy is ebbing away from the dead 

creed-carcasses, when such ministers speak out 

boldly against those creeds to which they subscribed, 

and yet stay under the banners and influences 

of those creeds and dare their more 

conscientious colleagues to brave public sentiment 

by expelling them, are such policy-men, 

we ask, likely to get the truth? No matter how 

much "orthodox" error they get rid of, there 

is little hope that such will get the truth. "Light 

[truth] is sown for the righteous," and "the 

meek will God teach his way." And he is able 

to "hide it from the wise and prudent and to reveal 

it unto babes." (Psa. 97:11; 25:9; 



Matt. 11:25.) Would men who thus stultify 
themselves be the Master's choice for servants, 
to bear the pure and precious bread of life 
to the awakening and hungry people who have 
been so long fed upon the husks of human tradition? 
Will not the Master rather show favor 
to the humble, pure in heart, honest ones who, 
as they get the true light, walk up to it; who 
leave the Confession found to be false, and the 
denomination found to be in error, regardless of 
the loss of earthly name, position and emoluments? 
True, some may in the present commotion 
come to see matters in a new light, and 
may step out and speak out; but such should, 
and if honest will, declare that their change of 
view is recent and that they acted as soon as 
convinced. 

The present shaking has not only afforded an 
opportunity for some to manifest their unfaithfulness 
to the dogmas hitherto confessed, but it has 
also indirectly done some good in awakening 
thought and bursting some of the fetters of 
superstition which will never be refastened. But 
while making an opening for the spread and 
influence of the Truth, it has as well opened the 
way for the spread of general infidelity under 
the guise of advanced thought and higher criticism, 
which will spread much faster than the 
truth— the faith once delivered to the saints but 
early swamped, and so sadly mixed since with 
the errors of the dark ages from which but 
few have yet gotten entirely free. 

So far from all denominations being suddenly 
wrecked, the finger of divine prophecy points 
out that a grand union of all Protestant denominations 
is to be the next great evil, which will 
be generally esteemed as a blessing and hailed 
as a mark of divine favor and of great spiritual 
growth. Our anticipation, therefore, is that 
the conservative men of all Protestant denominations 
will be forced by circumstances into a 
church confederacy or church trust. But the 
same finger of prophecy indicates that such a 
confederacy and its Roman Catholic colleague 
will last but a short time, and that they will be 
wholly and forever dissolved when anarchy shall 
shake and dissolve the earth— society. 

R1306 : page 82 

Those in Zion who are awake and watching, 
and who are heartily serving the truth, and they 
alone, can sing in the words of the prophet 
(Psa. 46):— "We will not fear though the earth 
be removed, and though the mountains be carried 
into the midst of the sea; though the waters 



thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains 
shake with the swelling thereof. The heathen 
raged, the kingdoms were moved; he uttered 
his voice, the earth melted. The Lord of 
hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge." 

The extent of the shaking now in progress 
may be inferred from the following resume of 
religious news gleaned from one page of a single 
issue of the New York Herald: 

R1306 : page 83 

(a) An account of the confirmation, as an 
Episcopalian, of Dr. Bridgman, recently a Baptist 
minister, who, having lately declared his 
unbelief in the doctrine of eternal torment, was 
given to understand that he was no longer a good 
Baptist. The gentleman has not yet experienced 
fully the freedom wherewith Christ makes 
free, and believes that he has found a bondage 
with a longer chain in the Episcopal church. 
Dr. Bridgman is quoted as follows: 

"Baptist churches are independent communities. 
It is claimed on behalf of their polity 
that it allows private judgment beyond what is 
tolerated in other communions. Of course, 
there is a general understanding that the churches 
must be in harmony with the orthodox Christian 
faith and be in accord as to the subject and 
method of baptism. If any one of these should 
be untrue to Baptist traditions and practice a 
council could be called by the local association 
of which it is a member, to decide whether it 
should be retained in the fellowship of the 
Church. 

"So a minister is subject to the same method 
of discipline. But there may be such an assumption 
of authority by certain theological 
teachers and religious editors and such a violent 
assertion of it that the whole denomination may 
be subdued to their will. Word has come forth 
from Rochester that unless a man believe the 
doctrine of endless torment he is no longer to 
be recognized as a Baptist minister, and except 
the Christian Inquirer, of this city, and the 
National Baptist, of Philadelphia, every other 
denominational paper is ready to enforce such 
a mediaeval doctrine." 

Here the Doctor paused to read another letter 
addressed to him by one of the foremost 
Baptist divines in the land. The letter ran:— 

"Theoretically and ideally I have always held 
that our denomination is the freest in the world. 
Sadly has it fallen short of its ideal. We have 
had Pharisees and Popes. We have felt the 
tyranny of creeds— that very tyranny against 



which the existence of the Baptist Church is an 
historic protest." 

(b) Dr. Abbott preached from 1 Cor. 1:10 
—"Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the 
same thing, and that there be no divisions 
[sects] among you; but that ye be perfectly 
joined together in the same mind and in the 
same judgment." He said in opening, "This 
seems a pretty good text to preach on at this time 
to all the various Protestant denominations." 
The gentleman proceeded, however, to show 

his disagreement with, and misunderstanding of, 
his text, giving it as his opinion that, "It is 
better to think and not think the same thing 
than to stop thinking and let somebody else do 
the thinking for you." He, however, wound 
up his discourse with the sensible observation 
that Christ and his apostles did not attempt to 
produce union by stopping thought, but by assisting 
it to a correct plane or basis of reasoning. 
"Christ did not say, 'Come unto me, all 
ye that believe in the thirty-nine articles, or the 
thirty-four articles, or the five articles.' That 
which Christ made the centre of unity was personal 
loyalty to him." 

Yes, we reply, the one article of Christ's doctrine 
is, faith in God and in Christ as the Son 
of God, whose willing sacrifice for the sins of 
the world is available by all who repent of sin 
and come unto God for forgiveness through the 
merit of that sin-offering. Upon this one article, 
comprehensive but simple, there is room 
enough for all true Christians to stand as individuals 
and to grow in grace, knowledge and 
love to full faith-stature in Christ. 

(c) Rev. Dr. W. Rainsford, of St. George's 
Episcopal church, preached from the text, "For 
through him we both have access by one spirit 
unto the Father."— Eph. 2:18. 

In the course of his observations (says the 
reporter) Dr. R. touched quite extensively on 
the question of creeds, declaring that they might 
do as crutches for the lame of humanity to hobble 
with, but should not be used as clubs to 
break each other's heads. "It is deplorable 
that some good Christian men are so misled 
and so carried away with prejudice that they 
want to insist upon the acceptance of their own 
crude conception of a creed." He claimed 
that it is folly to claim that any of the many 
humanly formed creeds are of divine authority; 
for they are merely human deductions. 

(d) Rev. B. F. De Costa, in his sermon, 
said: "Do not come to the holy communion 
with doubts and misgivings. Do not come to 



discuss or argue the truths of the Bible— have 
faith. Our reason cannot comprehend the various 
marvelous ways in which God makes himself 
known to us. Therefore let us not doubt, discuss 
or argue, but let us have faith." 

(e) The spiritualists of Brooklyn discussed 
the subject of "Heresy— what shall we do with 
heretics?" A tribute was paid to Heber Newton, 
Doctor Briggs, and other clergymen recently 
made prominent by difficulties with the 
denominations with which they are connected. 

(f) A hundred or more members of a Methodist 

R1306 : page 84 

Episcopal congregation, of Elizabeth, N.J., 

have recently bolted and organized as a congregation 

of the Methodist Protestant 

denomination. 

(g) The Rev. Dr. Talmage, in a discourse on 
Psa. 19:8— "The statutes of the Lord are right' 
—scored young 'scientists,' who, when they 
have learned the difference between a beetle and 
spider, think they know more than the Bible." 
He showed how other books of olden time have 
lost their interest and value and become obsolete; 
declared that many large libraries are 

simply cemeteries for dead books; and then 
contrasted with these the Bible, the oldest of 
all, and showed its freshness, and that nearly 
all the great books of the world are only the 
Bible diluted. He concluded: "There are only 
two doctrines in the Bible— man a sinner and 
Christ a savior." 

(h) Dr. Heber Newton (Episcopal) preached 
about church creeds. "He threw down the 
gage of battle to those clamoring to have him 
turned out of the Episcopal Church. He practically 
threw overboard the 'thirty nine articles' 
and declared that they contained no statements 
of faith that were binding upon him." 

(i) The Rev. G. H. Smyth (Collegiate Reformed 
Church) resigned his pastorate, but ingeniously, 
if not ingenuously, made it to take 
effect from next September, and is taking advantage 
of the interim to batter down the sect 
under whose name he still sails. His apology 
for this course, which violates his ordination 
vow, is, that under that arrangement (common 
to all sects), if lived up to, he would be obliged 
to "crawl out as if he were a mean criminal," 
without explaining matters to his congregation. 

(j) The North Reformed Church, of Schralenburg, 
N.J., has been suffering from internal 
dissensions for a month past, brought on, it is 
said, by the jealousy of the pastor. 



(k) "Dr. Parkhurst cast a bomb into the 
Presbyterian camp yesterday, and some of his 
criticisms of those who condemned Dr. Briggs 
are anything but complimentary. He said: 

"The Church has always fought new ideas, 
and the man who has a new understanding of 
things is always a hated man. No matter what 
his character may be, no matter what his integrity, 
no matter how profound, no matter how 
willing he may be to lay down his life for the 
truth, as he apprehends it, he is a feared and hated 
man, and they always try to kill him. Of 
course as civilization has advanced, modes of 
burning and burying alive have been modified 
and have assumed more aesthetic forms.'" 

And the New York Herald, quoted above, 
is only one of the hundreds of journals reporting 
the utterances of hundreds of pulpits in 
hundreds of cities. We will quote a few extracts 
from other journals of recent date: 

"In the Evangelical Alliance last evening 
Bishop Huntington, of New York, spoke on 
'The Gospel of the People,' and queried: 'May 
not the non-acceptance by the masses of the 
gospel we preach be because it is not in fact the 
gospel?'" 

[If the meaning of the word gospel— good 
news— is borne in mind it can readily be seen 
that what is generally preached and believed by 
all the sects of Christendom, viz., that the vast 
majority of mankind are en route for eternal 
torment, is not gospel, not good news in any 
sense? Can it be that the common sense of 
the masses has instinctively helped them out of 
the errors of the dark ages, while theologians 
and Bible students, bound by sectarian creeds 
and perversions, are now behind the world so 
far as an appreciation of the gospel is 
concerned?] 

The Rev. J. C. McFeeters, of Philadelphia, 
preached from Isaiah 26:21. He said, among 
other things: 

"The signs of distress are everywhere, in all 
nations and in all the callings of life. The nations 
are disturbed, and even the people of God 
and God's Church are in the path of the storm. 

R1307 : page 84 

The countries of the world are preparing for 
disturbances of the future that seem to beat 
hard, and even our own peaceful land must take 
part by demanding sea coast defenses and a 
navy. The country is disturbed in its commercial 
relations by the troubles and distress of 
labor. While all this is taking place the Church, 



and I speak in a collective sense, has also been 
found to be directly in the path of the storm. 

"The long-established laws of Episcopacy 
have been rent; the old usages and forms of the 
Presbyterian Church with its Calvinism have 
been assailed; our own little Church [the Reformed 
Presbyterian] has not escaped and is 
as badly hurt as any. The trouble among us, 
which we all know so well, is deplorable and is 
the cause for this day of prayer. It is said with 
a display of confidence that all these things will 
disappear before the Word of God and the work 
of God's people as the mist before the rays of 
the sun. This is a most lamentable folly. 
What has the Church accomplished and where 
does she stand in the contest? Here in this 
great country of ours the Church is sinking in 
its work." 

[Truly this is a comprehensive statement of 
the case. Yet how strange it seems that with 

R1307 : page 85 

such a realization of their need of the truth, ministers 

of all denominations are the least ready 

to receive it. Their difficulty evidently is the 

same that our Lord pointed out among the Doctors 

of Divinity— Doctors of the Law— at the first 

advent, when he declared that it was their love 

of the good opinion of each other and of men 

in general that blinded them to the truth— "How 

can ye believe who receive honor one of another 

and seek not [solely] that honor which 

cometh from God?" If the truth were popular, 

or if the divine plan of the ages were but championed 

by some of the great ones of the theological 

world and backed by influence and 

wealth, it would be generally and speedily 

received.] 

Referring to the session of the Reformed 
Presbyterian Synod, recently held in Pittsburgh, 
one of our daily journals, the Times, editorially 
says: 

"If some one were to reproduce faithfully 
in a novel the scenes and language of the Reformed 
Presbyterian Synod sitting in Pittsburgh 
he would be execrated as a slanderer. 
There are thousands of innocent souls who 
would refuse to believe that representatives of 
a faith of love and charity would so misrepresent 
both. 

"The passions displayed there originated in 
a question of creed. It was not necessary for 
Heber Newton to refer to the synods and councils 
of the early church to show that the spirit 
in which most creeds were made was anything 



but Christian. There were living illustrations 

for him. Is it a wonder, then, that the authority 

of creeds is questioned? In business one 

would not leave his interests to men whose judgment 

was so warped by anger. In politics a 

platform made under such circumstances would 

not command the respect of the party. A 

creed is an intensely human thing. The trouble 

which the churches have now is due to the fact 

that the world is finding that out. 

The same writer comments upon Dr. Briggs' 
heresy thus: 

"AN ALARMING VICTORY." 

"A majority of the New York Presbytery 
voted for the report which found Dr. Briggs 
guilty of heresy, but the majority must feel 
alarm at its victory. That 3 1 of the 75 members 
stood by him was as much a revelation as 
were some of the remarks made in that Presbytery 
when the revision of the Westminster Confession 
was under discussion. It is true that 
this Presbytery is more advanced in opinion 
than many others in the Presbyterian Church, 
but if this vote is at all near the division which 
will occur in others when the case is finally met, 
it may well be deemed a case which the Church 
approaches with trepidation. 

"Unsettled questions forbid the repose of 
nations. Repose of the Church is impossible 
so long as the questions raised by Dr. Briggs 
remain open. They go to the very roots of 
dogmas which are essential to the existence of 
orthodoxy. The founders of New England 
Unitarianism did not go so far in some particulars 
as he does. Unitarianism would hardly 
ask for a better hold in orthodoxy than he furnishes, 
for it knows that his views lead straight 
to the broadest of free thought. If, for instance, 
the Scriptures are inspired only in concept, 
every man must be at liberty to determine what 
the concept is, and it will not take long to reduce 
the inspiration of the Hebrew prophets to 
the inspiration of some of the classical philosophers. 
It is impossible to see how orthodoxy 
is to be reconciled to this. 

"But if not reconciled, what? It will be a 
dangerous undertaking to put down such a 
minority as stood up for Dr. Briggs yesterday. 
This is not an age of divisions, and the prediction 
that a split in Presbyterianism is inevitable, 
made by a New York paper, may be doubted. 
There are equally wide differences in the 
Episcopal Church, and it never was more prosperous 
than now. It escapes the effect of the 



differences by ignoring them. 

"That, judged by the standards of orthodoxy, 
Dr. Briggs is heretical, it would be preposterous 
to deny. The triumph of his teaching 
would be the death of orthodoxy according 
to the standards. One should never lose sight 
of the fact, though, that orthodoxy in life and 
orthodoxy in the books are two different things. 
There is not a Protestant Church in the United 
States that would dare to enforce the orthodoxy 
of its standards. By laymen and preachers 
alike it is constantly ignored, now in one particular 
and now in another, but not in an offensive 
way, and it is overlooked. To call 
every one to account for an expression of opinion 
against the leading tenets of the fathers 
would cause such an explosion as was never seen 
in the theological world. Orthodoxy in life is 
a pulsating thing, inspiring hope and cheering 
to good deeds; orthodoxy in the books is the 
grinning skeleton of a thing which ceased to 
live long ago. The offense of Briggs is in preferring 
the living thing to the dead. 

"It has been remarked that this trouble in 
the Presbyterian Church has been brought on 
entirely by the ministers, and that is what 

R1307 : page 86 

makes it serious. The men who were expected 
to keep peace in Zion are they who have drawn 
the sword. After the sword is drawn it is hard 
to make peace. It must puzzle all Presbyterians 
to know how the living orthodoxy of 
Briggs and all who agree with him, in the pulpits 
and training schools for ministers, is to be 
reconciled to the dead and buried orthodoxy of 
the books." 

[Yes; this secular journal sees the true state 
of the case. The cause of the present unrest 
in all the sects of Christendom lies in the fact 
that the masses of the people, as they become 
informed, are losing faith in the creeds that 
have so long fettered their thoughts and bound 
them to the opinions of men who lived in a 
darker age, and who, however good, were sadly 
in error. The trouble is that the present and 
increasing enlightenment is fast tending to infidelity. 
As sectarians awake and throw away 
their musty creeds, which for so long they have 
almost worshiped, they are likely to discard the 
Bible at the same time, believing that if the 
various creeds of Christendom are all wrong, 
the Bible, upon which they all claim to be 
based, must be radically wrong, and hence not 
at all a divine revelation. They did not consider, 



as they should, that the fact of the radical 
disagreements between the creeds proves 
that some, if not all of them, have misinterpreted 
the Bible's teachings. How thankful 
we should be who see the real gospel. How 
we are lifted out of the perplexity now upon the 
nominal churches, out of the miry clay of human 
tradition and given a firm foundation upon 
the Word of God. Ours is a foundation that 
is reasonable in itself, as well as supported by 
every testimony of the Bible— neither of which 
can be claimed for any of the creeds of 
Christendom. 

Blessed are our eyes for they see, and our ears 
for they hear; for verily many prophets and 
righteous persons have desired [before the due 
time] to see the things which we see and to 
hear the things which we are hearing from the 
Lord's Word.-Matt. 13:16,17. 

Since the Scriptures have foretold this present 
shaking, and have indicated that many will fall 
into doubt and infidelity, let us remember that 
God is at the helm: we need not fear. We see 
that in the very midst of the great commotion 
God is surely and steadily working out his deep 
designs for the final and complete overthrow of 
false doctrine, superstition, hypocrisy, injustice 
and every iniquitous device and institution of 
men which sought to hide truth and to establish 
and maintain oppression. He shakes and sifts 
because he would separate the many who have 
assumed the name of Christ but who are not 
truly his people. It is because only one in a 
thousand of nominal Christians are really consecrated 
wholly to the Lord that "a thousand 
shall fall at thy side." (Psa. 91:7.) The genuine 
saints will not fall, even though some of 
them may for a time stumble; for the Lord will 
uphold such with the right hand of his righteousness 
(with the power of his truth).— Isa. 41:10; 
Psa. 91:11,12.] 

Dr. Newton, after declaring that all the 
Churches are in a panic, says: 

"Christendom is torn and dismembered before 
our eyes. It is paralyzed with doubt. It 
is distracted with the contentions over dogma. 
Through every branch of Christendom the strife 
of creeds is seen. The mind of man is seeking 
a creed form for his faith under which he 
can rest with intellectual honesty and with 
spiritual satisfaction. He cannot find such a 
shelter under the reformation confessions of 
faith, with their long-drawn metaphysics, their 
intolerable opinionativeness, their infallibility 
in points where knowledge is blasphemy. He 



R1308 : page 86 

who reads the signs of the times sees clearly 
two alternatives before our American Protestantism: 
the throwing overboard of its creeds 
or their simplification." 
We quote another item on 

"TRUTH AND HERESY." 

"It was the above theme which the Rev. 
Mr. Phelps, of Albany, N.Y., selected for 
his evening sermon, and his text was John 16:13: 
'When the spirit of truth is come, he will 
guide you into all truth.' He said substantially: 
'That a mighty uprising of religious thought 
is taking place throughout the world must be 
evident to even a careless observer. Scientific 
research has made great inroads upon certain 
forms of belief, the veil of centuries is being 
uplifted, the darkness is being dispelled and 
the light of truth is illuminating the hitherto 
impregnable strongholds of tradition and dogma. 
It is true that criticism, heartless and cynical, 
has been pursuing shadows and phantoms; but 
its value is now becoming manifest in the awakening 

R1308 : page 87 

of dormant energies, and in the liberating 
of chained minds." 

[Yes, truly, the present commotion, not only 
upon religious but upon social questions, is the 
result of the uplifting of the veil of centuries. 
God is letting in the light, and those who love 
darkness and error rather than light are put to 
confusion. The lifting of the veil began with 
the invention of printing in the fifteenth century. 
So long as knowledge was confined to 
the wealthy and the clergy, no considerable 
trouble could result; for these had common 
interests to subserve, and the masses, bound by 
ignorance and superstition, were the tools of 
the educated. But the sudden enlightenment 
of the masses through public schools, a free press 
and other sources has considerably reversed the 
situation. 

This condition of things the Lord predicted 
long ago by the mouth of Daniel the prophet, 
saying: "In the time of the end.. .many 
shall run to and fro and knowledge (in general) 
shall be increased, and the wise (toward God— 
the humble disciples of the Lord) shall understand 
(God's plan); but none of the wicked 
shall understand (it). ...And at that time 
shall Michael [Christ] stand up [to render judgment], 



and there shall be a time of trouble such 
as was not since there was a nation— no, nor 
ever shall be (afterward)."— Dan. 12:1-4. 

The trouble and shaking of the Church, to 
shake out of profession of faith all who are not 
really saints, built upon the rock (Matt. 7:24-27), 
is because the election of the Church is 
almost complete; and the shaking will be the 
means of God for the liberating of some now 
chained by superstition. The trouble upon 
the earth [society] will not reach its intensity 
until the shaking of the heavens [ecclesiasticism, 
or the church nominal] has broken the fetters 
of superstition and plunged the masses into 
skepticism and open infidelity. Then the many 
kingdoms of God, so called, and the many 
churches of God, will pass away to make room 
for the one true kingdom of God, which will 
be the one true Church glorified (composed of 
all the truly consecrated "overcomers" in Christ 
from Pentecost down). It will take the place of 
power, and the Millennial blessing of the world 
will begin— first with those then in the world, 
and afterward extending to all that are in their 
graves, who shall be awakened and come forth 
to a full knowledge and to a full opportunity 
of reaching perfection and everlasting life, 
which opportunity was secured for all in the 
ransom-price given once for all. 



R1308 : page 87 

PRESBYTERIAN CREED REVISION. 



The General Assembly of the Presbyterian 
Church voted last year that some amendments 
to its creed should be made, and appointed a 
conservative committee to make suggestions as 
to just what the changes should be, enjoining, 
however, that no modification of the Confession 
should be considered which would not be 
within Calvinistic limits. That committee has 
reported and its suggestions have been accepted 
by the General Assembly; but they will not be 
passed upon finally until next year, so as to give 
all the Presbyteries an opportunity to pass upon 
them. 

Quite apropos in this connection is the opinion 
of this revised Confession recently expressed 
by one of the leading Presbyterian ministers, 
Dr. C. A. Parkhurst, whose discourse is thus reported 
in the daily press. 



"The attempt to make of Presbyterianism an 
aggressive, widening, moving power in the world, 
and yet break it on the wheel with the name of 
John Calvin or any other name, is like getting 
into your carriage with a crack of your whip 
and a great show of travel before you have 
loosened your horse from the hitching post. To 
tie it to the 16th century is an attempt to drive 
the Presbyterian buggy with a hitched horse, 
and any one who supposes that that kind of a 
church in this age of the world is going to 
draw into its membership a great many people 
besides children before they begin to think 
and old men and women after they have gotten 
through thinking is badly mistaken. There 
would have been no Princeton Theological 
Seminary in existence to-day if the Apostles 
had looked at it as Princeton does. The spirit 
of such an institution is to make theology as 
the shoemaker makes the pegs; as the baker 
turns out the crackers, all the crackers from the 

R1308 : page 88 

same dough and with precisely the same stamp 
upon them. 

"The question that is on the lips of thousands 
of young men that are on the threshold 
of the ministry, and that are looking in the direction 
of the Presbyterian Church, is: 'Can 
I enter the Presbyterian ministry and still retain 
my intellectual self-respect? Must I pluck 
out my eyes and replace my brains with sawdust, 
as candidacy for Presbyterian orders? Can 
I be an independent thinker and at the same 
time a loyal Presbyterian?' It was in view 
of such interrogatives, Dr. Parkhurst continues, 
that he would go on to express it as his frank 
conviction that the General Assembly stultified 
itself one year ago, when it bound its revision 
committee to confine its modification of the 
confession within Calvinistic limits. 'Our objection,' 
he said, 'is to the idea of trying a 
great Church in a live century to a man that 
has been 300 years under ground. It touches the 
spot in a keen, wide awake man when he keeps 
his disappointment and his contempt to himself. 
Perhaps we can never improve on Calvin, 
but it hurts my feelings to feel that the Church 
that my heart and life are bound up in is anchored 
to a cemetery.'" 

This Reverend Doctor of Divinity evidently 
sees the question clearly, but we consider that 
he has thus far set his young friends— the students 
—a very poor example of the courage and 
loyalty to conviction which, as he intimates, is 



the only true manly or Christian course. Would 

it not be much easier for him than for them to 

act conscientiously? Has he not under the care 

of Presbyterianism earned a reputation which 

would give him an influence and call and salary 

outside as well as inside that denomination? 

Does not his example speak to them as loudly 

as his words and say that as he for years has 

been able to stay inside the system whose Calvinistic 

faith he does not believe, so can they? 

May we not rest assured that so long as Presbyterianism 

is popular and its ministers well paid, 

so long there will be a good supply of young students 

willing to stultify themselves, by taking 

vows which they cannot and will not live up to; 

so long will they teach what they do not believe 

though they will not for shame's sake teach any 

more of it than they can avoid? 

And have not Doctor Parkhurst and others 
"highly esteemed among men" (Luke 16:15) 
shown these young students (who look up to 
them as models of Christian nobility and honor) 
how to secure and retain the emoluments 
of their respective sects without "plucking out 
their eyes" or "substituting sawdust for their 
brains?" And moreover some of the reverend 
gentlemen are showing them how they may now 
go a step farther and cheaply gain reputations as 
independent thinkers, and still hold on to their 
honors and salaries as ministers in those sects. 
Dr. Parkhurst and all others who thus talk about 
love for and "loyalty to Presbyterianism," and 
who at the same time ridicule and stab her, force 
thinking people to the conclusion that it is the 
great name, the influence and the wealth of Presbyterianism 
and not itself that they love— for in 
the creed alone consists the ism. 

The Doctor supposes a student asking, "Can 
I enter the Presbyterian ministry and still retain 
my intellectual self-respect?" He does 
not tell us how it is with himself and others, 
old in Presbyterianism, but he leaves us to the inference 
that he has realized the loss of his own 
self-respect when he remains in a system with 
which he professes radical disagreement. The 
gentleman should awake to a realization of the 
fact that it is such double dealing as his own 
that is fast making the name Christian a synonym 
for anything else than candor. 

And the same principle holds good in other 
matters. He that is unfaithful in that which 
is small will be unfaithful in greater matters, is 
the Master's decision (Luke 16:10), which we 
must expect will hold good in every case. Those 
who can treat lightly their vows to men, and 
twist and turn a human creed to suit their own 



convenience, and whose consciences are elastic 
in such matters, thereby contract habits which 
do them untold injury. When they come to 
God's word the same spirit of conscienceless 
twisting and avoiding issues will hinder their 
getting at the simplest elements of divine truth. 

R1309 : page 88 

Honesty is the need of the hour, both in the 
pulpit and in the pew, among Presbyterians and 
among all professing Christ. If honesty were 
practiced, present pews and pulpits would lose 
half their occupants and the other half would 
speedily overthrow the error and the superstition 
fostered by the creeds and traditions of 
men, and very shortly there would be a oneness 

R1309 : page 89 

of faith among the real children of God, and a 
realization of that glorious liberty which the 
spirit of the truth alone can give, and which 
but few understand or appreciate now. 

But instead of this noble, honest course, 
which would deserve and share the respect of 
all honest people (though it would wonderfully 
sift and humiliate the nominal Church before the 
world), the method pursued in all denominations 
is the very reverse of this. Ministers 
and laymen stultify themselves by remaining in, 
and thus upholding before men, denominations 
whose creeds, if ever believed, they have outgrown. 
So common is this form of deception 
and hypocrisy that few realize it under its 
proper name; and the clergyman who now publicly 
confesses his dishonesty in this respect is 
lionized as a most courageous person, whereas 
really this is glorying in his shame. 

Dr. Parkhurst declares that his heart and 
life are bound up in "a cemetery"— the Presbyterian 
Church. What is there about that 
cemetery that he so dearly loves? Not the dead 
Calvinism, he freely confesses. What, then, but 
the living honors and emoluments of 
Presbyterianism? 

Not such was the love of Christ and the 
Apostles. They neither knew of nor loved either 
Calvinism, Presbyterianism or any other ism. 
They rebuked just such sectarianism and declared 
it an evidence of carnality. (1 Cor. 3:1-4.) 
The Church which they loved, and served to 
the extent of laying down their lives, was the 
one Church, the members of the one body of 
Christ, whose names are written, not on earthly 
scrolls, but in heaven. -Col. 1:24,28; 1 Jno. 3:14,16; 



Heb. 12:23; Luke 10:20; Phil. 4:3; 
Rev. 13:8. 

The Doctor is correct when he infers that 
there would have been no such institution as 
Princeton if the Apostolic teachings had prevailed. 
And, we may add, there would have 
been no Presbyterianism, no Roman Catholicism, 
no Methodism and no other ism, but one 
Church, with one Lord, one faith and one 
baptism. 

CHANGES IN THE CONFESSION. 

The changes in the Presbyterian Confession, 
we believe, are improvements, though they will 
be found still very far from satisfactory to thinking 
people. Dr. Parkhurst and others admit 
that they are still a "cemetery" faith, and it 
is concerning the proposed amended confession 
that he charges that thinking students will see 
that to accept it they cannot retain their self-respect, 
or think independently while loyal to 
Presbyterianism. Dr. Parkhurst, the students 
and all others endowed with reason should at 
once consistently step out from all confessions 
of men and believe and teach all that they find 
taught in God's word. Then they would be 
members of the Apostolic Church and in fellowship 
with all the saints. 

We note below some of the more important 
of the proposed changes contrasted with the 
original or present statement. 

CHAPTER III. 

OF GOD'S ETERNAL DECREE. 

(Original.) 

Sec. III. By the decree of God, for the 
manifestation of his glory, some men and angels 
are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others 
fore-ordained to everlasting death. 

IV. These angels and men, thus predestinated 

and fore-ordained, are particularly and unchangeably 
designed; and their number is so 
certain and definite, that it cannot be either 
increased or diminished. 

V. Those of mankind that are predestinated 
unto life, God, before the foundation of the 
world was laid, according to his eternal and 
immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and 
good pleasure of his will, hath chosen, in Christ, 
unto everlasting glory, out of his mere free 
grace and love, without any foresight of faith, 
or good works, or perseverance in either of 



them, or any other thing in the creature, as 
conditions or causes moving him thereunto; 
and all to the praise of his glorious grace. 

VI. The rest of mankind God was pleased, 
according to the unsearchable counsel of his own 
will, whereby he extendeth or withholdeth mercy 
as he pleaseth, for the glory of his sovereign 
power over his creatures, to pass by, and to ordain 
them to dishonor and wrath for their sin, 
to the praise of his glorious justice. 

CHAPTER III. (Amended). 

Sections III. and IV. were stricken out; and 
Section V. was amended so that it as Section 
III. will read: 

III. God, before the foundation of the World 
was laid, according to his eternal and immutable 
purpose, and the secret counsel and good 

R1309:page90 

pleasure of his will, hath predestinated some of 
mankind unto life, and hath particularly and 
unchangeably chosen them in Christ unto everlasting 
glory, out of his mere free grace and 
love, without any foresight [on God's part] 
of faith, or good works, or perseverance in 
either of them, or any other thing in the creature, 
as conditions or causes moving him thereunto; 
and all to the praise of his glorious grace. 

Section VI. remains unchanged and becomes 
Section IV. Section VII. was amended, 
and becomes Section V., and is as follows. 

V. The rest of mankind God was pleased, 
according to the unsearchable counsel of his 
own will, whereby he extendeth or withholdeth 
mercy as he pleaseth, not to elect unto everlasting 
life, but to ordain them to dishonor and 
wrath for their sin, to the praise of his glorious 
justice; yet so as thereby neither is any limitation 
put upon the offer of salvation to all, upon 
condition of faith in Christ; nor is restraint 
laid upon the freedom of any one to hinder his 
acceptance of this offer. 

[The statements in italics are merely subterfuges 
to take off the harsh edge of Calvinistic 
doctrine, which right-minded people can no 
longer accept. For if Section III. be true— if all 
who are saved are saved not on account of 
faith or good works or any other thing— it is 
very manifest that non-election is a most decided 
limitation, and that there is no salvation or offer 
of it to any but the elect, and the non-elect 
are restrained and have no freedom to accept 
an offer of salvation never made actually to 



them.] 

CHAPTER VI. 

OF THE FALL OF MAN, OF SIN, AND OF THE 

PUNISHMENT THEREOF. 

IV. (Original) From this original corruption, 
whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled and 
made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined 
to all evil, do proceed all actual transgressions. 

IV. (Amended) From this original corruption, 
whereby we are utterly indisposed, disabled, 
and made opposite to all that is spiritually 
good, and wholly inclined to evil, do proceed 
all actual transgressions. Nevertheless the Providence 
of God, and the common operations of 
his Spirit, restrain unregenerate men from much 
that is evil, and lead them to exercise many 
social and civil virtues. 

CHAPTER IX. (X.) 

OF FREE WILL. 

III. (Original) Man, by his fall into a state 
of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any 
spiritual good accompanying salvation; so as a 
natural man, being altogether averse from that 
good, and dead in sin, is not able, by his 
own strength, to convert himself, or to prepare 
himself thereunto. 

III. (Amended) Man, by his fall into a state 
of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any 
spiritual good accompanying salvation; so as a 
natural man, being altogether indisposed to that 
good, and dead in sin, is not able, by his own 
strength, to convert himself, or to prepare himself 
thereunto. Yet is his responsibility as a free 
moral agent not thereby impaired. 

[Here we find another unsuccessful attempt 
to straddle both truth and error. If man is 
morally so fettered and enslaved that he has 
lost all ability to will any good thing, how can 
it be consistently said that his responsibility as 
a free moral agent is not thereby impaired? 
This is nonsense. The truth which they are 
"feeling after" is this: By their fall into sin and 
under its penalty, men have become morally 
and physically impaired, and their wills or desires 
perverted so that they do not naturally recognize 
or choose the ways of God. Nevertheless, 
when the revelation of the grace of God 
in Christ reaches any of them they are thereafter 
responsible for the exercise of their wills 



to the extent of their understanding of that revelation; 
because their wills remain free to choose 
between right and wrong, when they discern 
them, whether or not they have the moral and 
physical strength to carry out such will or 
choice.] 

CHAPTER XL 

OF THE UNIVERSAL OFFER OF THE GOSPEL. 

I. God so loved the world that he provided 

in the covenant of grace, through the mediation 

and sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, a 

way of life and salvation sufficient for and adapted 

to the whole lost race of man; and he doth 

freely offer this salvation to all men in the Gospel. 

II. The Gospel declares the love of God 
for the world, and his desire for the salvation 
of all men. It sets forth fully and clearly the 
only way of salvation, which is through Christ 
alone; promises that all who truly repent and 
believe in him shall be saved; commands, exhorts, 
and invites all to embrace the offered 

mercy; and urges every motive to induce men 

to accept its gracious invitations. This free 

and universal offer of the Gospel is accompanied 

R1310:page90 

by the Holy Spirit, striving with and 

R1310:page91 

entreating men to believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

III. It is the duty and privilege of every 

one who hears the Gospel immediately to accept 
its merciful provisions. Great guilt and 
danger are incurred by delay or neglect. And 
they who continue to disobey the Gospel perish 
by their own fault and are wholly without 
excuse, because they have resisted the Holy 
Spirit and rejected God's gracious offer of eternal 
life. 

IV. As there is no other way of salvation 
than that revealed in the Gospel, and as in the 
divinely established and ordinary method of 
grace faith cometh by hearing the Word of God, 
Christ hath given to his Church the written 
Word, the sacraments, and the ministry; endowed 
her with the Holy Spirit, and commissioned 

her to go with his Gospel into all the 

world and to make disciples of all nations. It 

is, therefore, the duty and privilege of all believers 

to sustain the means of grace where 



they are already established, and to contribute 
by their prayers, gifts, and personal efforts to 
the extension of the kingdom of Christ throughout 
the whole earth. 

[This is a new chapter added to the confession 
because the old confession lacked any 
statement of divine sympathy for the world. 
It is decidedly the best and most Scriptural 
chapter. But who cannot see that it is the reverse 
of Calvinistic? and that it is directly opposed 
to the statements first above quoted from 
the same Confession? 

If God loves the whole world and has made 
provision for the salvation of "the whole lost 
race of men," and if in his Word he declares 
"his desire for the salvation of all men" and 
"uses every motive to induce them to accept" 
it, how can it also be true that only the elect 
are chosen of God's free grace and love, irrespective 
of faith or good works or any other 
thing in said elected ones; and that he "withholdeth 
mercy as he pleaseth not to elect unto 
everlasting life but to ordain to dishonor and 
wrath?" Whence comes this conflict? and how 
can men of intelligence stultify themselves by 
declaring before the world that they believe 
these opposite statements? It is evident that 
if the revision committee had discarded the 
old confession and had made a new one, they 
would have come much nearer the truth. But 
then what would have become of Presbyterianism, 
Calvinism? It would be gone; and many 
of the ministers and people would have felt 
that they had lost their faith and wished they 
had died before the doctrine of election without 
reference to faith or works ended. They 
would have been in a pitiable condition for a 
while; but how much more they would have 
been blessed in finding afterward the true Bible 
doctrine of election— that God, having predetermined 
that every individual member of the 
redeemed race shall come to a knowledge of the 
truth and to an opportunity for faith and obedience 
and eternal life, has predestinated the election 
(or selection) of a Church under the headship 
of Christ Jesus, their Redeemer, composed 
of a "little flock" of overcoming saints, who, 
after being tried in all points, and found faithful, 
will be highly exalted as God's spiritual, Millennial 
kingdom, and shall then, as the Royal 
Priesthood, with Christ Jesus, their great Chief 
Priest, fulfil the promise made to Abraham 
(Gal. 3:16,29), by blessing all the families of 
the earth with knowledge and every assistance, 
bringing back to God whosoever freely wills to 
come. 



This glorious election once seen in its true 
light, the Apostle's injunction to make our calling 
and election sure, by so running as to obtain 
the great prize, would be appreciated as 
their error on the subject will not now permit 
them to appreciate it.] 

CHAPTER (X.) XII. 

OF EFFECTUAL CALLING. 

II. (Original) This effectual call is of God's 
free and special grace alone, not from anything 
at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive 
therein, until, being quickened and renewed by 
the Holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer 
this call, and to embrace the grace offered 
and conveyed in it. 

II. (As amended) This effectual call is of 
God's free and special grace alone, not from 
anything at all foreseen in man, who is altogether 
passive in the act of regeneration wherein, 
being quickened and renewed by the Holy 
Spirit, he is enabled to answer God's call, and 
to embrace the grace offered and conveyed in it. 

[Here is another futile endeavor to bend the 
word of God into harmony with the false view 
of election. The Scriptures declare that "many 
are called but few are chosen" or elected to the 

R1310:page92 

high honor of being Christ's bride, joint-heir 

and co-worker in the Millennial work of blessing 

the world in general. But this scripture 

did not harmonize with what John Calvin had 

decided on the subject; so he got around the 

statement that "many are called and few chosen" 

by making two calls— the effectual call for 

the elect and, as a matter of course, the ineffectual 

call for the non-elect. But the framers of 

the confession, ashamed to attribute such double 

dealing to the great Jehovah, refer to the 

ineffectual call only inferentially and logically. 

If the "effectual call" includes the giving of 

an indispensable ability to accept, then any other 

call would not only be ineffectual, but a hollow 

mockery and fraud. 

On the contrary, how simple and easy of explanation 
is the testimony of God's Word upon 
the subject: that all were unworthy of any favor, 
but that God graciously provided a ransom 
for the condemned ones, and then offered 
justification to all who, when they understand, 
accept of his favor of justification, not by works, 
nor without faith, but by faith. Then, so many, 



during the Gospel age, as hear and believingly 
accept of this justification are called or invited 
to become sons of God on a higher plane— to 
"become partakers of the divine nature" and 
joint-heirs with their Redeemer in his Kingdom. 

Many— all believers during the Gospel age- 
are thus called, but all do not care to accept 
the conditions of sacrifice which are attached 
to the call. "If we suffer with him we shall 
also reign with him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) "If any 
man will come after me, let him deny himself, 
and take up his cross, and follow me." 
(Matt. 16:24.) He that loveth not less 
than me, houses and lands, father and mother, 
sisters and brothers, yea, and his own life 
also, is not worthy of me. (Matt. 10:37,38; 
Luke 14:26.) Because few live up to 
these conditions, therefore few of the many 
called are chosen. The call was a genuine or 
effectual call in every case; but the response of 
the called ones was frequently insincere and ineffectual 
because they did not comply with the 
conditions. They did not so run as to obtain 
the prize, and thus make their calling and election 
sure or effectual.] 

III. (Original.) Elect infants, dying in infancy, 
are regenerated and saved by Christ 
through the Spirit, who worketh when, and 
where, and how he pleaseth. So also are all 
other elect persons who are incapable of being 
outwardly called by the ministry of the word. 

III. (As amended.) All infants dying in 
infancy, and all other persons, who, from birth 
to death, are incapable of being outwardly called 
by the ministry of the word, are redeemed by 
Christ and regenerated by the Spirit, who worketh 
when, and where, and how he pleaseth. 

[Another inconsistency. This statement belies 
the statement or confession first quoted 
above (Chapter III., Sections III. and IV.), 
on election and predestination. If it be true 
that "God hath predestined some of mankind 
unto life," and "the rest of mankind God 
was pleased— not to elect unto everlasting life, 
but to ordain them to dishonor, and wrath," 
then it cannot be true that all infants and others 
incapable of understanding are saved. Or, if it 
be true that all infants and all others without 
understanding are saved, it proves conclusively 
that the doctrine of the election of the saved 
and the non-election of others is a gross error— 
unless it be claimed that God's elections are according 
to unfitness, ignorance and degradation. 
And who would take such a position? 

This is the question specially troubling Doctor 
Briggs. He sees, sensibly enough, that if the 



non-elect class includes the majority of the 
thinking people, and if the elect includes with 
the "little flock" of saints all the insane and 
savages and infants, heavenly society would be 
rather undesirable unless some instructive training 
were given to the ignorant ones before full 
induction to the heavenly experiences, felicities 
and liberties. He, therefore, has adopted the very 
erroneous idea of an intermediate state of purgatory 
which, he presumes, such as are unsanctified 
and unfit for heaven enter at death. 

We shall not attempt here to give the true or 
Scriptural solution of the question of the future 
of infants and others incapable of faith, but 
will leave that for our next issue, to be treated 
in connection with a criticism of Dr. Briggs 
—his rights and his wrongs.*] 



*Sample copies of this and the next issue of the 
WATCH TOWER we will supply free on application in any 
reasonable quantities. 

R1310:page93 

IV. (Original.) Others, not elected, although 
they may be called by the ministry of the word, 
and may have some common operations of the 
Spirit, yet never truly come to Christ, and 
therefore cannot be saved; much less can men, 
not professing the Christian religion, be saved 
in any other way whatsoever, be they never so 
diligent to frame their lives according to the 
light of nature, and the law of that religion 
they do profess; and to assert and maintain 
that they may is very pernicious, and to be 
detested. 

IV. (As amended.) Others, not elected, although 
they may be called by the ministry of 
the word, and may have some common operations 
of the Spirit, yet inasmuch as they never 
truly come to Christ, they cannot be saved: 
neither is there salvation in any other way than 

R1311 : page 93 

by Christ through the Spirit, however diligent 
men may be in framing their lives according to 
the light of nature, and the law of that religion 
they do profess. 

[How inconsistent to say that the non-elect, 
though called, cannot be saved; and what a slur 
upon God's honesty to say that his Word calls 
those who are not elected and who consequently 
cannot be saved! 



That the hearts of our Presbyterian brethren 
are better than their heads and their Confession 
is evident from the endeavor to throw the blame 
off God and upon men by the statement that they 
are such as never truly come to Christ. But 
the effort is unsuccessful, for this portion of the 
Confession must be interpreted in harmony with 
the definition of election and non-election which 
precedes it, and which, as amended, declares 
that the elect are not chosen because of foreseen 
faith or good works, but purely of grace 
were predestinated to life, and that the rest of 
mankind God was pleased... not to elect 
unto everlasting life, but to ordain them to dishonor 
and wrath for the same sins which in the 
elect he forgives. 

Again, does it not seem to our Presbyterian 
friends rather a reflection upon the Lord's character 
to declare, as this revised clause does, that 
there is no hope of salvation for the millions 
who profess other religions than that of Christ 
—not even for the honestly deluded ones who 
are striving to shape their lives according to the 
light of nature they possess? Those in the class 
described are certainly honest if living up to 
the light of nature they do possess. If God 
loves them, why should he not give them, as he 
has given the elect, "a light to shine upon 
the road that leads men to the Lamb?" 

Let us note the point upon which they are 
thus confused and stumbling:— 

They are Scriptural in speaking of an elect 
class, the Church; they are correct, too, in calling 
the remainder of the human family non-elect. 
They are wrong, however, in the inference 
they draw, that all the non-elect are damned 
to torment forever. No scripture so teaches. 
The Scriptures show, on the contrary, that the 
elect little flock, when completed, is to be the 
long-promised "Seed of Abraham," by whom 
God declares all the families of the earth (the 
non-elect) shall be blessed. (Gal. 3:16,29.) 
To support the Presbyterian view, that passage 
should read, In thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be hopelessly damned. This is 
their mistake. The Bible doctrine of Election 
is a grand one when rightly seen: the elect 
Church, with her elect Head, Christ Jesus, is to 
constitute the Kingdom of God, to be exalted 
to glory and honor at the second advent, for 
the very purpose of blessing all for whom Christ 
died— all the human family— by bringing all 
to the full knowledge and full opportunity necessary 
to their acceptance of Christ and his 
proffered gift of life everlasting. 

They are right, too, when they declare that 



there is no salvation except through Christ and 
the spirit of the truth, however diligent men 
may be in framing their lives according to the 
light of nature and the laws of other religions; 
but they are wrong in the meaning which they 
attach to these words, indicated by the remainder 
of the Confession. 

The Scriptural view is that man has no claim 
upon the Creator for lasting life; that the giving 
of the ransom for all as an offset or cancellation 
of the claims of justice against all was an 
act of God's free grace, unmerited by any; and 
that the conditions upon which each may avail 
himself of this favor is by an acceptance of the 
fact and a framing of the life in obedience to the 
new covenant. There is no other name or way 
or light by which full salvation can be attained 
by any. But God, who provided this way, this 

R1311 : page 94 

only way, this light, this only light by which 
men may get back to God and to life, has made 
a broader provision for men to find that way 
and to see that light than our Presbyterian 
brethren realize. Our Redeemer not only gave 
himself a ransom for all, but the knowledge of 
this shall be testified in due time to all. (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
Nor can this be assumed to be a mere 
casual hearing of Christ and his work without 
satisfactory evidences to convict and satisfy the 
hearer as to the facts; for a preceding verse, 4th, 
declares positively that it is God's will that an 
accurate knowledge (see Greek text) of the truth 
on this subject shall reach all, in order that this 
salvation which he has provided in Christ for all 
may thus be available to all. 

No one can dispute that the vast majority of 
the living as well as the dead members of our 
race have never yet come to an accurate knowledge 
of God and Christ, and of the plan and conditions 
upon which eternal life is provided for 
them in the ransom sacrifice given for all, 
eighteen centuries ago. For those who have 
not received that knowledge in the present, 
there remains the sure promise of a coming blessing 
—the very blessing so long promised, that 
all the families of the earth shall be blessed in 
and by the Church, the little flock, with the 
Master-the Christ. 

It is evident that those persons who frame 
their lives according to the light of nature and 
those religions which they do profess are such 
as would gladly accept of Christ if they ever 
came to an accurate knowledge of the truth. 
They are evidently using the best light they 



possess. God's promise to these benighted ones 
is much better than our Presbyterian brethren 
confess, and it would be much more to their 
comfort and much more to God's glory if they 
confessed the truth as God's Word states it, that 
Jesus Christ is the true light which lighteth [or 
will light] every man born into the world. 
(John 1:9.) None will dispute that this light 
is the truth— the knowledge of God's plan; 
yet it must be evident to all that thus far only 
the few have seen it. It is in the future that 
this promise will be fulfilled— when the Christ, 
the Sun of Righteousness, shall arise with healing 
in his beams. (Compare Mai. 4:3 and Matt. 13:43.) 
"Then shall the blind see out of obscurity." 
-Isa. 29:18; 32:1-5; 35:1-5. 

CHAPTER (XXV.) XXVII. 

OF THE CHURCH. 

VI. (Original.) There is no other head of the 
Church but the Lord Jesus Christ. Nor can 
the Pope of Rome in any sense be head thereof, 
but is that antichrist, that man of sin, the son 
of perdition, that exalteth himself, in the Church, 
against Christ, and all that is called God. 

VI. (As amended.) There is no other head 
of the Church but the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
the claim of the Pope of Rome to be the vicar 
of Christ, and the head of the Church universal, 
is without warrant in the Scripture or in fact; 
and a usurpation dishonoring to the Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

[This is a denial of the original basis of the 
word Protestant. Calvin, Luther and others who 
protested claimed that there should be only one 
Church, but excused themselves from acknowledging 
the Church of Rome as that true Church 
because of its being Antichrist. Now they 
deny that it is Antichrist, and accordingly 
withdraw their protest by the above change.] 

CHAPTER (XXX.) XXXII. 

OF CHURCH CENSURES. 

II. (Original.) To these officers the keys of 
the kingdom of heaven are committed, by virtue 
whereof they have power respectively to retain 
and remit sins, to shut that kingdom against 
the impenitent, both by the Word and censures; 
and to open it unto penitent sinners, by the 
ministry of the Gospel, and by absolution from 
censures, as occasion shall require. 

II. (As amended.) To these officers the keys 



of the kingdom of heaven are committed, by 

virtue whereof they have ministerial and declarative 

power respectively to retain and remit 

sins, to shut that kingdom against the impenitent, 

both by the Word and censures; and 

to open it unto penitent sinners, by the ministry 

of the Gospel, and by absolution from censures, 

as occasion shall require. 

[Another very good, sensible change. Yet 
how inconsistent still— to tell us first that God 
has unalterably fixed the election or non-election 
of all, regardless of their faith or works, 
and then to say that the officers of the Presbyterian 
Church can in any sense either open or 
close the Kingdom for any whose fate God has 
fixed from all eternity!] 



R1311 : page 95 

YOUR REPRESENTATIVES ABROAD. 



By the time you get this number of the 
TOWER the Editor and his help-mate expect to 
be en route for Europe. 

We have several objects in view. We want 
to see the conditions of European society, in 
view of a preparation for the writing of the 
fourth volume of the MILLENNIAL DAWN series 
—"The Day of Vengeance." 

We desire also to consider, from that standpoint, 
what can be done to forward the spread 
of the Truth among the people of foreign countries. 
Even should we conclude that nothing 
more can be done than is being done at present, 
it will at least be a satisfaction to have made 
sure of it. 

Finally, we desire to meet with and to greet 
and encourage some of the dear fellow-servants 
there. This last feature, however, we fear will 
be disappointing to many of them as well as 
to us; for to accomplish the first two items 
(which are the real objects of the journey) will 
involve so extended a tour that the brief space 
of time at our disposal will necessitate rapid 
and constant traveling, and will consequently 
prevent our holding any meetings, except, possibly, 
in London. Nothing would please us better 

R1312:page95 

than to be able to go from town to town 
throughout England, Ireland and Scotland, 



spending a week at each, and holding meeting 
with the dear friends there whom we know by 
correspondence. But this is not possible: such 
a trip would require at least six months for 
Great Britain alone, and we have only about 
two months at our disposal for the entire trip 
outlined below. We will probably stop over 
one night at Belfast, Ireland, and one day each 
at Glasgow and Edinburgh, Scotland, in going, 
and two days in London, and, if possible, one 
day in Liverpool, on returning. We will send 
postal cards giving our address to the TOWER 
readers residing in those cities, and will be most 
happy to meet all who call on us. 

Think not, dear friends, that we would prefer 
visiting those haunts which usually attract 
merely pleasure-seeking tourists. Not so: ours 
is a journey in the honor of our King and for 
the better qualifying of ourselves to spread his 
truth. We care nothing for curious and ancient 
ruins, castles, etc.: we want to see the people, 
to judge of their modes of living, habits of 
thought and tendencies— the very things which 
few think or care about. 

Our route, as proposed, is as follows— subject 
to providential, financial or other changes found 
expedient: 

We leave New York City on the Inman Line 
steamer, "City of Chicago," on July 1st, for 
Queenstown, Ireland: thence to Belfast, Glasgow, 
Edinburgh, Copenhagen, Berlin, Leipzig, 
Vienna, Kischenev (Russia, where we hope to 
meet the converted Jew, Mr. Rabinowitz, whose 
work among the Jews so closely corresponds to 
our work among Christians, and whom we hope 
to persuade to accompany us to Jerusalem), Constantinople, 
Athens, Jerusalem; returning via 
Cairo (to see the Great Pyramid), Rome, Berne 
(Switzerland), Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam, London, 
Liverpool, and thence by steamer for New 
York and home. 

We want you to feel, as we shall, that our 
eyes and ears are yours representatively. And 
whatever we learn by this trip that would be of 
interest and profit to you all, we shall consider 
it a trust, as well as a pleasure, to deliver to you 
all, through the mediums of the TOWER and the 
future volumes of the DAWN. 

Meantime the office work is left in the charge 
of competent and deeply interested friends, who 
will do all they possibly can to fill your orders 
carefully and promptly; and matter for the next 
two issues of the TOWER is left ready. And 
not knowing what may be the Master's will in 
reference to our return, or when our "change" 
may come, we have left our affairs in such shape 



that the work would continue— others, under 
the Lord's guidance, filling our places. 

Good-bye! Come with us in spirit; and remember 
us in prayer, that our journey may be 
prospered, to the good of many and to the 
praise of our Redeemer. 



R1305 : page 96 
THE JUNE TOWER. 



Although our first intention was to publish 
the third volume of DAWN in cloth binding 
only, we finally concluded that this would hinder 
many from possessing it who would greatly 
desire and enjoy it. We therefore published 
a paper-bound edition at 25 cents per volume. 
Although many readers had already ordered 
it, others wrote that they could not pay 
for it at present, and still others, aged, maimed, 
and otherwise dependent, who are regularly on 
the TOWER poor list, we knew would lack 
means to purchase it as well as the TOWER. 
Love for the truth and love for the poor of the 
flock led to the plan adopted, and we sent out 
the paper-bound edition as the June issue of the 
TOWER, to all paid up subscribers and to all of 
the Lord's poor who, as directed, sent us a 
postal card at the beginning of the year requesting 
its continuance and stating their inability 
to pay for it. So far as possible we avoided 
sending extra copies to those who had already 
ordered and received the book; but we 
know of quite a few mistakes by which extra 
copies did go out. We trust that the friends 
receiving such may know of some good ways of 
using them to interest others in the truth. 

The sending out of so many books is of course 
quite an expense, but the message is for all the 
Lord's people alike, and we could not feel satisfied 
to do less. No extra charge has been 
made; but so many as can afford it of those 
who have not paid for their copy may, if they 
choose, accept their own copy free as a number 
of the TOWER, and at the same time have a 
share in the work of feeding such as are spiritually 
hungry by paying whatever they choose 
toward the expense of sending the book to 
others. 

If any who have paid for the TOWER for 1891, 
or any who have asked for it for this year, stating 
their inability to pay for it, have failed to receive 



the third volume, they will know that the 
omission was accidental, and they can have it 
rectified by advising us at once. 



page 96 

SPECIAL NOTICES. 



THE TAGS on your paper will, hereafter, inform 
you of how your subscription to the TOWER 
stands on our books. 

Changes in dates will be made only at the 
beginning of each quarter. 

Subscriptions will not, hereafter, begin at any 
time, but only with the quarters, January, 
April, July and October. For instance, new 
subscriptions sent in during July, August or September 
are reckoned as beginning with July 
issue, and will be marked as ending June '92, 
and TOWER issues from July are sent at once. 



Please be particular to give full address in each letter. 

When you change your address, state where from, as 
well as where to. 

In sending lists for samples or new subscriptions, mention 
full address of each. 

Write orders and lists of subscribers on a sheet of paper 
separate from your letter. 

The safest way to send money is by Express or Postoffice 
Money Order, by Bank Check, or Registered. 

If needful to write a second time about any order, give date 
of previous order, how money was sent and full particulars. 

The price of this journal was advanced to 60 cents a year, 
last January, when it assumed the present form. The additional 
charge does not cover the additional expense. 

The offer of the MILLENNIAL DAWN in paper covers at 
15 cents to those who give a portion of their time in helping 
to circulate it has heretofore been made only to those 
who purchased as many as ten copies of any single volume 
at one order. We have many inquiries for smaller quantities, 
however, and have decided that hereafter we will 
supply as few as five copies of any one of the three volumes 
in paper covers at colporteur's rate, 15 cents each, 
five for 75 cents. 

Please do not ask us to deviate from this rule. We 
must have system to avoid waste of valuable time. If 
you want more than five of a kind take ten; if more, then 
take twenty, thirty or forty. Remember that the books for 
colporteurs are put up in packs of fives, tens and twenties. 



R1312:page97 

VOL. XII. AUGUST, 1891. NO. 8. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Rev. Charles A. Briggs, D.D., for some years 
professor of Hebrew in the Union Theological 
Seminary (Presbyterian), has for some months 
been the centre of a religious commotion which 
is causing Presbyterianism a great deal of trouble 
and is awakening all classes of thinking 
people. 

Prof. Briggs is a fine scholar, and is more 
than ordinarily independent as a thinker. For 
some time he has been a leader among the progressives 
in Presbyterian circles, and, with others, 
has been quite outspoken in his opposition 
to the old Confession of Faith, and very desirous 
of having a new one adopted which would be 
liberal enough to permit the advanced and progressive 
Presbyterians to remain in the denomination 
and subscribe to its Creed without 
so many mental reservations and stretchings 
of conscience as have been and still are 
necessary. 

We can only commend the desire for full 
freedom of conscience evinced by Prof. Briggs 
and his colleagues, and heartily advocate the 
abolition of the musty traditions and confessions 
of our forefathers. We utterly repudiate 
the thought that the framers of the Presbyterian 
and other creeds of Christendom were 
either more honest or more inspired than are 
Christian men of to-day. And surely the increased 
facilities for critical Bible study which 
to-day abound should permit honest men under 
the guidance of the one Spirit of truth to gain 
a clearer idea of the teachings of the Bible 
than was ever before possible. It is, therefore, 
undoubtedly right for Prof. Briggs and for all 
true Christians to seek to know God's revealed 
truth, and to hold and teach it rather than the 
misconceptions of that truth entertained by fellow-mortals 
centuries ago. In no way could 
the promise of God have been fulfilled, that the 
path of his Church shall shine more and more 
unto the perfect day (Prov. 4:18), unless some 
of God's people had acted upon this principle 
of loyalty to his Word, thus asserting their freedom 
from human bondage. 

But, having commended the attitude of Professor 
Briggs and his colleagues in their battle 
against the darkness and errors of the past, we 



must criticise the methods they have adopted, 

because we believe them wholly wrong, dishonoring 

to themselves, and dishonest toward 

others not so far advanced, who put them into 

the positions of trust and influence they now 

occupy. Surely the use of influence thus bestowed, 

to the injury of the system which reposed 

the trust, is neither honorable nor honest, 

and must therefore be worthy of condemnation. 

We regret the necessity for such plainness of 

speech; but many teachers of theology greatly 

need plain lessons in honesty— in doing to others 

as they would that others should do to them 

if the circumstances were reversed. 

Nor can it be urged that the end sought— the 
liberation of Presbyterians from a dead creed— 

R1312:page98 

justifies the means. This is the doctrine of the 

Jesuits, but it is condemned by the Apostle 

Paul as unworthy of any servant of God. (Rom. 3:8.) 

On the contrary, while warring against 

error and sin and in behalf of the Truth, we 

should remember that no warrior will be crowned 

unless he war lawfully— justly. (2 Tim. 2:5.) 

The maxim, "All is fair in war," will not apply 

to Christian soldiers fighting the good fight of 

faith— contending for the faith once delivered 

to the saints. 

But, says one such, I have a good excuse for 
my conduct: let me state it to you. For the 
past three to six years I have been out of harmony 
with the denomination with which I am 
connected. I have seen that its ideas on 
election and damnation, and other subjects, 
are entirely unscriptural, and I have longed 
and prayed for the revision of our Confession 
now in progress. I am glad of what we have 
attained: it is a step in the right direction. I 
wish to God it were more thorough, and I 
hope to see it so within the next ten years. 
Meantime, I, with others, will wait and privately 
labor for that end. In the Presbyterian 
church I have had an opportunity and an influence 
for good which I would not have had if I 
had stepped out of her six years ago; and one 
result is the present half-way revision of the Confession. 
Had I stepped out of my pulpit, merely 
announcing that a change of views as to the 
teachings of the Bible prevented my remaining 
any longer a Presbyterian, the support of myself 
and family would have been withdrawn unless I 
could have found some other denomination with 
which I could fully agree, which is not the case. 
I consider that I have a right to teach in my 



own pulpit and to my own congregation of the 
Lord's church whatever I find taught in God's 
Word, so long as they are agreeable to having 
it so. Now tell me, Does not this explanation 
justify my course? 

Ah no ! dear Brother. Do get rid of that Jesuitical 
idea that the end sought justifies ignoble 
and dishonorable means for obtaining that 
end. You know very well that it is not your 
pulpit, but the pulpit owned and controlled by 
the Presbyterian denomination; and you know 
very well that it was only upon your recognition 
of it as their pulpit and under their supervision 
and control and after you had most 
solemnly vowed before God and men that you 
accepted and believed fully all the doctrines 
and regulations of Presbyterianism, that you 
were intrusted with the influence as a pastor, 
and as a teacher of Presbyterianism. You 
know, too, that your congregation is similarly 
bound, and that it assembles, not as a Church 
of Christ to study and to believe all that you 
can find and point out in God's Word, but as a 
Presbyterian church, pledged to believe neither 
more nor less than is taught in the Presbyterian 
Confession of Faith. You know very well, 
too, that if you, and every member of your congregation, 
should conclude to become simply 
Bible-Christians, taking God's Word as your 
only rule of faith and practice, as did the early 
Church, you would be hindered from using even 
the church-building, which is the property of 
the Presbyterian denomination. Think not that 
the Master will award a crown of glory for such 
violations of your covenant with your fellowmen, 
even though done in the name of service 
for the truth. Remember, too, that obedience, 
even without sacrifice, is better than great sacrifices 
without obedience. 

You should have stepped out of Presbyterianism 
or any other ism you might have been in, 

R1313 : page 98 

just as soon as you received greater light on God's 
Word than its creed would permit you to preach 
fully and conscientiously. The Lord has promised 
to provide for our temporal wants— as well 
as for our eternal welfare— not sumptuously, but 
nevertheless surely.— Isa. 33:15,16. 

PROFESSOR BRIGGS' DOCTRINES. 

A new professorship had just been added to 
the Union Theological Seminary— that of Biblical 
Theology— and Prof. Briggs had been 



called to fill it. He took the usual oath, declaring 
his belief in the inspiration of the Scriptures, 
and in the Westminster Confession of 
Faith as the proper interpretation of them, 
and promised to teach nothing subversive of 
the said Confession; and it was his inaugural 
address which followed (January 20th, 1891) 
that aroused the disturbance of which his name 
is now the centre. 

R1313 : page 99 

That inaugural address seems to many candid 
people to be a direct violation of the 
oath just previously taken. We give, below, a 
synopsis of the address, from which all can 
judge how much elasticity of conscience it 
would require to make oath that it is simply 
Presbyterian doctrine, or Prof. Briggs' understanding 
of the meaning or teaching of the 
Westminster Confession. 

JUST WHAT THE ADDRESS URGED. 

"The address set forth historically three great 
fountains of divine authority— the Bible, the 
Church, and the reason. The authority of the 
Church, the address urged, served to lead to 
God the majority of Christians from the Apostolic 
ages. If we cannot see good in the Church 
it is because the institutions of the Church 
have so enveloped themselves with human conceits 
and follies. The authority of reason was 
equally potent to lead men to the truth. This 
is the very holy of holies of human nature, and 
the vast multitude are unconsciously guided by 
God through its forms. The third source is the 
Bible. 

"As examples, the men who have been thus 
led to the truth were instanced— Cardinal Newman, 
the churchman; the rationalistic philosopher, 
Martineau; and the great biblical expounder, 
Spurgeon. These three, the address 
held, found God in their own ways through the 
three fountains of authority. 

HUMAN OBSTRUCTIONS TO THE BIBLE. 

"The Bible, continued the address, is the 
book of God, the greatest treasure of the 
Church. Of the three fountain-heads, no one 
is so beset with human obstructions as the Bible. 
No one can get at the Bible unless he force his 
way through these human obstacles. These barriers 
are: (1) A superstitious reverence for the 
book itself. (2) The belief in the verbal inspiration 



of the Bible. The divine authority 
is not in the words but in the thoughts. 

(3) The authenticity of the Scriptures. Traditions 
from the dead church assign authors to all 

the books of the Bible, but higher criticism pronounces 
these traditions fallacies and follies. 

(4) The dogma of the inerrancy of the Bible. 
Historical criticism again pronounces that there 

are errors in the Bible, but they are in circumstantials, 
not in essentials. (5) The miracles 
are in violation of the laws of nature, and they 
keep men away from the Bible. (6) The failure 
of minute prophecy. 

"As to the doctrines on Faith, there are 
(1) the doctrine of God, (2) the doctrine of 
Man and (3) the doctrine of Redemption. 

FUTURE PROBATION. 

"The Old Testament doctrine of redemption 
is chiefly concerned with (1) material interests 
of man; (2) redemption comprehends the whole 
process of grace; that is, it comprehends justification, 
sanctification and glorification; (3) redemption 
is not limited to this world, but continues 
during the vast periods of time which 
have elapsed for most men in the middle state 
between death and the resurrection. This middle 
state must not be shortened as to time by 
human limitations. 

"The only sanctification known to experience 
is progressive, and cannot be limited as to 
time. Progressive sanctification after death is 
the doctrine of the Bible and the Church. 
(4) Redemption is a redemption of our race and 
of universal nature. It is not to be limited by 
the doctrine of election. There is a definite 
number of the redeemed, but that is multitudes 
that no one can number. The salvation of the 
world is the salvation of the race as a whole." 

The fault found with Prof. Briggs is upon 
these two points— his placing the Church and 
uninspired Reason not only on a parity with the 
Bible, but even in advance of it, and his belief 
in a future probation in an intermediate state, 
between death and resurrection; or, as he states 
it, before the judgment. 

Prof. Briggs has since re-affirmed his statements 
above quoted, and has supplemented them 
by fuller explanations, some of which we quote 
below. Defending his position on the Bible, 
he declares— 

"That the Church is a source of divine 
authority is taught by all the organized churches 
of Christendom." 

And again— 



"Unless God's authority is discerned in the 
forms of the reason, there is no ground upon 
which any of the heathen could ever have been 
saved, for they know nothing of Bible or 
Church." 

"Unless God speaks with authority in the 
forms of the reason, no other mode of revelation 
was ever possible than that of an external 
and mechanical kind." 

We see just where the Professor stands; and 
we believe that many more Presbyterians and 
others who take opposite views from his would 
more fully sympathize with his position if they 
were as logical as he is without seeing the one 
and only complete solution of the problem. 
Prof. Briggs has gotten out of the idea that 

R1313 :page 100 

the Presbyterian Church contains all, or nearly 

all, the "elect," and that all others than the 

elect little flock are unalterably predestinated 

to everlasting torture. He is therefore, with a 

larger heart, looking around him to see who 

are saved and what saved them. He thinks of 

the billions of heathen people who have never 

heard of the Redeemer and who have never 

seen a Bible or in any way come in contact 

with its truths. He thinks, too, of some honest-minded, 

moral-living skeptics who have not 

believed in the Bible or trusted in Christ as 

their Redeemer. His conclusion, in common 

with the conclusions of other progressive theologians, 

is that these are somehow saved at 

death; for surely they are too good and too 

numerous to be tormented to all eternity on account 

of not believing what was not clearly 

made known to them. He asks himself, What 

saved these billions? and answers: Neither the 

Church nor the Bible, but Reason. 

The Professor next looks about him at those 
who have come more or less under the influence 
of the various professed churches, and thinks of 
the millions under the control of Roman Catholicism, 
Greek Catholicism, Mohammedanism, 
etc., who have practically no access to the 
Bible, and of the millions of Protestants who 
know but little of either the Bible or its teachings. 
He cannot, nor can any other man of 
sound and enlightened reason, bring himself to 
think that all these millions are to be tormented 
forever because of their ignorance of the Bible 
and its teachings. So he asks himself, What 
saves these millions? The only answer he 
seems to get is, The churches as organizations 
save them by teaching them to live approximately 



moral lives. 

Thus unintentionally, and contrary to their 
own theories and to the Scriptures, they make 
morality the ground or condition of salvation. 
Certain errors in their way hinder their getting 
the real Scriptural solution of the problem and 
force them to reason from false premises to 
erroneous conclusions. 

Looking next at the Bible and at the few who 
have any considerable understanding of it, he 
reaches the conclusion that of the three presumable 
fountains of divine authority and instruction 
the Bible saves the fewest and should 
be mentioned last. But the gentleman has 
surely omitted another, a fourth fountain, necessary 
to be remembered to complete his theory; 
for from this fourth fountain of saving grace 
(according to his theory) more blessing flows 
than from all the others together. That fourth 
fountain (according to his theory) is ignorance; 
for the Professor and many others claim that 
more than one-half of the race die in infancy, 
and that all these, since the revision of the Confession, 
are saved as fully by ignorance as the 
others are saved by reason, or the Church, or 
the Bible. 

Having found that the Bible saves very few, 
the Professor next concludes that it has been 
idolized too much, and forthwith he declares 
its errancy, and that not the words of the 
prophets and apostles were inspired, but merely 
the naked ideas, which they were left to clothe 
in fit or misfit language of any color, according 
to their temperaments or moods. According 
to this theory every reader is left free to 
guess for himself and to imagine what he pleases, 
regardless of the meaning of the words used by 
the apostles and prophets. 

Against such a theory we must most emphatically 
protest. If we can place no dependence 
on the inspiration of the language of the 
Bible we are entirely without a divine revelation. 
Even among those who admit that the 
words are inspired there are widely conflicting 
views taken, and we can readily see that if verbal 
inspiration were denied, and each interpreter 
left free to guess what the apostles and 
prophets had in their minds, regardless of the 
words they used, it would speedily make the 
Word of God of none effect. Take any text 
on any subject and apply this idea, and see 
what nonsense it would make. For instance, 
in the one which reads, "The soul that sinneth 

R1314:page 100 



it shall die:" if the words were not inspired, 
but merely the teacher's "concept," the interpreter 
might deny that the word "sinneth" 
conveyed the proper concept, and claim that 
the prophet had not expressed himself clearly, 
but that he meant a vile sinner who commits 
several murders. Or another might deny the 
word "die" and claim that the prophet did 

R1314:page 101 

not express himself correctly, and that instead 
he should have said, shall live in misery. Or 
another might question the use of the word soul 
and claim that the prophet should have said 
body. And thus each self-conscious reader 
might reconstruct his Bible to meet his own 
"concept." 

Besides, if Prof. Briggs and others to-day are 
able to get the conception or thought of the 
Spirit of God in spite of the improper use of 
words by the apostles and prophets, and if they 
in turn are able to express the real thought in 
better words, would it not prove that these 
teachers are much in advance of the writers of 
the Bible on all points, and consequently that 
it is time to discard the Bible as a hindrance 
rather than a help to the knowledge of the truth? 
—because the common people will take the erroneous (?) 
words of the apostles and prophets instead 
of going to Prof. Briggs for the true (?) 
interpretation— the proper words which they 
should have used and which the Holy Spirit 
should have dictated. In that event would it 
not be far the best plan now to suppress the 
Bible and to hire Prof. Briggs and his colleagues 
to be our Pope and council to tell us 
the truth? 

Is not this one of the very mistakes made by 
Papacy? It first placed the teachers of the living 
Church ahead of the teachings of the apostles 
and prophets, and very soon the Bible was 
not only useless to them, but an inconvenience, 
because the common people might puzzle the 
clergy by asking how the teachings of the living 
apostles (?) agreed with those of the dead 
apostles. Let Christians everywhere beware 
how they take such a backward step. If we 
discredit the verbal inspiration of the Bible we 
may as well cast the book aside entirely. 

But let us not be misunderstood: We do not 
refer to the English or German or any other 
translation of the Bible as being verbally inspired. 
Translators and transcribers have made 
a few errors; and here and there a few passages 
have crept in under the Bible covers which do 



not belong to the Bible. These,* of course, we 
do not defend. 

Another matter: certain books, such as 
Chronicles, Kings, Esther, Jonah, etc., are 
merely histories, and no more inspiration was 
necessary to write them than other more modern 
histories. A truthful statement of facts is all 
that can be demanded or claimed for these. 
And not only are any reasons for false statements 
lacking here, but considering that these 
histories cover centuries it is remarkable that so 
few flaws can be found in them. Their chief 
value is in furnishing us with chronological and 
genealogical data, the value of which information 
we have seen in examining the subjects 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., where 
we saw also that God has supplied, through 
the apostles in the New Testament, any breaks 
or points of uncertainty in those records. 

When Prof. Briggs asserts that the minutiae 
of prophecies have never been fulfilled, he 
speaks from his own standpoint merely, and 
does not realize the minuteness of the fulfilments 
past and present. Our readers who have 
carefully studied Volumes II. and III. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN will disagree with the gentleman 
and wish that he could realize with us some 
of the minute fulfilments. 

The claim that the authorship of certain 
books and portions of the Bible is a subject of 
dispute does not affect the question. For instance, 
whether or not Moses wrote one word 
of the first five books of the Bible is of 
no consequence. We know that Israel as a 
nation accepted those books as the essence of 
Moses' teachings. We know, too, that our Lord 
and the apostles referred to and quoted from 
the narratives of those books as the teachings of 
God through Moses. What matters it, then, 
whether Moses wrote them with his own hand 
or whether he had amanuenses who wrote according 
to his direction and under his supervision, 
and who properly closed the records with 
a purely historical account of the death of the 
great law-giver. 



*As instances see John 21:25; Mark 16:9-20; Rev. 20:5; 
portions of 1 John 5:7,8; and other less important 
words interpolated at sundry times, as shown by 
comparison of texts of the three oldest Greek MSS., by 
Prof. C. Tischendorf. All students should have these 
Testaments with Tischendorf 's foot notes. We have arranged 
to supply them at 50 cents post paid— usual price 
being $1.00 plus postage. 



R1314:page 102 

Again, a difference should be recognized between 
the prophetic and doctrinal writings of 
the apostles and prophets and the merely historical 
books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings, 
Chronicles, Esther, Ruth, the four Gospels and 
the Acts of the Apostles, which are merely historical 
records. The truthful writing of matters 
of history in this our day is not supposed to 
require inspiration, but merely honesty; and 
all well-informed persons know that the Jewish 
scribes were scrupulously careful in their work. 
In fact, no other historic records of those 
times are counted worthy of comparison with 
theirs. 

We hold, however, and believe the claim is 
supported by the internal evidences of the historic 
books of the Bible, that God, intending 
to furnish his people with such a reliable history 
of such incidents, dates, etc., as would be 
necessary or helpful to them, assisted the memories 
and exercised a general supervision over 
those whom he used as narrators of the historical 
features of his Word, "that the man of God 
might be thoroughly furnished." (2 Tim. 3:16,17.) 
And to some extent the same may be 
inferred respecting many items of more modern 
history which bear testimony to the fulfilments 
of prophecy, though the historians themselves 
were in total ignorance of the service they 
rendered to divine truth. The slight inaccuracies 
in some of the dates given in the 
books of Kings are, as we have heretofore 
shown, fully met and corrected by Chronicles 
and other Scripture; and many of them no 
doubt would be fully explained if the history 
were given in greater detail, so as to show joint 
reigns of fathers and sons. 

The authorship of the epistle to the Hebrews 
is also in dispute. But those who have partaken 
of the spirit of that epistle can not doubt 
that it was inspired by God, whoever may have 
written it. But so far as we are concerned there 
is no room to question that the author was none 
other than that great theologian and servant of 
the Church, the Apostle Paul. No other pen, 
it would seem, than that which wrote the Epistle 
to the Romans, except under special divine 
control, could write so clearly and forcibly of 
spiritual things. 

Miracles the Professor dismisses as "violations 
of the laws of nature;" but we should remember 
that many things might appear to us 
to be violations of nature's laws which in reality 



are not such. The usual we consider to be 
the law, while in reality the usual is as little 
understood as the unusual. For instance, it is 
the usual thing for grape-juice to form gradually, 
slowly, upon a vine, yet our Master, who 
undoubtedly understood the laws of nature, 
should not be esteemed a violator of its laws because 
he produced similar results at the marriage 
at Cana without the usual process. He, 
as the one who was giving his life as man's substitute 
and redeemer, violated no law that we 
understand or can appreciate when he healed 
the multitudes by letting his vitality (virtue- 
Luke 6:19; 8:46) go out into them. 

Our Lord's miracles were not foolish deeds 
for the benefit of the curious. They were, all 
of them, good works done, not selfishly in his 
own interest, for the gain of wealth or power, 
like the fabled miracles of Aladdin and others, 
but they were part and parcel of the long promised 
fruits of the Kingdom: "Those things did 
Jesus and manifested forth [beforehand] his 
glory." (John 2:11.) It was by these that Israelites 
were to recognize him as Messiah, in 
fulfilment of the predictions of the prophets. 
And when John the Baptist hesitated a little 
and sent to our Lord to inquire whether he were 
indeed the Christ, Jesus replied by pointing to 
his miracles as evidence, saying, "Go and show 
John again those things which ye do hear and 
see: The blind receive their sight and the lame 
walk, the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, 
the dead are raised up and the poor have the 
gospel preached to them."— Matt. 11:4,5. 

DR. BRIGGS' VIEW OF FUTURE PROBATION. 

In Dr. Briggs' views on future probation, or, 
as he terms it, progressive sanctification, centers 
chiefly the interest felt in his new departure. 
His skepticism upon other points could be lightly 
passed over by many who cannot brook even 
the suggestion that grace and mercy extend 
beyond the present life. 

And yet on the other hand there is an increasing 
number of Presbyterians and of other 

R1314:page 103 

Christians whose hearts are nearer to the truth 
than their heads— who seem to be feeling after 
the truth, but who are so convinced that their 
denominational creeds properly present the 
teachings of the Bible that God's Word is the 
last place they would think of looking into for a 
reasonable solution of their difficulties. This 



is well illustrated by the remarks of the Rev. 
H. P. Smith, when discussing Dr. Briggs' position 
before the Presbyterian General Assembly 
at Detroit recently. He is reported thus by the 
public press: 

"He quoted the passages of the Confession 
that point to a limited atonement, and that 
about elect infants, and said the revision recently 
recommended by the committee would 
not very long ago have been considered rank 
heresy. I don't understand Prof. Briggs' views 
on progressive sanctification (laughter), but that 

R1315 :page 103 

may not be because they are not clear. The 

Confession has many points that are often misunderstood. 

The doctrine of the Presbyterian 

Church is that every minute thirty human beings 

drop into the unspeakable and unending torments 

of hell. Think of this awful belief— you 

can't do it and keep out of the lunatic asylum. I 

think most of us have a secret hope that in some 

way God will find a way out of this. If Dr. 

Briggs can find this in the Bible, let us be glad. 

On a strict construction of the Confession, of 

course, he is wrong, but will you, who mean to 

make such a radical change of our Confession 

as to say that all infants are saved, not leave a 

little margin for Dr. Briggs? Prejudice is easily 

raised but not allayed. The theological 

stomach is delicate and made squeamish." 

Many of our readers have supposed that Dr. 
Briggs' views are in harmony with our own, but 
not so: although his views are much more in 
sympathy with ours than are the views of Presbyterianism, 
there is yet a wide difference between 
a future probation at the close of the 
Gospel age, during the times of restitution of 
all things which God hath spoken by the mouth 
of all his holy prophets since the world began 
(Acts 3:19-21), and a future probation in death, 
of which God has never spoken by any apostle 
or prophet. 

Prof. Briggs' position only illustrates how 
one error invariably leads to another. He sees 
the necessity of just such a scheme as the Bible 
points out, but he has not seen what the Bible 
teaches on the subject, and hence has proceeded 
to manufacture a theory expressing his own concept 
of what ought to be, and he believes therefore 
is, the divine arrangement. 

His first conclusion is that the Gospel age, 
instead of being God's time for the election 
and perfecting of a "little flock" of saints, 
is the time for the salvation of millions and 



billions of mankind. 

His second conclusion is that God does not 
work miraculous changes in character, but 
leaves character to be developed under discipline 
and experience. 

His third conclusion is that the vast majority 
who die have not at death developed good characters, 
and hence that they would be totally 
unfit for the companionship of Christ, the saints 
and the angels until they be put through a 
schooling and discipline which will develop in 
them true and pure characters in full harmony 
with God. His idea is closely allied to that of 
Romanism expressed in the doctrine of Purgatory, 
and, though more refined and less objectionable 
every way, it is equally unscriptural. 

His fourth conclusion is that since this theory 
would get him over his two great difficulties 
(a small number of saved saints or a host of 
saved ones unfit for heaven and whose presence 
there would not only cause pain to themselves 
but disturb the pleasure of all others there), 
therefore his way must be God's way. 

We quote the Professor's own words in elucidation 
of his views and his reasons for them. 
It will be noticed that he bases nothing upon 
the statements of the Bible, which he classes 
last and least among the "three great fountains 
of divine authority," but bases all upon Reason 
and Church theories. He uses the word "believers" 
in connection with his theory, but by 
this expression he must not be understood to 
refer to believers in Christ as a redeemer, but 
rather to all who believe that there is a God 
(which includes almost every one). This conclusion 
is irresistible from his statement that 
Reason is one of the principal fountains of 
divine revelation. Reason never leads to Christ 
and his sacrifice and justification by faith, but 
to works for self-justification. Reason, however, 
does admit a god of some sort as a first 
cause of all things; and this we must suppose 

R1315 :page 104 

to be Prof. Briggs' understanding of a believer, 
as in no other sense can heathen millions who 
never heard of Christ be said to be "believers." 
His own words are:— 

"There are some theologians who persuade 
themselves that they can believe in the immediate 
justification and the immediate sanctification 
of infants, of incapables and of heathen 
adults, in the change of death, in that supreme 
moment of transition from this life to the middle 
state. Such a theory may be stated in 



words, but it is inconceivable in fact. It would 
violate the intellectual and moral constitution 
of man. 

"If regeneration and sanctification are one 
act, how can we distinguish the intervening 
act of justification? and if regeneration, justification 
and sanctification may all be one at 
death, why not in this life? Why was the world 
turned upside down at the Protestant reformation 
in order to discriminate justification by 
faith from sanctification, if after all these centuries 
of Protestantism they are really identical? 

"Then Protestantism would be not only a 
failure, but also one of the greatest crimes in 
history. This is the pit of ruin into which 
some of the scholastic dogmatic divines of our 
day would force us, rather than extend the light 
of redemption into the middle state. 

ONE WAY TO MAKE CHRISTIANS. 

"The doctrine of immediate justification 
and sanctification at death involves the conceit 
that the child who dies in infancy a few minutes 
after birth is immediately justified and 
sanctified, receives saving faith and all the 
Christian graces in an instant; while his 
brother, who lives in this world, is not justified 
until he reaches the age in which he can exercise 
personal faith, and then he has all the 
struggles of life to undergo until he reaches the 
limits of human life without the comforts of 
sanctification, which he can not receive until 
death. If this were so, then blessed are those 
who die in infancy, and thus outstrip their fellows 
in the Christian race. 

"What parent would not prefer to lay all his 
children in an early grave, assured of their salvation, 
rather than expose them to the dreadful 
risks of life and the possibility of eternal damnation? 
According to the current beliefs, those 
Chinese mothers who put their children to 
death make more Christians than all the 
missionaries. 

"The Roman Catholic doctrine of purgatory 
is a perversion of the true doctrine. It is mechanical 
and unethical, like other peculiar doctrines 
of the Roman Catholic system. But it 
is better than a blank agnosticism. 

"Believers who enter the middle state enter 
guiltless; they are pardoned and justified, and 
nothing will be able to separate them from 
Christ's love. They are also delivered from all 
temptations. They are encircled with influences 
for good such as they have never enjoyed 
before. But they are still the same persons, 



with all the gifts and graces and also the same 
habits of mind, disposition and temper they 
had when they left the world. Death destroys 
the body. It does not change the moral and 
religious nature of man. The eternal punishment 
of a man whose evil nature has been 
stripped from him by death and left in the grave 
is an absurdity. It is the work of sanctification 
to overcome sin in the higher nature. The 
Christian graces will unfold under more favorable 
circumstances than in this world. 

THE MIDDLE STATE A HEAVENLY UNIVERSITY. 

"What practice have infants and imbeciles 
when they enter the middle state? How far 
short in practice do the best of men fall? Are 
they no longer to have an opportunity for the 
practice of true holiness? Will there be no 
chance to learn what true holiness is? The 
middle state must, from the very nature of the 
case, be a school of sanctification, a heavenly 
university, the aim of whose training is Christlikeness 
and glorification at the second advent. 

CHRIST'S PROPHETIC OFFICE CONTINUES TO 
THOSE IN THE MIDDLE STATE. 

"Christ is the mediator between God and 
man in the exercise of his office as prophet, 
priest and king. Those who passed a few years 
in this world, and then went into the middle 
state and have been there for centuries, have 
not passed beyond the need of his mediation. 
The interval between death and the judgment 
has its lessons and its training for them as well 
as for us. The prophetic office of Christ continues 
to those who are in the middle state. 
After his own death he went to the abode of 
the departed spirits and preached unto them 
his gospel. He ascended into heaven, taking 
his redeemed with him. 

THE FATHERS, TOO, TEACH THE DEAD. 

"The redeemed robber is not the only one 
to whom he has something to say in the middle 
state. All believers enter his school and are 
trained in the mysteries of his kingdom. Those 
mysteries are not cleared up by a flash of revelation; 
they are revealed as the redeemed are 
able to apprehend them and use them. It is 
improbable that Augustine, Calvin and Luther 
will be found in the same class-room as the redeemed 
negro slave or the babe that has entered 



R1315 :page 105 

heaven to-day. The fathers and doctors of the 
Church will be the teachers of the dead, as they 
taught the living. 

"Christ's priestly office continues for them. 
But, above all, Christ is a king in the intermediate 
state. Here in this world his reign is 
complete. His reign is entire over his saints, 
and they are being prepared by him for the advent, 
in which they will come with him to reign 
over the world. 

THE MODERN CHURCH SHOULD BELIEVE IN THE 
COMMUNION OF SAINTS. 

"The Church is chiefly in the intermediate 
state. The Church on earth is only the vestibule 
of it. In this world we have learned to 
know in part the Messiah of the cross; there 
in the middle state the redeemed know the 
glory of the Messiah of the throne. There the 
Church is in its purity and complete organization, 
as the bride of the Lamb. There Christ 
the head and his body the Church are in blessed 
unity." 

It will be noted that the Doctor's chief difficulties 
here expressed are (1) that his heart has 
outgrown the Presbyterian Confession of Faith; 

R1316:page 105 

and (2) that cold, critical study of the Word 
of God has exceeded the spiritual study of it in 
the meekness and simplicity of a disciple at the 
feet of the Master, seeking divine guidance into 
the deep things of God's plan therein revealed. 

What all such large-hearted Christians need 
is a full, clear view of the glorious plan of the 
ages. To obtain such a view, however, requires 
great meekness and patience: meekness 
to accept and confess the truth from any source; 
patience to hold objections in abeyance until 
its gracious and comprehensive provisions are 
seen. The plan of our God formed before the 
world, but requiring ages for its full development, 
is so just, so loving, so good, so altogether 
complete and so soul-satisfying, as to leave 
no aching void for reason to search to fill. 

(1) That plan shows that, so far as the world 
in general is concerned, God, who created all 
perfect in the one representative man whom he 
made and in whom he placed procreative powers, 
has for six thousand years been letting the 
condemned race feel the full weight of the just 
penalty threatened and pronounced— "Dying, 



thou shalt die." 

Only the Church composed of the faithful 
overcomers of the Patriarchal and Jewish ages 
and the Church of the Gospel age have yet in 
any sense or degree escaped the sentence; and 
these saved ones are as yet saved from that 
calamity only partially. At present they are 
"saved by hope" only (Rom. 8:24), and must 
await the appointed time and the full coming 
of God's Kingdom, when our blessed Lord 
and Redeemer will reign in power and great 
glory, and will complete to both of those Churches 
the work of salvation, raising them fully out 
of the death condition to perfection of life and 
organism.-l John 5:19; Heb. 11:37-40; 
Rom. 8:24; 2 Tim. 4:8. 

(2) It shows that the "groaning creation," 
which for six thousand years has been travailing in 
pain together, is also to be delivered (liberated) 
from the bondage it is now under by reason of 

the sentence of death, and that those of the 
world, too, may have everlasting life if they 
will accept of it then upon the terms of the 
New Covenant sealed by the precious blood of 
him who died for all.— Rom. 8:21; 
IPet. 1:18,19. 

But it shows very clearly in this connection 
that this deliverance which Christ will extend 
to the whole creation is not due until after the 
two elect Churches (Jewish and Christian) have 
first been selected, and that these two elect 
classes, as the seed of Abraham— both that 
which is after the flesh and that which is after 
the spirit (Rom. 4:16) are thus to be unitedly 
the agencies of God for blessing all the families 
of the earth.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

(3) It shows that as the Jewish age was the 
judgment day of the Jewish Church, which 
proved and selected the worthy ones of the 
fleshly seed of Abraham who will constitute the 
earthly phase of the kingdom of God; and as 
the Gospel age has been the appointed time for 
the trial and selection of the spiritual seed of 
Abraham who will constitute the higher, spiritual 
phase of that kingdom, so the Millennial 

age is the time appointed as the world's judgment 
day under the kingdom of Christ which 
will bless all the families of the earth with a 
righteous government, and assist all the groaning 
creation to the attainment of full perfection 
and everlasting life under the New Covenant. 

(4) It shows that the holy ones of both the 

R1316:page 106 

Jewish and Christian Churches, who renounced 



sin and accepted God's freely-provided justification 

by faith, and who consecrated themselves 

fully to the will and service of God, were accepted 

of him provisionally as FULLY SANCTIFIED, 

and were tested by him (Heb. 12:8; 

Rom. 8:14) in order to prove the depth and 

sincerity of their sanctification. However, we 

do not refer to sanctification in the sense which 

Doctor Briggs' language intimates— a sanctification 

of perfect conformity of the flesh 

to the will of the Lord. This is impossible because 

of the inherited weakness of the flesh 

through the fall. Our reference is to a sanctification 

or full conformity of the will or spirit 

of such consecrated ones to the will of God. 

Such sanctified ones seek as best they can to 

bring every thought and word and deed of the depraved 

body "into captivity to the obedience of 

Christ." This sanctifying work progresses with 

each member of the Christ as soon as he is accepted 

into the family of God. This cleansing 

or purging of God's elect Church is accomplished 

by those trials and persecutions which are 

permitted to come upon its members, to teach 

them their own imperfections, to emphasize the 

necessity of the ransom, the atonement and the 

Mediator which God has freely provided, and 

to develop in each a character appreciative of 

righteousness and love. Such under the Lord's 

care grow stronger with each wind of adversity 

and with each battle with selfishness and sin. 

Thus we see that, to the faithful of the Jewish 

Church (Heb. 1 1:37,38) and the faithful of the 

Gospel Church, the Jewish and Gospel ages have 

been purgatories or periods of purgation. With 

reference to the fires of the purgatory in which 

God has been thus destroying our weaknesses 

and cleansing and purifying unto himself the 

Gospel Church, called to be the Bride of Christ 

(Eph. 5:30-32), the Apostle says: Beloved, 

think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 

which is to try you, as though some strange 

thing happened unto you; but rejoice inasmuch 

as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that 

when his glory shall be revealed ye may be glad 

also with exceeding joy.— 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

Again, God through the prophet Malachi (3:3) 
shows that our Lord Jesus himself is the 
refiner who is purging or purifying the spiritual 
Levites (believers), that he may present to himself 
a chaste virgin-church without spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing. 

(5) As the past and present ages have been 
times of trial, days of judgment and purgatorial 
fires for these two Churches, so God's design 
is that the next age, the Millennial day, 



will be the purgatory, the day of judgment or 
trial for the world in general. And those who 
then accept of the divine offer of everlasting 
life, under the conditions of the New Covenant, 
will, during that age, not only be instructed 
fully in the ways of the Lord, but disciplined 
also; for the Lord disciplines every son whom 
he accepts into relationship to himself— whether 
human or spiritual sons. 

The world's purgatorial or reformatory discipline 
will in some respects be less severe than 
that of the Jewish and Gospel Churches, because 
full, clear knowledge of the Lord's character 
and plan will remove many of the present 
obstacles to faith and obedience, and because, 
Satan being bound [active evil influences restrained], 
everything will be favorable to the 
formation of good characters, and only the inherited 
moral and physical weaknesses will remain 
to be conquered under the sympathetic 
guidance and assistance of the Christ of God— 
the Church of God glorified under the great 
head of that Church, our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who as Jehovah's representative secured this 
privilege of reconciliation of sinners with his 
own precious blood.— Rom. 14:9; 1 Cor. 6:2; 
Gal. 3:29. 

But as the purgatorial discipline of the Gospel 
Church is specially severe, so the reward to 
those who prove faithful is correspondingly 
greater— the world is offered human perfection 
and honor and glory, the Church, divine perfection 
and honor and glory. The standard, 
however, by which all the sons of God must 
be measured is the golden rule, perfect love 
(and hence obedience) to God, and love instead 
of selfishness toward all the sons of God. 



Here, then, we find the arrangement which 
God's plan has provided for the work of progressive 
sanctification of "whosoever wills" of 

R1316:page 107 

all the ransomed race, fitting the justified for 
the proper enjoyment of those holy and everlasting 
blessings which God offers to all through 
Christ. This way, too, so far from running 
counter to God's Word (as human theories always 
incline to do), is in perfect accord with 
"all things written" in the Law, the Prophets 
and the Gospel, whose statements cannot all be 
used consistently while ignoring this future part 
of God's great work, without which also God's 



character, as declared in his works, must be 
apologized for instead of adored. Thus the 
true light now enlightening his Church, and 
blessing those upon whom falls "the light of 
the glory of God as it shines in the face of 
Jesus Christ our Lord," will yet prove, as promised, 
to be that TRUE LIGHT which shall enlighten 
every man that cometh into the world. 
Thus, ultimately, will "good tidings of great 
joy be unto all people," and each class of the 
blessed will in its turn come to its blessing 
through God's grace in the sacrifice of atonement 
made once for all by our Lord Jesus, and 
by the purgatorial experiences through which he 
will bring all who submit themselves to his will, 
and will be accounted worthy of everlasting life. 
While these purgatorial influences are common 
to all sons of God as individuals, at all 
times, yet there are special dispensational burnings 
as well. For instance, such a special or 
dispensational burning occurred in the end of 
the Jewish age, when, the Israelites indeed, the 
true "wheat" of that dispensation, having been 
gathered out of it into the Gospel "garner" at 
Pentecost, a time of great and fiery trouble 
came upon the "chaff," the remnant of that 
nation (Matt. 3:12). So, too, will it be in the 
"harvest" or end of this Gospel age. Our 
Lord declares that the "wheat" of this age 
will be separated completely from the "tares" 
and gathered into the higher garner of his 
glorified kingdom, and then the purgatorial 
"fire" will come upon nominal Christendom, 
producing "a time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation," which will burn up, 

R1317:page 107 

root and branch, all of its false pretenses and 
evil systems, and thus prepare the world for the 
reign of the kingdom of Christ, the true 
Church glorified. 

These great dispensational, purgatorial fires 
cleanse the floor and prepare the way for 
the work of the dispensations following. Thus 
the utter destruction of the Jewish polity as the 
typical kingdom of God was due at the time of 
the establishing in embryo of its antitype. 
And in the end of the Gospel age it is likewise 
proper that the great nominal Church systems, 
chiefly in the midst of which the true Church 
or Kingdom has been developed, should be 
destroyed (as systems) at the time that the acceptable 
little flock is to be received into the 
fulness of her promised glory. In both of 
these instances those cut off from special favor 



are still granted such favors as remain. The 
Jews, broken off from special favor as the natural 
seed of Abraham, had still open before 
them whatever favors remained: they, as well 
as the wild olive branches, might be grafted in 
again if they continued not in unbelief. So, 
too, in the end of the Gospel age: after the 
elect number has been selected and glorified, 
all the unworthy (rejected from that high position) 
will go into the great trouble predicted, 
and in that purgatorial fire they will finally learn 
of their rejection from that great honor to which 
they were called; but they will also be shown 
that God has some other precious favors which 
are yet open to them. 

But in the end of the world's purgatorial 
trial, in the end of the general judgment of the 
Millennial age, there will come another dispensational 
fire upon those who will still be found 
out of harmony with God and his law of love, 
at the close of that day of blessed opportunities 
for knowing and doing the will of the Lord. 
That fire will signify the "everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord" of all 
those then found unworthy of life. There 
will remain nothing further of favor to be extended 
to them; for wisdom, love and power 
will then have done all that could justly be done 
to influence the wills of men toward hearty 
obedience to God's law of love. 

We thus see that although Dr. Briggs is not 
at heart so far from the plan of God, yet his 
head is far from being in harmony with either 
the letter or the spirit of God's Word. Let us 
the more earnestly contend for the faith once 

R1317:page 108 

delivered to the saints, and seek in every way 
to speed the true, the Bible view of purgatory 
as the only satisfactory answer to both the hearts 
and heads of God's people. Let each one who 
sees the true light lift it up where others, too, 
can see it. Let your light so shine among men 
that they, seeing your good works, your energy, 
zeal and love for the Lord, may be drawn, also, 
to examine God's Word and plan afresh, and 
thus to glorify God on your behalf. 



R1288:page 108 
DELIVERANCE. 



"Still o'er earth's sky the clouds of anger roll, 
And God's revenge hangs heavy on her soul; 
Yet shall she rise— though first by God chastised— 
In glory and in beauty then baptized. 

"Yes, Earth, thou shalt arise; thy Father's aid 
Shall heal the wound his chastening hand hath made; 
Shall judge the proud oppressor's ruthless sway, 
And burst his bonds, and cast his cords away. 

"Then on your soil shall deathless verdure spring. 
Break forth, ye mountains, and ye valleys, sing! 
No more your thirsty rocks shall frown forlorn, 
The unbeliever's jest, the heathen's scorn. 

"The sultry sands shall tenfold harvests yield, 
And a new Eden deck the thorny field. 
E'en now we see, wide-waving o'er the land, 
The mighty angel lifts his golden wand, 

"Courts the bright vision of descending power, 
Tells every gate and measures every tower; 
And chides the tardy seals that yet detain 
Thy Lion, Judah, from his destined reign."— Heber. 



R1318:page 108 

"GOD IS IN THE MIDST OF HER." 



"God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: 
God will help her at the dawning of her morning."— Psa. 46:5. 
Leeser. 

Who is this upon whom the great King of the 
universe hath so set his love, that though all the 
earth be in the wildest commotion she shall not 
be moved? Ah, it is she who in compliance with 
the invitation of the preceding Psalm (45:10,11) 
hath inclined her ear, forgetting her own 
people and her father's house that she might become 
the joyous bride of the King's Son. She 
has consecrated the remainder of her life to this 
one thing— the proving of her worthiness to fill 
the exalted station to which she is called. Gladly 
she bids farewell to her own people and her 
father's house— her human friends and relationships. 
Henceforth she has no further interest 
in the hopes, ambitions and aims which she once 
shared in common with them. The way which 
leads to the goal of her new ambitions and hopes 
she also realizes will be long and tedious, set 



with many a snare, and thronged with numerous 
foes. But her heart is fixed and she has 
put her trust in the omnipotent Jehovah, who 
lovingly assures her (Psa. 46:1) that he will be 
her refuge and strength and a very present help 
in trouble. And to-day, when the trials and 
dangers are most subtle and ever increasing, 
God is in the midst of his consecrated ones, 
his Church, and she is not moved; and every 
moment she is made to realize his presence and 
help and strong support. God is in the midst 
of her; nor shall she ever be moved until glory 
hath crowned what grace hath begun. 

But where is this faithful Church to be found? 
—this people so set apart from the world, so 
faithful, so loyal and so true?— so ready always 
to recognize and accept the Lord's help? Does 
it gather here or there or yonder? and is God 
manifestly in the midst of its congregation as 
evidenced by its joyous songs and fervent 
prayers? Ah, no! it is a scattered flock; so 
much so that the world does not discover that 
there is such a people. The world knows them 
only as isolated and peculiar individuals who 
cannot assimilate even with the masses of those 
who bear the name of Christ. There is one in 
the quiet of country life whose chief interest 
is not in the harvest of his earthly crops, and who 
only plants and reaps thus that he may be able 
to devote himself so far as possible to the reaping 
of God's harvest. He has glorious tidings 

R1318:page 109 

for his neighbors far and near, of the kingdom 
which is soon to be established in the earth. 
And there is a farmer's wife: in the midst of 
her busy cares the blessed sound of gospel grace 
has fallen on her ears. She feels at once like 
dropping the domestic duties and going abroad 
to tell the good news. But no; she remembers 
the Lord's teaching, that he that provideth not 
for his own house is worse than an unbeliever; 
and so she says, I will let my light shine here. 
These little ones around my feet shall learn to 
rejoice in the truth; my companion, my neighbors, 
my farm hands and all that I can reach 
through the mail or the press shall know of it; 
and all these domestic duties which I realize the 
Lord would not have me ignore shall henceforth 
be done with an eye single to his glory. 

Here is an invalid and there is an aged saint. 
Their faith in the Word of God, regardless of 
the vain philosophies and traditions so commonly 
accepted, brings upon them many reproaches 
which are meekly born for Christ's sake, while 



they humbly endeavor to let their light shine 
upon those about them. And yonder in a crowded 
city are a few who dare to be peculiar— to 
separate themselves from the customs and habits 
of social life, to forego the pleasures and present 
advantages of former social ties, to speak 
the new and heavenly language, to sing their 
songs of hope and praise and by every agency 
within their grasp to send forth the glorious 
message of the coming kingdom. And then 
scattered far and near are some unencumbered 
with earthly cares and joyfully denying themselves, 
esteeming it a privilege to devote all 
their time and energy to the great harvest work. 

Yes, "the Lord knoweth them that are his," 
and he is in the midst of them. He knows 
their loyalty to him and they know his voice 
and are ever ready to follow his leading. Thus 
no harm can overtake them. They will stand 
and not fall, and will in the end be crowned 
as victors. A thousand will fall at their side 
and ten thousand at their right hand in this day 
of trial, but they will be kept in the very midst 
of the wildest confusion. They may, as the 
trial proceeds and as the faint-hearted and unfaithful 
fall, be left to stand almost or entirely 
alone in their several localities; but then they 
will realize all the more the preciousness of being 
alone with God. 

Trials and siftings are as necessary to the 
Church's prosperity and development as is the 
truth, and none of these things need discourage 
any. If some go out from us, it is because they 
were not of us (1 John 2:19), and those who 
still stand after such purification should be the 
dearer to one another, as they are to the Lord, 
and should the more endeavor to strengthen and 
comfort one another with his words. 

The promise that God shall ever be in the 
midst of his faithful Church guarantees her steadfastness 
—"God is in the midst of her: she shall 
not be moved." His watchful eye is upon all 
the ways of his saints. He will give his angels 
[his messengers or servants] a charge concerning 
them [messages of truth and grace] and in 
their hands they shall bear them up, lest they 
dash against the hidden rocks of error and destruction. 
(Psa. 91:11,13.) There is therefore 
no saint of God so weak, or unlearned, or 
beset with subtle opposing forces, as not to 
be abundantly able to stand, even in this evil 
day, if he is only loyal and faithful to God. 
And his blessed help will be gloriously realized 
in the fruition of all their hopes in the dawning 
of the morning of their new life beyond the 
vail. MRS. C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1317:page 109 
ITEMS OF INTEREST. 



Misconceive, mistrust, misunderstand, misconstrue, 
misrepresent, misquote, misapply, misuse, 
mislead, misreport— here is a lengthy list 
of troublesome misses. Who has not seen a 
victim of their awful work? They have trampled 
upon and triumphed over the just. They 
have drowned out the voice of the innocent 
with their unrighteous din. The Lord himself 
suffered from the most of them. He was misunderstood, 
misjudged, and misrepresented; and 
His words were misconstrued and misapplied, 
and are to-day. He heard Scripture misapplied, 

R1317:page 110 

and at last suffered death through the misapplication 
of his own words. Can a disciple expect 
better treatment than his Master? Poor, 
frail humanity is always missing the mark. A 
good man may be the victim of all these troublesome 
misses, but no good man will entertain or 
employ them as soon as he finds out their character. 
We had better be praying to God for more 
wisdom than to be missing the mark with any 
of this list. "A fool uttereth all his mind, but 
a wise man keepeth it in till afterwards." It 
saves heaps of trouble to have a mouth that 
won't go off half-cocked, like a dangerous piece 
of fire-arms, and wound somebody. It is a mark 
of wisdom to keep the tongue still unless divine 
grace causeth it to move. —Selected. 



In a recent magazine article the Princeton 
College astronomer gave an account of the latest 
astronomical news, mentioning by the way the 
service which photography is lending to his science. 
An illustration of that is in this statement, 
made at the meeting of the Photographers' 
Association of America: "After an exposure 
of thirty-three minutes the same instrument 
which rendered visible to the human eye stars 
of the fourth magnitude, which in the centre 
heavens would register 44,000,000 stars, showed 
to the photographic eye 134,000,000, and upon 
exposure of one hour and twenty minutes would 



throw before the gaze of the beholder luminous 
dust of 400,000,000 stars." Never before had 
there been such a revelation of the depths of 
the infinite. 

Truly, as the Prophet has declared, Day unto 
day uttereth speech and night unto night showeth 
knowledge. How the increasing light of 
revelation and invention assure us of the boundlessness 
of our Father's house of many mansions 
or apartments! What a field for pleasure 
and usefulness in the divine service, everywhere 
revealed, God hath prepared for those that love 
him! When as joint-heirs with our Lord we 
shall have finished the great work of blessing 
all the families of earth at the close of the 
Millennium, there will evidently be other worlds 
to bless and enlighten. Of the increase of 
his government and peace there shall be no 
limit. 

What are the distinguishing marks of a ripe 
character? One mark is beauty. Ripe fruit has 
its own perfect beauty. As the fruit ripens, the 
sun tints it with surpassing loveliness, and the colors 
deepen till the beauty of the fruit is equal to 
the beauty of the blossom, and in some respects 
superior. There is in ripe Christians the beauty 
of realized sanctification, which the Word of God 
knows by the name of "beauty of holiness." 

Another mark of ripe fruit is tenderness. 
The young, green fruit is hard and stone-like. 
The mature Christian is noted for tenderness 
of spirit. 

Another mark of ripeness is sweetness. The 
unripe fruit is sour. As we grow in grace we 
are sure to grow in charity, sympathy and love. 
We shall, as we ripen in grace, have greater 
sweetness toward our fellow-Christians. Bitter 
spirited Christians may know a great deal, but 
they are immature. 

Those who are quick to censure may be very 
acute in judgment, but they are as yet immature 
in heart. I know we who are young beginners 
in grace think ourselves qualified to reform the 
whole Christian Church. We drag her before 
us, and condemn her straightway; but when our 
virtues become more mature I trust we shall not 
be more tolerant of evil, but we shall be more 
tolerant of infirmity, more hopeful for the 
people of God, and certainly less arrogant in 
our criticisms. Another and a very sure mark 
of ripeness is a loose hold of earth. Ripe fruit 
easily parts from the stem.— Spurgeon. 

R1304:page 110 

NEW TRACTS. 



Nos. 9 and 10 of the OLD THEOLOGY TRACT 
Series are now ready. No. 9 is a translation 
of TRACT NO. 1 into the SWEDISH language. 
No. 10 is "The Faith Once Delivered to the 
Saints." 

To regular THEOLOGY TRACT subscribers we 
sent only one of No. 9 as a sample, not knowing 
how many each could use, and a double 
quantity of No. 10 to make up the difference. 
Should any be able to use more of No. 9, we 
will furnish the number for which they subscribed 
without extra charge. 

These Tracts will be furnished to others at 
the same rate as the preceding numbers— one 
cent each. 



R1317:page 111 
JEWISH ITEMS. 



The Grasdanin, a newspaper published in 
St. Petersburg, Russia, says, in the course of 
an article on the Semitic question: "Judaism 
is proceeding by slow but sure steps to the subjugation 
of Europe by intrigue, knavery and 
corruption. It advances easily where the people 
are ignorant, pliable and apathetic. It 
is therefore absolutely necessary to protect the 
Russians against the Jewish conquest by the 
most radical measures, if we do not wish to see 
the Israeli tish Empire established in our midst." 
The Grasdanin suggests as preventive measures 
the refusal of social recognition of the Jews 
unless they hold a first guild license, that dealings 
in lands should be prohibited unless the 
guild licenses them, that only five per cent of the 
members of councils and clubs may be Jews, 
and that all Hebrew newspapers be suppressed. 



The change in the position of the Jew within 
the past half century is one of the most remarkable 
character. Fifty years ago the Jew was 
inert and imbecile; now he exercises a greater 
power than in the days of David or Solomon. 
The Jews to-day influence more people, control 
more bullion, and exercise more legislative 
power than they did when they had their temple, 
their land, and their sceptre. They have 
been stationary for eighteen centuries, and 



hunted into obscurity. To-day they attract 
wider attention than ever before in their history. 
It is estimated, by those who claim to see the 
drift of things, that in a brief period all the 
seats of justice will be in their hands. Out of 
twelve hundred students of law in Berlin, six 
hundred were Jews. The Berlin and other 
Councils are ruled by a Jewish majority, and all 
offices are in the gifts of Jews. The German 
tradesman sinks to a secondary position alongside 
his Jew competitor, the best squares are 
filled with Jew shops, the best estates have 
passed into their hands. In Germany they have 
ousted the best families from their patrimonial 
possessions. This is true of Holland also. 
The Jew is the world's chief banker to-day. 
Almost the whole of the liberal press of Germany 
is in their hands. The two leading papers 
of Rome were, and possibly still are, edited 
by Jews. The power of the Jewish press of 
the continent of Europe is very great in matters 

R1318:page 111 

political, scientific and theological. ...As 

the Jew has entered the civilization of the age 

and become a part of it, Rabbinical Judaism 

has necessarily undergone considerable modification. 

Amongst multitudes of Jews in Germany, 

the hope of a Messiah has totally disappeared. 

A spirit of scepticism has laid hold of 

the younger generation, so that conviction has 

disappeared.... All idealism is gone, and 

nothing is considered to be useful and worth 

while any effort but that which promises material 

advantage— wealth, honor, power and enjoyment. 

Of two thousand shops kept by Jews 

in the city of Paris, not over a hundred are 

closed on Saturday. Of the seventy thousand 

Jews in New York City, not over twenty-five 

hundred are attached to the synagogue. 



A correspondent of The Faith says: The 
Academy of Sciences of Bologna have at length 
produced their report on the question of a 
primary meridian and universal standard of 
time. They propose to disestablish Greenwich, 
and to fix the new meridian at Jerusalem, where 
the universal day would begin at noon, and 
where the universal day and chronological day 
would virtually coincide. The essential thing 
in a meridian is that it should pass over as much 
land as possible, so that arcs of it may be easily 
measured in any investigations into the size and 



shape of the earth. From this point of view 
the choice lay between Boston and Jerusalem. 
The meridian of Boston is in certain respects 
the better, but Jerusalem is supposed by the 
Academy to be a better site for an international 
observatory. Thus, if the scientific opinion of 
Europe endorses this report, we shall have in 
future to regulate our clocks and watches by 
Jerusalem mean time, and our maps will make 
all their degrees run east and west, not from 
Greenwich, but from Jerusalem. 



R1319:page 113 

VOL. XII. SEPTEMBER, 1891. NO. 9. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

PERILOUS TIMES AT HAND. 

"This know also, that in the last days perilous times 
shall come."— 2 Tim. 3:1. 

Realizing that we are now living in the very 
times referred to by the Apostle, some may inquire, 
How can this be? Are not these times, 
in comparison with times past, specially favorable 
to the prosperity of the Church? Time 
was when fire and sword and guillotine and rack 
were systematically employed to exterminate 
the true saints of God, when the Word of God 
was a book prohibited, and when the prison and 
the dungeon rewarded the faithful searching of 
the Scriptures. And is there not also more 
truth due and understood now than formerly, 
as well as full liberty— if a man is pleased to 
exercise it— to believe and teach, either in private 
or in public, whatever he believes to be 
truth? 

Yes, such are the favorable conditions of our 
day. Never, in all the history of the Church, 
has there been a day of such privilege and blessing 
—such increase of knowledge and general 
intelligence, such facilities for the general diffusion 
of knowledge and such breadth of individual 
liberty— of conscience, of speech and of 
action as today. The spirit of liberty is abroad 
in the earth, and though the wily enemies that 
once fettered and handcuffed and imprisoned 
it still live, and would fain imprison it again, 
they regretfully realize that the soaring eagle is 
on the wing and may never be pinioned again. 
But hand in hand with all these advantages, 
strange to say, comes the Church's greatest peril. 
True, there is little peril to physical life, or 
earthly property; but these to the true saints 
are of minor importance, for they count not 
their earthly life dear unto them, if by any means 
they may attain the divine nature and glory to 
which they are called. The peril of these times 
is to the spiritual nature of the saints and to their 
valuable property in the exceeding great and 
precious promises of God, which are all yea and 
amen in Christ Jesus. Subtle influences are now 
at work seeking to dwarf and extinguish the 
spiritual life and to rob the saints of their glorious 
hope, to sap stealthily the very foundations 
of Christianity, and thus effectually to overthrow 



the whole superstructure of the Christian 
faith in the minds of many, causing them thus 
to stumble and lose their glorious inheritance 
as joint-heirs with Christ. The present besetments, 
being of this subtle character, are the more 
calculated to delude and ensnare, so that if one 
allows himself to be for a moment off his guard, 
the agencies of the adversary will gain an advantage 
and use it to entrap the unwary one. And 
God will permit such snares because those only 
who are loyal and faithful, and therefore ever 
watchful, are counted worthy to escape their 
strong delusion. "Watch ye, therefore, and pray 
always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape 
all these things that shall come to pass, 
and to stand before the Son of man."— 
Matt. 21:36. 

R1319:page 114 

The Apostle forewarns the Church, not only 
of the certainty of such perils, and of their 
character, but also of their manner of approach. 
On one occasion he said, "For I know this, 
that after my departing shall grievous wolves 
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
[Such were the great and destructive papal 
powers.] Also of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things to draw away disciples 
after them." (Acts 20:29,30.) Some of 
these Paul and the early Church encountered in 
that day. Paul was often in perils among false 
brethren who, concerning the faith, had made 
shipwreck, and who greatly withstood his words 
—his efforts to build up the Church in the most 
holy faith. (2 Cor. 11:26; 1 Tim. 1:19; 2 Tim. 4:14-17.) 
And he shows that from such false 
brethren, brethren who have erred from the 
truth and become teachers of false doctrine, 
will come the Church's greatest peril in these 
last times. (2 Tim. 2:16-18; 3:5.) And in 
order that we might recognize and beware 
of them, he very minutely described them, 
though the clear significance of the warning is 
somewhat beclouded by a faulty translation, 
which reads as follows:— 

"For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient 
to parents, unthankful, unholy,* truce-breakers, 
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers 
of those that are good; traitors, heady, 
highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers 
of God; having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof; ever learning, and 
never able to come to the knowledge of the 
truth." 



The description as here translated, the reader 
will observe, is incongruous; for men of such 
villainous character could have no form of godliness. 
Read the description again and consider 
—How could a proud, covetous, boastful 
blasphemer, a truce-breaker, a false accuser, incontinent 
and fierce, a despiser of those that 
are good, a heady, highminded, pleasure-loving 
traitor, have any form of godliness whatever, 
or deceive any one in this respect. Such a fierce 
character and bold blasphemer could not possibly 
palm himself off as a child of God; nor 
would he attempt it. The fact is that our translators 
did not fully comprehend the Apostle's 
language, and in rendering it into English they 
put the heaviest possible construction upon the 
Greek words, and thus the picture of these persons 
is overdrawn. Thus, for instance, the Greek 
word here rendered "blasphemers" (verse 3) 
is blasphemos, which signifies one speaking 
injuriously or an evil-speaker. Now, judging 
merely by the word, regardless of the context, 
we would not know whether in this instance the 
evil speaking is carried to the extent of revilings 
or not; but as it stands related to the 
context— in view of the after statement that 
these have a form of godliness (verse 5), though 
lacking its real power— we must conclude that 
those milder or more subtle forms of evil-speaking, 
which would be consistent with hypocritical 
forms of godliness, are referred to, and therefore 
that our English word blaspheme, though 
it means evil-speaking, is too strong a term by 
which here to translate the Greek word blasphemos; 
for the full and generally understood significance 
of the English word blaspheme is— 
"To speak of the Supreme Being in terms of 
impious irreverence, to revile or speak reproachfully 
of God, Christ, or the Holy Spirit— to 
speak wickedly of, to utter abuse or calumny 
against, to speak reproachfully of."— Webster. 

So also the word apeithes, rendered "disobedient," 
signifies not persuaded; and the expression 
"disobedient to parents" would consequently 
signify not of the same persuasion, or not of the 
same mind as were the parents. The word anosios, 
rendered "unholy," which signifies unkind 
or unholy, would likewise, in view of the context, 
be better rendered by the milder English term, 
unkind. The word aspondos, rendered "truce-breakers" 
(verse 3), signifies irreconcilable or implacable 
—i.e., stubborn or constant in enmity. 
The word akrates, rendered "incontinent," signifies, 
more properly, without strength, or without 
self-control. Though this thought is also in the 
English word "incontinent," a coarser meaning 



generally attaches to the word. The word anemeros, 
rendered "fierce," signifies not mild, savage. 
That is, it may be a great or a small lack 



*The Sinaitic, the oldest and most reliable MS., omits 
the words, "without natural affection," they being no part 
of the original text. 

R1319:page 115 

of mildness, amounting in some cases to savage 
bitterness. But, again, the fierce or savage 
idea is not compatible with any pretentions to 
godliness, as intimated in verse 5. The word 
aphilagathos, rendered "despisers of those that 
are good," would thus be better rendered not 
friendly to the good. 

Thus revised, the Apostle's language reads as 
follows: "For men shall be lovers of their own 
selves [selfish], covetous, boasters, proud, evil-speakers, 
not of the same mind as were their 
forefathers [i.e., devisers of new doctrines], 
unthankful, unkind, irreconcilable, false accusers, 
without self-control, not mild, not friendly 
to those that are good— traitors, heady, high-minded, 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers 
of God [i.e., preferring their own will or pleasure 
to the will or pleasure of God]; having a 
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; 
ever learning, and never able to come to a 
knowledge of the truth." 

It should be observed also that the word 
men, in verse 2, is emphatic in the Greek text, 
as shown in the Emphatic Diaglott, thus indicating 
that a particular class of men is here referred 
to, which, according to the description, 
can be none other than those mentioned in 
Acts 20:29,30, viz.: men "of your own selves 
[men of your own company, men whom you 
have hitherto regarded as members of the body 
of Christ, and who still claim to be such], who 
shall arise speaking perverse things [perverting 
the truth. But why, you ask, should any one 
who had once received the truth desire to pervert 
it? The Apostle answers that their object 
is] to draw away disciples after them." And for 
this purpose, of leading away disciples after 
them, they keep up the form of godliness, although 
they deny its power— the only power by 
means of which any of the fallen race can be 
reckoned godly or righteous in God's sight- 
viz.: the power of the precious blood of Christ, 
which cleanseth us from all sin, as long as we 
appreciate and accept this salvation through 



faith in his blood. 
R1320:page 115 

Well may we inquire, as we realize that we are 
living in the last days here referred to, Is there 
such a class of enemies to the truth and to the 
Church actually in existence to-day? Truly, the 
voice of prophecy has never set up a false alarm, 
or foretold an uncertain event. The perilous 
times have come and the foretold perils are all 
about us. Side by side in the same communities 
with the humble, faithful, consecrated 
saints— in the same little assemblings together 
of those who have escaped from the bondage 
of Babylon, in the same households, and often 
at the same table of the Lord, there has also been 
developing a class who are "lovers of their 
own selves [selfish], covetous [of honors and 
distinction and the praise of men— ambitious], 
boasters [as though the credit of the truth now 
due and received were in some way due to them, 
and as though they had a right therefore to alter 
and amend it at their pleasure], proud" [of 
that knowledge which should be received with 
only humility and thankfulness, and which can 
be retained only under these conditions]. 

Because the light of newly unfolding truth 
has dawned upon their pathway, they, in common 
with the faithful saints, no longer are of 
the same mind as were their parents; but the 
goodness of God thus manifested to them, 
instead of cultivating in them a spirit of thankfulness 
and co-operation, which is its design, 
seems to arouse a spirit of pride and ambition, 
which does not long hesitate to make merchandise 
of the truth for ambitious ends, however 
trivial and foolish those ends may be. And in 
pursuance of the ambitious policy, by degrees 
they become "evil-speakers [against the doctrine 
of Christ and those who believe and teach it] 
unkind, unfriendly to those that are good [who 
hold fast the truth in righteousness], and false 
accusers" [of such]. As they proceed in this 
way they seem to lose all former strength of 
Christian character. They become irreconcilable 
to the truth, so that neither Scripture, nor 
reason, nor the example of the faithful, has 
power to restore them. Loving their own wills 
more than the will of God, they grow more and 
more proud and boastful of their attainments- 
high-minded and heady. Not submitting themselves 
to the Head of the body, Christ Jesus, 
they are ambitious to head new factions themselves, 
and thus they turn traitors to the truth. 

They claim, too, to be very earnest students 



of the Word of God; and so they are, but they 

R1320:page 116 

never come to a knowledge of the truth. They 
are after something new, some new and peculiar 
"find" in the mine of God that will attract 
the wondering gaze of many curious disciples. 
But, alas for their purposes! there are no such 
real curiosities in the blessed Word of God; but 
the zeal of these ambitious ones is equal to the 
emergency, and one after another the actual 
truths are beclouded, distorted and perverted to 
this ignoble end and presented as newly found 
truths. And the unwary receive them as such, 
not recognizing at first that they are subversive 
of the entire system of divine truth. Thus their 
faith in the truths already learned is unwittingly 
undermined; they are caught in the snare of 
the enemy; and as they continue to give ear to 
these seductive influences they become more 
and more entangled, until, having lost their 
anchorage, they find themselves adrift on a vast 
sea of unbelief, floating they know not whither. 
Like their leaders, they may retain the form of 
godliness but have lost its power. 

But there is another feature of the description 
of these false teachers, whose ambitions place 
so many perils in the pathway of the saints, 
which should not be overlooked. Verses 6 and 8 
describe, or rather illustrate, the manner in 
which the influence of such teachers will be 
brought to bear upon the Church. Their opposition 
is not expressed in bold, defiant terms, 
and emphasized and enforced with vehemency. 
As here intimated, their policy is crafty, deceitful, 
sly, under pretentions of godliness, love of 
truth, and zeal for the truth. Their influence 
will be exerted somewhat after the manner of a 
vile class mentioned in verse 6 who "creep into 
houses and lead captive silly women laden with 
sins and led away by various inordinate desires." 
Not that such will be the actual immoral character 
of these teachers, but that their policy 
will be similarly seductive. 

Their actual course is more particularly described 
in verse 8 thus: "Now as Jannes and 
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist 
the truth: men of corrupt minds [corrupted or 
turned aside from the truth], reprobate concerning 
the faith." Thus we are shown that 
the opposition to the truth will be manifested 
in a subtle, deceptive course similar to that of 
those opposers of Moses. They opposed Moses 
by doing something similar to what he did, thus 
confusing the people. God had given Moses 



power to do certain miracles in order to prove 
to Israel that Moses was his divinely empowered 
agent. And Satan forthwith empowered 
his agents to duplicate those miracles to some 
extent, though not perfectly, thus endeavoring 
to confuse the minds of the people and to unsettle 
their confidence in Moses and his leading 
and teaching. 

Just so it is to-day: the studied effort of false 
teachers— false brethren developing in the very 
midst of the Church— is to offset the truth by 
plausible forms of error, to unsettle confidence 
both in the truth and in all teachers of the 
truth, thus to lead away disciples after them 
and their theories. And in consequence of 
the allurements of these false teachers, and 
of the unfaithfulness of many to the love and 
service of the truth which they have received, 
a class in the midst of the Church will give 
much encouragement to the ambitions of these 
false brethren; "for," says the Apostle (2 Tim. 4:3,4), 
"the time will come when they will 
not endure sound doctrine, but after their own 
desires [desires for something new] shall they 
gather to themselves teachers, having itching 
ears [for new and strange things]; and they 
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and 
shall be turned unto fables." 

Nor will this class be only a small minority; 
for, in order that the faithful may not be discouraged 
when brought face to face with these 
things, they are forewarned (Psa. 91:7) that, 
before this conflict ends, a thousand shall fall 
at their side and ten thousand at their right 
hand. Thus realizing that God foreknew it all 
and that the accomplishment of his glorious 
purposes is not in the least endangered thereby, 
they may still have confidence and joy in view 
of the glorious consummation of his plan and of 
their promised position in it. 

But how shall the faithful believers act towards 
these false brethren in their midst? 
Shall they take them by the hand as formerly 
and bid them God-speed? Shall they recognize 
them as brethren in Christ when they have denied 
the faith, when they have rejected salvation 

R1320:page 117 

through the precious blood of Christ and 
now claim it of God as their just right, as the 
reward of their own righteousness after they 
have, as they say, slain the enmity that is in 
them? Are such indeed our brethren? are 
they owned of God as sons? and shall we indeed 
walk with them and be guiltless? What 



does the Apostle say we shall do? He says, 
"From such turn away." (Verse 5.) "Be not 
ye partakers with them; for ye were formerly 
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: 
walk as children of light. .and have no 
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, 
but rather reprove them." (Eph. 5:6-11). 
And the Apostle John (2 John 1 1) emphasizes 
Paul's counsel, saying, "If there come any 
unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive 
him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed; 
for he that biddeth him God-speed is 
partaker of his evil deeds." 

Such "evil men," says Paul (verse 13), "shall 
wax worse and worse [more and more bold and 
aggressive, as they receive encouragement from 
that rapidly increasing class who will no longer 
endure sound doctrine], deceiving [others] and 
being deceived" [themselves— becoming more 
and firmly intrenched in the snares of their own 
weaving, so as to make it impossible to extricate 
them]. But, nevertheless, the time is coming 
when they shall proceed no further; for 
their folly shall be manifested unto all men, as 
was the folly of Jannes and Jambres, who could 
not forever withstand the teachings of Moses, 
the servant of God.— Verse 9. 

Then Paul proceeds to call attention to the 
ground of Timothy's confidence in himself as 
a faithful teacher of divine truth, saying, "But 
thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience, 
persecutions, afflictions which came unto 
me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what 
persecutions I endured: but out of them all the 
Lord delivered me." (Verses 10,11.) Such are 
always the marks of a true teacher. His doctrine 
will be that which the most thorough investigation 
of the Scriptures most clearly proves 
and establishes beyond all peradventure. His 
manner of life will be consistent both with his 
faith and with his consecration to the Lord. 
His purpose will be the building up of the 
Church in the most holy faith. His faith will 
be positive and clear— not mere guess work, 
but knowledge, based upon the sure Word of 
God, with whom is no variableness nor shadow 
of turning. And his great love for the Church 
will be manifest as was Paul's, and as was Moses' 
love for Israel, by longsuffering, patience and 
meek endurance of persecution, both from an 
opposing world and from false brethren arising 
in the midst of God's people. And in such 
persecutions no true teacher will be lacking; for 
"all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." (Verse 12.) Such has been 



the experience of every true teacher that God 
has ever raised up to deliver and guide his 
people. Witness Noah, Moses, Paul and Luther. 

But, beloved, our advice to you in these perilous 
times, when error is taking on its most baneful 
and deceitful forms, and when it is finding 
its most active agents amongst false brethren 

R1321 :page 117 

and sisters in your very midst, and when fidelity 
to truth, therefore, occasions the severing 
of some of the tenderest social ties you have 
ever known, even among those with whom you 
once held sweet converse as you walked together 
to the house of God— yes, in these times 
let us again urge the counsel of Paul— "Continue 
thou in the things which thou hast learned 
and hast been assured of, knowing of whom 
thou hast learned them;" for it is written (John 6:45), 
"They shall be all taught of God." 
Whoever the human agent may be that God has 
made use of to bring you to a knowledge of the 
truth, he was simply an index finger to help 
you trace it for yourself on the sacred page; 
and in humility and faithfulness he made no 
greater claim than this, assuring you that the 
holy Scriptures to which he ever and continually 
pointed are indeed "able to make you wise 
unto salvation through faith which is in Christ 
Jesus;" and that "all Scripture given by inspiration 
of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, 
that the man of God may be perfect, 
thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
Therefore, dearly beloved, what you have 
learned concerning God's glorious plan of the 
ages, and concerning your privileged place in 

R1321 :page 118 

that plan, as heirs of God and joint-heirs with 

Jesus Christ, his Son, and concerning the conditions 

upon which you hold this precious 

promise and may finally realize it, and concerning 

that great foundation doctrine of our redemption 

from sin and death through the precious 

blood of the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

a ransom for all, upon which fact rests the 

whole superstructure of the wondrous and glorious 

plan, hold fast these things, knowing of 

whom you have learned them. This precious 

truth is God's message to you, not man's. No 

such high and glorious hope could ever have 

entered the mind of mortal man, had not God 

revealed it by his spirit, as he has done through 



faith in his Word, in his own due time. It is 

all in that Word. Search and see for yourselves; 

and be not faithless but believing. It comes not 

to you on the miserable authority of vain imagination, 

or dreams, or doubtful visions, but 

on the authority of God's most holy and authentic 

Word. True, it is almost too good to 

believe, but is it not just like our God? Does 

it not gloriously illustrate the breadth of his 

mighty mind, the scope of his marvelous wisdom 

and power, and the depth of his love and 

grace? 

Continue, therefore, in the things which thou 
hast learned, and hast been assured of (having 
proved them yourselves from the Scriptures), 
and be not of them who turn away their ears 
from the truth and are turned unto fables. And 
observing those who have a form of godliness, but 
who, nevertheless, by their false teachings deny 
the power thereof, "from such turn away," and 
"have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather reprove them." We 
cannot serve two masters; we cannot espouse the 
cause of truth and the cause of error as well; 
nor can we retain the friendship of God and 
of the advocates of error also. Who is on the 
Lord's side? let them rally around the Lord's 
standard. All told, they will only be a "little 
flock." Like Gideon's band, the company now 
gathered by the proclamation of the harvest-message 
of truth must be tested and sifted until 
only the loyal, faithful, true hearted, brave 
and valiant soldiers of the cross remain; and to 
these, though their numbers be small, will 
the laurels of victory belong when truth and 
righteousness finally prevail. Let no man boast 
of numbers now when the highest interests 
of the elect of God are all bound up with 
the faithful few, to whom it will be the Father's 
good pleasure to give the kingdom. 

"Count me the swords that have come." 
"Lord, thousands on thousands are ready." 

"Lo, there are too many, and with them are some 
Whose hearts and whose hands are not steady. 
He whose soul does not burn, 
Let him take up his tent and return." 

"Count me the swords that remain." 

"Lord, hundreds on hundreds are daring." 
"These yet are too many for me to attain 

To the victory I am preparing. 

Lead them down to the brink 

Of the waters of Marah to drink." 

"Lord, those who remain are but few, 



And the hosts of the foe are appalling, 
And what can a handful such as we do?" 

"When ye hear from beyond my voice calling 
Sound the trump! Hold the Light! 
Great Midian will melt in your sight." 



R1321 :page 118 

"Temptations never give us notice. Can we 
expect them to do so? The sailor does not expect 
to have notice of every gale of wind that 
blows upon him. The soldier in battle does not 
reckon to have notice of every bullet that is 
coming his way. By what apparatus could we 
be kept aware of every advance of the evil 
one? The very essence of temptation often 
lies in the suddenness of it. We are carried 
off our feet before we are aware. Yet we must 
not say, because of this, 'I cannot help it;' for 
we ought to be all the more watchful, and live 
all the nearer to God in prayer. We are bound 
to stand against a sudden temptation, as much 
as against a slower mode of attack. We must 
look to the Lord to be kept from the arrow 
which flieth by day and the pestilence which 
walketh in darkness. We are to cry to God for 
grace, that, let the gusts of temptation come 
how and when they may, we may always be 
found in Christ, resting in him, covered with 
his divine power." — C. H. Spurgeon. 



R1318:page 119 
WHAT OF THE NIGHT? 



Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Shadows and darkness encircle me quite; 
Earth is enshrouded in midnight gloom, 
Black as the pall that envelopes the tomb; 
Watchers are few, and mockers are bold— 
The heavens are starless— the night-air is cold. 
I am weary; O would that this night were gone. 
I will watch for the day till the morning dawn." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"In the east appeareth a glimmering light: 
Faint it gleams— but 'tis rising now, 
And streaming afar— 'tis the morning's brow. 
Shadows are passing— the Day Star is out, 
The glory is flashing and leaping about, 



And the golden tints that are poured o'er the earth 
Foretell of the bursting morning's birth." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Day rushes onward all cloudless and bright. 
And warmth, and light, and beauty are driven 
To the farthest bound of the far-off heaven. 
Flashing flames from the throne of God 
Are bathing the world in a golden flood. 
Seraph and cherub are crowding it on, 
And the pure in their rapture are skyward gone." 

Watchman! watchman! what of the night? 
"Bursts on my vision a ravishing sight: 
The Lord is in sight with his shining ones, 
And the splendors of twice ten thousand suns. 
He has come! Lo, the night-watch of sorrow is o'er, 
And the mantle of midnight shall shroud me no more. 
Pilgrim and Stranger, haste to thy home, 
For the morning, the beautiful morning, has come!" 
D. T. Taylor. 



R1321 :page 119 

THE PROPHET LIKE UNTO MOSES. 



DEUT. 18:15-22, AND ACTS 3. 

In these Scriptures is to be found our subject. 
In the former is the prophecy of Moses, and in 
the latter Peter touches on its fulfilment. To 
find an apostle dealing with the fulfilment of 
prophecy is a great advantage, as it is one of 
our best safeguards against error and uncertainty. 
It is here, as it frequently happens elsewhere in 
similar cases, minute details are not dealt with: 
only broad outlines. Peter identifies the Prophet 
like unto Moses, and indicates the sphere and 
scope of his mission, together with its results. 
The likeness is not of a personal kind, either in 
nature or character; but is to be found rather 
in position and work. Nor is this likeness at 
all exact, being that of antitype to "type," 
reality to "figure," or substance to "shadow." 

I. As "our Passover," Christ is the Prophet 
like unto Moses. When the Passover was instituted, 
"the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron 
in the land of Egypt, saying, This month shall 
be to you the beginning of months; it shall be 
the first month of the year to you.'" There is 
an adequate reason for this. The life which 
man derives through the first Adam is condemned; 



and God has never entered into covenant 
with man on the basis of condemnation. 
In the institution and observance of the Passover, 
the people were typically passed over from 
death unto life. Their physical lives were preserved 
when others were destroyed; and that 
preservation is a type of a more widely extended 
and enduring one. In the treatment of the 
Passover lamb, there are at least two points which 
ought to be specially noted. First, as to the 
blood: "They shall take of the blood and strike 
it on the two side posts and on the upper doorpost 
of the houses wherein they shall eat it... 
and the blood shall be for a token upon the 
houses where ye are; and when I see the blood 
I will pass over you and the plague shall not be 
upon you to destroy you when I smite the land 
of Egypt" (Ex. 12:1-28). Very early the eating 
of blood was prohibited: "Flesh with the 
life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye 
not eat" (Gen. 9:4). This prohibition was 
frequently repeated, and a specific reason assigned 
for it: "For the life of the flesh is in the 
blood; and I have given it to you upon the altar 
to make an atonement for your souls; for it is 
the blood that maketh an atonement for the 
soul" (Lev. 17:11). The shedding and sprinkling 
of the Passover blood is a striking "figure" 
of giving "life for life"— the requirement of 

R1321 :page 120 

divine justice before the condemned could be 

justified. It was only a "figure," however— the 

reality came afterwards: "Forasmuch as ye 

know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible 

things, as silver and gold. ..but with the 

precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without 

blemish and without spot" (1 Peter 1:18-19). 

The other point is as to the flesh: "They shall 

eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and 

unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs they 

shall eat it... with your loins girded, your 

shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; 

and ye shall eat it in haste; it is the Lord's 

Passover." Through the blood-shedding, the 

life of the Israelites was preserved; but the wilderness 

journey was before them, and they had 

to eat of the flesh as well. This feature, too, 

is a striking "figure" of the Lamb of God— 

"our Passover." Through the shedding of his 

precious blood we have life. But that is not all. 

The journey of life has to be pursued, the enemies 

of life have to be overcome, the work of 

life has to be accomplished, and the discipline 

of life has to be perfected. In all this there is 



wear and tear— weariness and exhaustion; but 

R1322 : page 120 

our strength is renewed by heavenly food: 
"My Father giveth you the true bread from 
heaven: for the bread of God is he that cometh 
down from heaven and giveth life unto the 
world.... He that cometh to me shall never 
hunger, and he that believeth in me shall never 
thirst" (John 6:27-58). 

II. As "the Resurrection," Christ is the 
Prophet like unto Moses. Typically, the Israelites 
were "bought" before they began their 
journey; but they did not travel far until they 
were brought face to face with another divine 
lesson. "The Egyptians pursued after them, 
all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his 
horsemen and his army, and overtook them 
encamping by the sea." With the sea before 
them and Pharaoh's host behind, the children 
of Israel saw no way of escape, and in terror 
they cried out: "Because there were no graves 
in Egypt hast thou taken us away to die in the 
wilderness?" By divine appointment Moses had 
"bought" them with blood, and by the same 
authority he had to deliver them with power. 
He was not overcome, either by the faint-heartedness 
of the people, the power of Pharaoh, or 
the untowardness of the position: "Fear not," 
(said he) "stand still, and see the salvation of 
the Lord." He "stretched out his hand over 
the sea," "the waters were divided," and the 
children of Israel passed through "upon the dry 
ground." "The Egyptians pursued and went 
in after them." Moses again "stretched forth 
his hand over the sea," and "the waters returned 
and covered the chariots and the horsemen 
and all the host of Pharaoh." "Thus the 
Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of 
the Egyptians" (Ex. 14). This transaction is 
a striking "figure" of the deliverance to be 
effected by Christ from the bondage and power 
of death, hades, and the devil. In reference 
to the "figure," the Apostle Paul says the people 
"were all baptized unto Moses, in the cloud 
and in the sea" (1 Cor. 10:2); and he teaches 
that baptism is an emblem of both death and 
resurrection (Rom. 6:3,4). Some theologians 
would have resurrection without ransom, others 
would have ransom without resurrection; but the 
Prophet like unto Moses is both: "Forasmuch 
then as the children are partakers of flesh and 
blood, he also himself likewise partook of the 
same; that through death he might destroy him 
that had the power of death, that is, the devil; 



and deliver them who through fear of death were 
all their lifetime subject to bondage" (Heb. 2:14,15). 
Pharaoh held fast his captives until 
the typical lamb was slain; so, until the antitypical 
Lamb was slain, the devil held fast his 
captives. When the typical lamb was slain the 
power of Pharaoh was broken; so, the power of 
the devil was broken when the antitypical Lamb 
was slain; and complete matter-of-fact deliverance 
became a mere question of time. Ransom 
and Resurrection follow each other like cause 
and effect— just as sure as the one has been paid 
the other will be accomplished. "I will ransom 
them from the power of the grave; I will 
redeem them from death: O death, I will be 
thy plagues: O grave, I will be thy destruction: 
Repentance shall be hid from my eyes" 
(Hosea 13:14). 

III. As "the Life," Christ is the Prophet 
like unto Moses. The order of events in the 
type is significant: first the Passover; then 

R1322:page 121 

the deliverance from Egypt; and afterwards the 
giving of the law. So it is with the antitype: 
first the death of Christ for the life of the race; 
then the resurrection of the race; and afterwards 
the giving of "the law of the Spirit of 
life" to the race. In the type, Mount Sinai is 
the scene of the law-giving "glory;" in the 
antitype, Mount Zion is the scene of "the glory 
that excelleth." "For ye are not come unto 
the Mount that might be touched, and that 
burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, 
and tempest, and the sound of the trumpet, 
and the voice of words; which voice they that 
heard entreated that the word should not be 
spoken to them any more. ..but ye are come 
unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living 
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable 
company of angels, to the general 
assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are 
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, 
and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and 
to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and 
to the blood of sprinkling which speaketh better 
things than that of Abel" (Heb. 12:18-24). 
In the type, one nation was delivered from 
Egypt, and led to Mount Sinai to receive the 
law; in the antitype, all nations are to be delivered 
from hades, and led to Mount Zion to 
receive the law. "And it shall come to pass in 
the last days that the mountain of the Lord's 
house shall be established in the top of the 
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; 



and all nations shall flow unto it. And many 
people shall go, and say, Come ye, let us go up 
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of 
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his 
ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of 
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the 
Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:2,3). This 
feature of the likeness between Christ and Moses 
being of supreme importance, it is necessary to 
consider it somewhat in detail. The likeness 
between "figure" and reality very often runs 
into broad contrast; and in no feature is this 
more observable than in the present one. The 
Apostle Paul deals largely with it in his epistles; 
and perhaps no passage could be found more 
graphic or sublime than that in 2 Cor. 3. In 
that short chapter are crowded together more 
ideas than are to be found in some volumes; 
and it is our present purpose to enumerate and 
emphasize some of them. 

1. The "figure" was written "in tables of 
stone;" the reality, "in fleshly tables of the 
heart." Stone is a fitting figure of human hearts 
petrified by sin. Of those upon whom the seed 
of the kingdom falls, a large proportion are 
found to be "stony ground." This condition 
of man was foreseen and provided for. "A 
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit 
will I put within you; and I will take away the 
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give 
you a heart of flesh" (Ezek. 36:26). Moses rehearsed 
all the words of the law unto the people; 
the Prophet like unto Moses not only rehearses 
the law, but opens the minds and the 
hearts of the people to receive it. The disciples 
were made aware of this soon after he rose from 
the dead. "Then opened he their understanding, 
that they might understand the Scriptures" 
(Luke 24:45); and this operation has been going 
on ever since, as all true believers can testify, of 
whom Lydia— "whose heart the Lord opened" 
(Acts 16:14)— may be taken as a sample. Moses 
carried the law to the people in his hands; 
Christ carries the law to the people in his heart. 
"Lo, I come; in the volume of the book it is 
written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my 
God; yea, thy law is within my heart" (Psa. 40:7,8). 
Love begets love. If we would open 
another's heart, we have to lay bare our own. 
God acts upon this principle; and God manifest 
in flesh was an embodiment of it. "Herein 
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved 
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for 
our sins" (1 John 4:10). This is the law of 
love, as it is "the law of faith" (Rom. 3:26); 
and faith "worketh by love" (Gal. 5:6). 



2. The "figure" was ministered "in letter;" 

the reality is ministered in "spirit." The "figure" 
is the "old" covenant; the reality is the 
"new." Some theologians would fain find the 
reality of the present figure in the letter of the 
Gospel. Not so the apostles— they never used 
one letter as the figure of another; they used 
one letter— "the letter"— as the figure of a 
higher and much superior force— "the Spirit." 
"Our Gospel" (says Paul) "came not unto you 

R1322:page 122 

in word only, but also in power, and in the holy 

Spirit, and in much assurance" (1 Thes. 1:5). 

"For the kingdom of God is not in word, but 

in power" (1 Cor. 4:20). Change the form of 

the letter, or the word, as you may, and you do 

not assist man to break his fetters— you merely 

change the form of his slavery. He exclaims 

still, "O wretched man that I am! who shall 

deliver me from the body of this death?" (Rom. 7:29). 

It is only through "the ministration 

of the Spirit" that man obtains freedom. "The 

Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the 

Lord is, there is liberty." Its ministration is 

"the perfect law of liberty" (James 1:25). 

"The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because 

the Lord hath anointed me to preach good 

tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind 

up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to 

the captives, and the opening of the prison to 

them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable 

year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance 

of our God; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint 

unto them that mourn in Zion, to give 

unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 

mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit 

of heaviness; that they might be called trees of 

righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that 

he might be glorified" (Isa. 61:1-3). 

3. The "figure" was "the ministration of 
condemnation" and "death;" the reality is 
"the ministration of righteousness" and "life." 
The law of Moses is "holy, and just, and good" 
(Rom. 7:12). It is the ministration of condemnation 
and death to man because he is unholy, 

unjust, bad. That which is right must 

always condemn that which is wrong. The law 

could do nothing else. It never was intended 

to do anything else. In proportion to the information 

it gives, it condemns. "I was alive 

without the law once; but when the commandment 

came, sin revived and I died" (Rom. 7:9). 

Man's radical need is Life. The law has 

neither promise nor power of life in it; and therefore 



it cannot meet his need. "If there had been 
a law given which could have given life, verily 
righteousness should have been by the law; but 
the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that 
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be 
given to them that believe." (Gal. 3:21,22). 
"The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" 
is the law of righteousness. The operation of 
this law accomplishes in man what the law of 
Moses could never do. "For what the law 
could not do in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness 

R1323 : page 122 

of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in 

the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might 

be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, 

but after the Spirit" (Rom. 8:2-4). Some 

teachers who despair of obtaining righteousness 

by the law of Moses seem to think that it is obtainable 

by the law of conscience. That is a 

great mistake. The Jew has the law of conscience, 

as well as the law of Moses, and he has 

failed to obtain righteousness, either by the one 

or the other, or both combined. The fact is, 

the weakness of the law of Moses is through the 

flesh; and conscience in this respect is no exception 

to the other elements of the flesh— all 

are weak, and all are sinful. For righteousness, 

man must look much higher than himself. 

His only hope is in the Righteous One. "Behold, 

the days come, saith the Lord, that I will 

raise up unto David a righteous Branch, and a 

King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute 

judgment and justice in the earth: in his days 

Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell 

safely; and this is the name whereby he shall be 

called: THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS" (Jer. 23:5,6). 

Moses taught righteousness, and enforced 

it by sanctions; it is the Prophet like 

unto Moses "who of God is made unto us wisdom, 

and righteousness, and sanctification, and 

redemption" (1 Cor. 1:30). Moses imparted 

righteous words and righteous motives; in addition 

to these, the Righteous One imparts 

righteous life— the power which embodies righteous 

words in righteous deeds. Nor is this the 

power of imitation merely; it is the power of 

being. "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, 

even as he is righteous" (1 John 3:7). 

It is "the Spirit of life" permeating the "new 

man" as really as the blood permeates the "old." 

4. The "figure" was "glorious;" the reality 
"excelleth" in glory. Moses was with the Lord 
forty days and forty nights "on Mount Sinai, 



and did neither eat bread nor drink water." 
When he came down Aaron and all the children 

R1323 : page 123 

of Israel saw that "the skin of his face shone; 

and they were afraid to come nigh him" (Ex. 34:28-30). 

Even the ministration of condemnation 

and death was given in glory. "But if 

the ministration of death, written and engraven 

in stones, was glorious, so that the children of 

Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of 

Moses for the glory of his countenance;... 

how shall not the ministration of the Spirit be 

rather glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation 

be glory, much more doth the ministration 

of righteousness exceed in glory. For 

even that which was made glorious had no glory 

in that respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth." 

Our ideas of the glory of the Prophet 

like unto Moses, and of his ministration, are 

naturally contracted and very inadequate. We 

know something of the sufferings of Christ; but 

comparatively little of the glory which is to follow. 

Peter, James, and John, however, had a 

"vision" of it; and they tell us that "His face 

did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white 

as the light" (Matt. 17:2). Saul of Tarsus, 

too, had a "heavenly vision," and after it he 

was three days without sight, and neither did 

eat nor drink" (Acts 9:9). But, of all highly-favored 

ones, the saintly witness of Patmos 

stands pre-eminent, and his description of the 

Glorious One is graphic and sublime in the extreme: 

"I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, 

and heard behind me a great voice, as of a 

trumpet, saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the 

first and the last.... I turned to see the voice 

that spake with me;... and I saw one like 

unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment 

down to the foot, and girt about the paps with 

a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were 

white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes 

were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto 

brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his 

voice as the sound of many waters. And he 

had in his right hand seven stars; and out of 

his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and 

his countenance was as the sun shineth in his 

strength. And when I saw him I fell at his feet 

as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, 

saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the 

last, I am he that liveth and was dead; and behold, 

I am alive for evermore, amen; and have 

the keys of hell and of death" (Rev. 1:10-18). 

That is an inspired conception of the present 



glory and majesty of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ. Perhaps we are to receive no fuller 
description of it until that day when we are to 
see it for ourselves. He is glorious in retinue, 
glorious in person, glorious in position, and 
glorious in power and authority. "All power 
(said he) is given unto me in heaven and in 
earth" (Matt. 28:18). The glory of Moses 
has been "done away," the glory of Christ 
"remaineth:" "For. ..the government shall 
be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be 
called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, 
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. 
Of the increase of his government, and peace, 
there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, 
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish 
it with judgment and with justice from 
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord 
of Hosts will perform this" (Isa. 9:6,7). The 
lawgiver of Israel put a veil on his face when 
he spoke to the people; and that veil was typical 
of the blindness of their hearts. "If our 
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; 
in whom the god of this world hath blinded 
the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is 
the image of God, should shine unto them." 
"For God, who commandeth the light to shine 
out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give 
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God 
in the face of Jesus Christ."— 2 Cor. 4:3,4,6. 
5. The "figure" was a present possession; 
the reality is an object of hope: "Seeing then 
that we have such hope, we use great plainness 
of speech." It would be well for us to note 
that "the ministration of the Spirit" is an object 
of hope. Many plume themselves with the 
conceit that they have that ministration now in 
all its fulness. Not so the apostles. Paul makes 
their position clear: "By manifestation of the 
truth (wrote he), commending ourselves to every 
man's conscience in the sight of God." "In 
all things approving ourselves as the ministers 
of God.. .by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned, 
by the word of truth, by the power of 
God, by the armor of righteousness on the right 
hand and on the left." "In nothing am I behind 

R1323 : page 124 

the very chiefest apostles, though I am 
nothing. Truly the signs of an apostle were 
wrought among you in all patience, in signs, 
and wonders, and mighty deeds" (2 Cor. 4:2; 
6:4-7; 12:11,12). Who is there in the present 
day that can show such a record? And yet 



to Paul "the ministration of the Spirit" was 

an object of hope. One of his statements to the 

Corinthian believers is somewhat enigmatical: 

"Ye are our epistle, written in our hearts, known 

and read of all men." Mark: Believers are 

an epistle, that epistle is written in the apostle's 

heart, and it is known and read of all men. 

How can an epistle which is written in one man's 

heart be known and read of all men? It was 

Paul's hope that these believers would one day 

be "manifestly declared to be the epistle of 

Christ," which was written in his heart. "Our 

hope of you is steadfast, knowing that as you 

are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be 

also partakers of the consolation." "We are 

your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the 

day of the Lord Jesus" (2 Cor. 1:7-14). "We, 

brethren, being taken from you for a short time 

in presence, not in heart, endeavored the more 

abundantly to see your face with great desire." 

"For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? 

are not even ye in the presence of our 

Lord Jesus Christ at his coming" (1 Thes. 2:17,19). 

These believers were not then 

"manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ," 

but it was Paul's hope that they would be so declared, 

and that hope was written in his heart. 

When is "the epistle of Christ" to be "known 

and read of all men?" When it becomes like 

its writer— the Christ: "Beloved, now are we 

the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear 

what we shall be; but we know that when he 

shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall 

see him as he is" (1 John 3:2). Why is the 

epistle to be like its writer? These words spake 

Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, 

"Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son that 

thy Son also may glorify thee....O Father, 

glorify me with thine own self, with the glory 

which I had with thee before the world was. I 

have manifested thy name unto the men which 

thou gavest me out of the world. ...I pray 

for them.... Neither pray I for these alone, 

but for them also which shall believe on me 

through their word; that they all may be one; 

as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that they 

also may be one in us; that the world may believe 

that thou hast sent me. And the glory 

which thou gavest me I have given them; that 

they may be one, even as we are one; I in them 

and thou in me, that they may be made perfect 

in one; and that the world may know that thou 

hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast 

loved me" (John 17:1-23). Mark: Christ 

prays that he may be glorified; Christ prays 

that believers also may be glorified; Christ 



prays that he and they may be glorified, "that 
they may be made perfect in one;" and Christ 
prays "that they may be made perfect in one, 
that the world may know" that the Father hath 
sent him. When that marvelous prayer has 
been answered— as answered it certainly will be 
—then will believers be "known and read of 
all men— manifestly declared to be the epistle 
of Christ." Not written by that compound and 
antagonistic process which prevails at present; 
"but with the Spirit of the living God." Not 
in some crooked, cramped, contradictory, or 
undecipherable hieroglyphics— such as the best 
of us are; but in characters so clear that "the 
wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err" in 
reading them. Not limited to one nation, like 
the figure; the reality— the epistle of Christ— is 
to be sent to all the "ends of the earth," and 
will be "known and read of all men." 

6. The "figure," in its sanctions, did not extend 
beyond the first death; the reality, in its 
sanctions, includes the "second death." That 

R1324 : page 124 

there is to be a second death is clearly revealed: 
"The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and 
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire 
and brimstone; which is the second death" 
(Rev. 21:8). As the first death terminates the 
first life, so the second death may terminate the 
second life. Some theologians teach that there 
will be two terminations to one life; as well 
might they teach that there have been, or will 
be, two beginnings to one life; the Scriptures 
teach no such doctrine. There is a radical difference 
between the law regulating the first death 

R1324 : page 125 

and that regulating the second. The first death 
comes upon the entire human race (Adam excepted) 
independent of individual will. "As by 
one man sin entered into the world, and death 
by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in 
whom [margin] all have sinned" (Rom. 5:12). 
On the contrary, the second death will reach 
no man independent of his will. When "the 
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath 
made herself ready," an offer of the water of 
life is to be made to every man. "The Spirit 
and the bride say, Come. And let him that 
heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst 
come. And whosoever will, let him take the 



water of life freely" (Rev. 22:17). The only 
obstruction, or limitation, to the enjoyment of 
life as then to be offered will be the will of the 
hearer— "whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely." How very different that will be 
from the state of things prevailing now. Then 
will be in full force the law of life and death 
depicted by the prophets. "The soul that sinneth 
it shall die. The son shall not bear the 
iniquity of the father, neither shall the father 
bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness 
of the righteous shall be upon him, and the 
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him" 
(Ezek. 18:20). "And it shall come to pass that 
every soul which will not hear that prophet 
shall be destroyed from among the people" 
(Acts 3:23). "The water of life freely" then 
unto everyone who "will" receive it; "destruction 
from among the people" then unto everyone 
who "will not hear that prophet." There 
are those who say, deliverance from the second 
death may be expected; but the Scriptures utter 
no such word. They give no uncertain sound 
as to deliverance from the first death; but touching 
deliverance from the second death they are 
silent. While we ought to be prepared to speak 
whatever the Scriptures speak, we ought also to 
be prepared to be silent on whatever the Scriptures 
are silent. 

In conclusion: (1) It is simply impossible to 
compress "the ministration of the Spirit" so as 
to bring it within the limits of the present age. 
There is in that ministration a galaxy of life, 
and light, and liberty, and love, and power, and 
righteousness, and glory, and blessedness, which 
is altogether incompatible with the present state 
of things. The more determinedly the work of 
compression is driven, the more conspicuous becomes 
its failure; and therefore, of necessity, 
we have to look forward to post-resurrection 
times for the beneficent fulness of that ministration. 
As that is so, it may be asked: (2) Is 
there no part of the "ministration of the Spirit" 
now? Most certainly there is. "Simeon hath 
declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, 
to take out of them a people for his name" 
(Acts 15:14). "Of his own will begat he us 
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind 
of first fruits of his creatures" (Jas. 1:18). 
Those being taken out from the others now are the 
"first fruits." So is it as to the blessedness enjoyed 
now by those who are taken out. "In 
whom also after that ye believed ye were sealed 
by that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the 
earnest of our inheritance" (Eph. 1:13,14). 
But, the "first fruits" are not the "lump," 



nor is the "earnest" the "inheritance." The 

"first fruits" and the "earnest" are indications 

of the nature of the "lump" and of the "inheritance, 

and pledges, too, that the "lump" 

and the "inheritance" will follow in due time. 

"For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also 

holy; and if the root be holy, so are the 

branches." "O the depth of the riches both 

of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How 

unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 

past finding out!"— Rom. 11:16,23. 

JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1324 : page 125 

It is said that the Jewish population of Russia 
doubles its numbers in thirty years, while the 
native population doubles only in ninety years, 
and the population of Europe only in one 
hundred and fifty years. The Russians therefore 
fear the time when they will be outnumbered. 

The Jews who are being driven by persecution 
to Palestine, although unable to understand 
each other's language, have all some 
knowledge of Hebrew, which, it is said, is rapidly 
becoming a living tongue in the Holy 
Land. 



R1324 : page 126 

LETTER TO THE CHURCH AT ALLEGHENY. 



[Brother Russell's letter to the Church at 
Allegheny is published below as of interest to 
all TOWER readers.] 

Odessa, Bessarabia, Russia. 
August 1st, 1891. 

TO THE DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS OF 
THE CHURCH AT ALLEGHENY --Greeting to 
you all in the name of our Redeemer and King. 

We are thus far upon our long journey and 
are feeling weary from so constant travel; but, 
thank the Lord, we both are quite well— spiritually 
and physically. We pray for you all the 
same heavenly blessings. 

You will be pleased to learn that our journey 
is proving profitable to us, as hoped. I will 
not give details or particulars now (leaving 
that for a general report in the TOWER), but will 



merely say that we already appreciate the situation 
of Europe much better than before. 

You will be glad to learn that during our 
journey we have met several who manifested a 
deep interest in God's great plan of the ages, 
and who said they would procure and read 
DAWN, and search the Scriptures to see whether 
these things be so presented therein. One of 
these was a Hebrew with whom we rode from 
Dresden to Vienna. The gentleman (a merchant) 
had a noble and intelligent face, and 
until he so informed us we did not surmise him 
to be a Jew. We had inquired of him respecting 
the laboring classes— their daily wages, etc., 
and conversation turned upon the proportion 
of Catholics and Protestants, and finally to the 
subject of true heart-religion. He remarked 
that although almost all the people of Austria, 
except the Jews, are counted as Roman Catholic 
Christians, yet a truly religious spirit is 
lacking. He said that there were strong evidences 
that a persecution of the Jews in Austria 
may soon break out which would lead to as 
great or greater affliction upon that race than 
is now being experienced in some parts of 
Russia. 

We assured him that these things must so be; 
that God through his prophets had clearly 
pointed out that he would permit persecution 
in all lands in order to drive out the Jews and 
to give them no rest; and further, that the 
Scriptures showed that the time for this was 
now due; but that while Israel feels the trouble 
sharply, this trouble (Isa. 26:16-19) is really 
unlike all others of the past 1800 years upon 
that people— it is not a mark of divine disfavor, 
but, contrariwise, of favor; for by it the 
Lord would awaken them from present lethargy 
and contentment among the nations, to cause 
their hearts to long for the Promised Land as 
an everlasting possession, because his time has 
now come to re-gather in Palestine the faithful, 
longing Jews and to remove from their 
hearts the blindness of unbelief. 

But, we inquired, what evidences do you see 
of a persecution of the Jews in Austria. "Very 
strong indications," he answered; "for instance, 
stories are being circulated among the 
ignorant to the effect that the Jews kidnap 
Christian children and kill them and drink 
their blood; and the same class is told that 
if it were not for the Jews they would all be 
prosperous, money plentiful, wages high, etc. 
Why," said he, "one labor agitator publicly 
declared recently that the only remedy for the 
grievances of the poorer classes is to kill all 



the Jews. He said, 'We must do with them as 
was once done with the French at Seville' 
(—massacre them). That man," he continued, 
"is well known as a bad man: he had already 
done penal service (once for making counterfeit 
money); yet so greatly was that man appreciated 
for his hatred of the Jews that he was 
elected to the Austrian Parliament by a large 
majority." 

We then briefly pointed out the matters detailed 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., how that 
God's Word reveals his plan: that as Israel had 
1845 years of favor, which terminated with their 
rejection of Messiah, Jesus, so they were to 
have 1845 years of disfavor (during which 
period the Gospel Church would be selected), 
after which favor would return to Israel and 
their blindness of unbelief in Messiah be removed. 
As we proceeded to quote and to 

R1324 : page 127 

cite the prophecies referring to this "double," 
our friend began to note the passages, saying, 
"I am greatly interested in all this, for I am 
an Israelite." 

We assured him of our love for all who are 
Israelites indeed, and proceeded to point out that 
the "double" was completed in 1878; that in 
that very year a Jew was the leader in the Berlin 
Conference of Nations; and that there began 
the preparation for Israel's return to God's 
favor and to Palestine. We pointed out that 
as they as a nation were 37 years in falling, so 

R1325 : page 127 

they would be 37 years in rising again to 
nationality, and that the present and prospective 
persecutions in all lands were but parts of 
the favor of God to bring them as a people to 
a condition in which all sincere Israelites would 
be blessed by Messiah, the Truth and the 
Kingdom. 

The Hebrew friend and another traveling 
companion from Ireland, who overheard the 
conversation, are to receive the DAWN, and at 
once begin careful studies of these things. 
May God's blessing be upon them as they 
search, and may the true light— Christ— enlighten 
them both in all things pertaining to 
his name and Kingdom. 

One of the most interesting of our experiences 
thus far was our visit to Brother Joseph 
Rabinowitch at his home in Kischenev, Russia. 
He welcomed us warmly, as did all the family, all 



of whom are believers in the Lord Jesus. We 
had a pleasant and, we trust, a profitable visit, in 
which we learned what we could of the work, 
past and present, among the Israelites. 

We found Brother Rabinowitch pleasantly 
and comfortably situated: his home, office 
and new hand press for printing tracts are 
alongside of, and connected with, a new and 
very neat house of worship, which will seat 
about one hundred and twenty-five persons. 
We were struck with the close correspondence 
in many particulars between his work among 
the Israelites and our work among Christians. 
He finds the Israelites looking for a Kingdom 
of God, but disbelieving in Jesus as the Redeemer 
and King. We find Christian people 
trusting in Christ Jesus as Redeemer, but ignorant 
and disbelieving concerning the Gospel of 
the Kingdom. He finds many Jews anxious, 
privately, to know about the Redeemer, but fearful 
to incur the odium of their co-religionists. 
We find the same yearning and fear among 
Christians concerning the Kingdom. Undoubtedly 
both parts of the work (for it is one work 
in the sense of being under the one Lord) are 
making greater progress than appears on the 
surface. A heart work is in progress, much of 
which will bear no fruit until the great time of 
trouble has further unsealed the vision and the 
understanding. 

Brother Rabinowitch has the New Testament 
and quite a number of tracts printed in what 
he terms Hebrew-Russo-German jargon— the 
only language which the lower classes can 
fully comprehend. Kischenev contains about 
50,000 Israelites, so he has an excellent location 
for his work. 

We found him well acquainted with the 
teachings of DAWN and in deep sympathy with 
the same. We took sweet counsel together of 
the Lord's work and each other's experiences, 
and of the necessity for holding fast to the 
word of the Lord's testimony. 

Fearing that he was inclined to preach Christ's 
first advent and his sacrifice for sin almost to 
the exclusion of the Kingdom, we urged that he 
forget not the Lord's instruction upon this subject 
—"This Gospel of the Kingdom must be 
preached in all the world for a witness." We 
urged that in presenting the subject to the mind 
of an Israelite, Christ Jesus the Redeemer of 
men would be much more acceptable, if presented 
from the standpoint of Christ Jesus the 
King, about to establish his long-promised Kingdom 
—to make which an everlasting Kingdom he 
died ("the just for the unjust") 1800 years ago. 



Brother Rabinowitch replied that he well 
knew the truth of what we said, but that though 
he had not totally neglected the subject of the 
coming of Christ as the King, yet he had heretofore 
felt that the second coming of Christ and 
the Kingdom then to be established were subjects 
for those more advanced in Christian 
knowledge, and that, therefore, his discourses 
in the past had been chiefly in proof that Jesus 
of Nazareth was the Messiah foretold by the 
prophets. 

R1325 : page 128 

Our advice to him was, that the Church had 
for eighteen hundred years preached thus, and 
to little effect; and that the Lord's Word now 
pointed out a new message for Israel, saying: 
"Comfort ye, comfort ye my people: speak ye 
comfortably to Jerusalem and cry unto her that 
her appointed times are accomplished, for she 
hath received of the Lord's hand double for 
all her sins." (Isa. 40:1,2.) We suggested 
that this meant a preaching to them of the return 
of divine favor to them as a people before 
they had believed in Christ, and that with this 
return of God's favor would come the opening 
of the long-blinded eyes to recognize in Christ 
Jesus the Sun of Righteousness whose beams of 
blessing were already shining upon them. 
While assenting to the proposition, that without 
a full acceptance of Christ there is no possibility 
of everlasting salvation for either Jew or 
Gentile, we urged that a measure of blessing 
was about to come to the people of Israel in 
order to reveal Christ to all who are Israelites 
indeed. We reminded him, also, of the Lord's 
declaration that the knowledge of the Kingdom 
about to be established constitutes no insignificant 
part of the Gospel which the Lord wished 
to have preached in all the world, but which so 
many Christians had lost sight of— "This Gospel 
of the Kingdom must first be preached in all 
the world for a witness." In this connection 
we related to him our experiences with the 
Hebrew merchant en route for Vienna, and his 
interest so keenly and so quickly awakened 
by the fulfilment of the prophecies of Isaiah 
and Jeremiah, now manifestly in progress in its 
due time. We believe that the Kingdom will, 
hereafter, have a still more important place in 
Brother Rabinowitch's preaching, and we doubt 
not that the results will proportionately increase, 
to the praise of the Great King, in the turning 
away of blindness from Israel. 

At parting we knelt in prayer with Brother 



Rabinowitch and his family in the forepart of 

the Chapel, each committing the other to the 

love and care of the one Lord whose work we 

each serve, though in different spheres. We 

left, extending our warm thanks to all for the 

kind hospitality received, and with our best 

wishes for their future welfare, receiving the same 

good wishes from each of them. At the railway 

station we were again greeted by Brother 

Rabinowitch and his son John (a very promising 

young man of about twenty years, from 

whom we hope to hear very soon in the Lord's 

vineyard). They had come to see that we experienced 

no difficulty with our tickets and baggage, 

and especially for a final good-bye and 

"God bless you." Both father and son kissed 

me (a custom much more usual among men 

here than in America), saying, "Pray for us 

when you are at Jerusalem, the City of the 

Great King, and especially when on the 

Mount of Olives." We assured them that 

we would do so, and asked their prayers also 

with us. 

And now, beloved in the Lord, Farewell. 
When at the Mount of Olives, as everywhere, 
be assured that the Church of Christ at Allegheny, 
as well as the saints everywhere scattered 
abroad, will be remembered and loved 
and prayed for by my beloved helpmate, Sister 
Russell, as well as by myself. 

Truly your brother and servant, 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 



page 128 

When you change your address, state where from, as 
well as where to. 

If needful to write a second time about any order, give date 
of previous order, how money was sent and full particulars. 

The price of this journal was advanced to 60 cents a year, 
last January, when it assumed the present form. The additional 
charge does not cover the additional expense. 

The offer of the MILLENNIAL DAWN in paper covers at 
15 cents to those who give a portion of their time in helping 
to circulate it has heretofore been made only to those 
who purchased as many as ten copies of any single volume 
at one order. We have many inquiries for smaller quantities, 
however, and have decided that hereafter we will 
supply as few as five copies of any one of the three volumes 
in paper covers at colporteur's rate, 15 cents each, 
five for 75 cents. 

Please do not ask us to deviate from this rule. We 
must have system to avoid waste of valuable time. If 
you want more than five of a kind take ten; if more, then 



take twenty, thirty or forty. Remember that the books for 
colporteurs are put up in packs of fives, tens and twenties. 



R1325 : page 129 

VOL. XII. OCTOBER, 1891. NO. 10. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

"AS I HAVE LOVED YOU." 

"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one to another. A new commandment I 
give unto you, That ye love one another. As I have 
loved you, love ye also one another."— John 13:34,35. 

The law of love is the golden rule which, if 
in operation, would settle all disputes and controversies, 
and wipe out all bickerings, jealousies, 
strife and contention. In the world it does 
not prevail, though all men acknowledge that 
it should. Yet the world is not wholly loveless. 
In the midst of all its suffering and woe and 
sin we often hear of brave, heroic deeds, even 
by those who know not God; while abroad in 
the world there is a very general effort for the 
general good of mankind, prompted to a considerable 
extent by the somewhat latent principle 
of love which is a part of our common inheritance 
from our father Adam's original perfection 
not yet wholly lost. 

How often have men risked their own lives 
to rescue their fellow-men from drowning, or 
burning, or shipwreck, or railroad disasters. 
How often has the benevolent hand contributed 
freely to the necessities of suffering neighbors, 
or suffering communities. And while much of 
the more public charity is often ministered with 
ostentation which betrays an undue love of approbation, 
it is but just to conclude that there 
is at least a mixture of the higher motives. 
And to that extent is such a one blessed in his 
deed. 

At the present time, as never before in the 
history of the world, men are studying, if not 
very generally practicing, the golden rule of 
love. They see that if it were in general operation 
the whole world would be greatly blessed 
by it. But how would it operate? How should 
it operate?— that is the perplexing question. 
One of the most popular suggestions among the 
masses of the people is what is commonly 
termed socialism. And just here we wish to introduce 

R1326 : page 129 

a brief article on the subject clipped 

from a recent issue of a secular journal. The 

article is as follows:— 



A QUESTION OF TO-DAY. 
SOCIALISM AND PROGRESS. 

"All readers and thinkers are watching with 
interest the struggle of the civilized world with 
Socialism— a product evolved from the conditions 
and thoughts of the masses, peculiar to 
the closing years of the Nineteenth Century. 
In different nations it assumes different names, 
but all its aims and objects tend to a re-organization 
of society and the distribution of wealth. 
The masses read and think and reason something 
like this: 'Well, here I am, a poor man, 
doomed to labor the year in and out; and, do 
the best I can, I am only able to pay my rent, 
keep body and soul together, get few luxuries 
and much misery, and no prospect to better my 
condition. 

'"What matters it to me what becomes of the 
princes, dukes and generals who wear fine linen 
and fare sumptuously every day? Let revolution 
come; my condition can not be any worse, 
and might be bettered by killing off our oppressors.' 
In this frame of mind he is an easy 
prey to the wily agitator, and thus the ball rolls 

R1326 : page 130 

on, gathering force as it goes, in all the European 
countries. 

"In the United States, only the extreme agitators 
are prominent, and work under the name 
of Anarchists, but they are few in number and 
are not gaining much ground. In Germany the 
social agitators are gaining rapidly, but there 
the Socialists must not be confounded with the 
Anarchists, for the latter have all been expelled 
from the Socialists' clubs. The Socialists there 
really represent the progressive ideas of the nation; 
and, with some slight modifications, their 
platform is almost identical with modern republicanism. 
They have become so powerful in that 
country as to force the resignation of Bismarck. 

"In Russia we have the Nihilists, who represent 
the advanced thought of that despotic nation; 
in France are the Radicals; in England 
the Liberals; and so on, in every nation, the 
social leaven is at work. The toiling millions 
are endowed with all the natural faculties of 
those who 'toil not, neither do they spin.' 

"The poor man reasons that if this world was 
made for man to enjoy, it is self-evident that all 
the enjoyment was not intended for a few individuals; 
that if a man inherits a fortune and 



title, he deserves no credit for the accident of 
birth, and there would be just as much reason 
and justice in making the rich man divide with 
his less fortunate neighbor as to let him spend 
it in riotous living or hoard it up. 

"The average toiler also can not see why he 
should be heavily taxed to support an army of 
cut-throats, whose sole business was to fight for 
the glory of a few kings and generals, posing 
as figure-heads. And so the peasant comes to 
the conclusion that the people would be all 
the better off if the armies were disbanded, the 
titled rulers abolished, and the rich made 
to disgorge. A settled conviction soon becomes 
a duty, and the agitators who have nothing to 
lose and everything to gain by revolution have 
little difficulty in wielding the toilers in battalions 
and leading them to vote and work for the 
overthrow of the government under which they 
chance to live; for it is a well known fact that, 
in every nation, this class of people saddle all 
their woes upon the government, no matter 
what its form. 

"England groans under the oppression of landlords, 
dukes, titles, lords, etc., and the masses 
see no reason why they should be taxed to support 
a royal house which is, at best, only a figure-head; 
and so social democracy grows apace. 

"But while the poor man always is entitled to 
be heard, the question arises: Suppose property 
were divided equally, how long would it be 
before those who have it now would get it back 
again? The extreme Socialist says, We'll remedy 
that matter by making an equal division 
every ten years. But if you do this you destroy 
the spirit of competition and the desire for 
improvement, and with all the human aspirations 
put under this sort of a ban, man would 
relapse into a semi-savage state, and all law and 
order be hurled into chaos. To share equally 
in property unequally earned is contrary to all 
political economy. The best thing for a man to 
do is to do the best he can under the 
circumstances. 

"To abolish law and order would put every 
poor man at the mercy of the desperado and the 
cut-throat: and, with no one to see after the 
welfare of society, everything would go to 
eternal smash. 

"If the people would devote their intelligence 
and energy to the reforming of existing institutions 
and give the agitators a wide berth, much 
of the existing evil might be ameliorated. 

"Communistic Democracies all end in social 
chaos, and promiscuous socialism means social 
anarchy. 



"Germany is so situated that a strong centralized 
government will always be necessary for 
self-protection. 

"With Russia on the east with her barbaric 
millions, and a half million soldiers who are 
veritable heathen, and France on the west with 
her desire for revenge, the Kaiser's country must 
always be on the alert and ready to defend herself. 
France is more favorably situated, and, 
if the conservative element keeps the ascendency, 
may continue a moderate Republic. England 
will never be what she ought to be, until 
the masses own the soil. Great reforms are 
necessary in all the nations, and can only be 
brought about by reforming existing institutions, 
and not by adopting the views and impracticable 
theories of the socialistic agitators." 

Here is some sound logic, and some not so 
sound. The reforming of existing institutions, 
for instance, would be a hopeless task. The 
fact is, they are so imperfect that nothing but 
revolution will reform them. And such a revolution, 
we are forewarned, is coming; the signs 
of the times also clearly indicate its rapid approach; 
and the outcome of that revolution 
will be the utter wreck of existing institutions- 
civil, social and ecclesiastical. 

But what of socialism? will it survive the 
world-wide wreck and bring men to a realization 
of their common brotherhood and to the 
actual practice of the law of love? No: socialism, 
however moderate its principles and course 
in the beginning, must and will degenerate into 

R1326:page 131 

wild and ungovernable anarchy, which, as this 
writer claims, places every man at the mercy of 
the desperado and the cut-throat. The writer 
truly claims that, "To share equally in property 
unequally earned is contrary to all political 
economy." Why? Because it would crush out 
individuality and enterprise, and rob the worthy 
individual of his just need of credit and remuneration, 
and encourage the unworthy in a 
shiftless and ignoble dependence. The general 
tendency of such a course, it is easily seen, 
would be toward national, as well as individual, 
imbecility. Any system of political economy 
which would subordinate the individual to community 
interests is imperfect and unjust; for the 
individual has rights, as well as the nation, and 
the real interests of the nation can only be 
properly considered as the accumulated rights 
and interests of every individual of the nation. 
When the Kingdom of God, which is to displace 



all present institutions, is set up, it will 
have respect, not only to national or community 
interest, but to every legitimate individual 
interest as well. At first, in the great time of 
trouble, there will be a great and very necessary 
leveling process; for the pride of man 
must be humbled and his dependence upon God 
must be realized before he can be exalted to the 
true dignity of manhood. That the individual 
right of property will be respected is manifest 
from the promise that "they shall build houses 
and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards 
and eat the fruit of them. They shall 
not build and another inhabit; they shall not 
plant and another eat.. .and they shall long 
enjoy the work of their hands."— Isa. 65:21,22. 
The promise here is not that every man must 
build his house and plant his vineyard according 
to a fixed common idea, so that every one 
will be exactly equal in convenience, elegance 
or tastefulness. Each man may work out his 
own ideas and enjoy the results, and also the 
approbation of God and of his fellow-men for 
his commendable progress. Will it seem selfish 
for a man thus to build and plant for his 
own enjoyment? No. Will it be in strict accord 
with the golden rule of loving his neighbor 
as himself? Yes. The golden rule is not 
to love your neighbor more than yourself, but 
simply as yourself. If this man works out his 
own ideas and carefully guards against any infringement 
upon his neighbor's right to work 
out his ideas; and if he is pleased with his 
neighbor's prosperity as he is pleased with his 
own, and is pleased under proper circumstances 
to lend a helping hand if needed and desired, 
then he is loving his neighbor as himself, and 
doing unto his neighbor as he would have his 
neighbor do unto him. And God's great storehouse 
of blessing is large enough and full 
enough to supply all their need when justice 
rightly balances the affairs of men. There will 
be an abundance, not only of comfort, but of 
luxury, too, for every man; but men will have 
to learn by degrees how to acquire it. God 
will not put money into the pockets, nor grand 
ideas into the minds, of the slothful. Success 
and approbation and ease and luxury and honor 
and glory and blessing will reward the righteous 
and persevering effort of each individual. 
And the law of God, re-written upon the human 
heart, will strictly forbid the coveting of 
another man's lawful right; but every man may 
rejoice in his neighbor's achievements and prosperity 
and may be stimulated thereby to greater 
attainments on his own part: not, however, 



from a selfish, ignoble ambition to outdo his 

R1327:page 131 

neighbor, but from a healthful and pleasurable 
ambition to develop his own powers and to enjoy 
the added comfort, etc. While individual 
interests will be thus conserved to the finest 
point and to the high purposes of development, 
thrift and culture, community interests will also 
be adjusted to the highest degree of national 
prosperity. 

Socialism, therefore, is not God's ideal condition 
for the human race, but it will be the 
last attempted experiment of fallible, fallen men 
to adjust their own affairs; and its predicted 
result is world-wide anarchy and dire confusion. 

But though socialism is not God's ideal for 
man's future happiness, says one somewhat influenced 
by the infection in the air of these 
times, would not such a condition be the 
proper one for the Church of God now? Should 
they not have all things common, so that 
there could be no difference in the body of 
Christ? and would not unfeigned love surely 

R1327:page 132 

lead to such a course? Well, let us see; but let 

us bear in mind that God acts and would have 

us act upon established and well founded principles. 

Where God does not directly express 

his will concerning the details of our course, 

he has left them to be gathered from observation 

of his dealings. So when we discover, as 

above, that socialism is not according to his 

purpose, and that such a scheme would be detrimental 

to man's highest interests of development 

and happiness, we know, or ought to 

know, that it would be similarly detrimental 

now to the highest interests of the body of 

Christ. 

Let us see how. Suppose, for instance, that 
all who claim to be fully consecrated to the 
Lord, and therefore members of his body, the 
Church, were to decide to-day to have all things 
common— what would be the effect? Well, in 
the first place, it would necessitate an organization; 
not merely a small organization here and 
there, but a world-wide organization, including 
all such professors, so that all could be on an 
equal footing. Secondly, It would impose upon 
each one entering the organization the obligation 
of placing all his possessions at the 
disposal of the whole company, or rather of 
some representatives of the whole company, 



notwithstanding the obligations or the opposition 

of friends and relatives; and therefore it 

would relieve him of all personal responsibility 

as a steward over those possessions. Then there 

would be differences of judgment among those 

thus opposed as to the reasonableness of the opposition, 

and as to how far it should be heeded; 

and these individual differences of opinion would 

have to be decided by the representatives of 

the company in order to avoid general dissatisfaction. 

And in time these representatives would 

assume the dignity of a clerical class with despotic 

power over all the interests of the Church. 

Then, again, some of those thus entering the 
Church might, as they often do, fall away from 
the faith and desire to withdraw from the 
organization; when, if they could not reclaim 
some or all of the means put into it, they would 
feel that they had been deceived and cheated, 
and the whole Church would be scandalized. 
Then, if it were possible for the Church to claim 
and thus actually to confiscate all the property 
of its individual members and to re-distribute 
it in equal measure amongst them all, such 
a course would gather into it many who, having 
nothing to lose but all to gain, would come 
merely for "the loaves and fishes," and the 
acquisitiveness of many of those already in would 
be apt to make them anxious to interest others 
who would add to their financial welfare. And 
very soon this would be generally understood 
to be the spur to all efforts of the Church to 
preach the gospel. Thus such an organization 
would rapidly fill up with poor tares; it would 
be a scene of contention, bickering, strife and 
evil-speaking, and a reproach to the cause of 
Christ. In other words, it would result in the 
Church, as its attempt will in the world, in anarchy 
and ruin. 

In the Church, therefore, as in the world, 
we must recognize individual rights and responsibilities, 
and also the fact that the accountability 
of each member is to God alone; 
and that to our Master, who is able to read 
the heart, to measure the circumstances, and 
to judge righteous judgment, we must each 
severally stand or fall. The Lord never commissioned 
the Church to consume its precious 
time and energy in thus looking after temporal 
affairs and minding earthly things. The 
Church's talents are consecrated to a higher 
service— to the service of heralding the good 
tidings, by the voice, the press and the pen, 
and in endeavoring to build one another up in 
the most holy faith— mutually to stimulate zeal, 
faith, love and the spirit of sacrifice and of 



patient endurance of hardness as good soldiers 
for the truth's sake. 

In the body of Christ there must of necessity 
in the present time be different degrees of 
prosperity in temporal things. We are not all 
equally endowed either mentally, morally or 
physically, nor by circumstances nor by education. 
Some have five talents and some have 
only one. The question with each consecrated 
believer, as he comes into the body of Christ, 
should be, not How can I better my temporal 
condition? but, on the contrary, How can I 
sacrifice some of the things which I already 
have? In some cases the earthly store is very 

R1327 : page 133 

small and yet the spirit of sacrifice finds many 
a little love-token to present to the Lord; and 
the Lord, though he is rich and could well spare 
the trifles thus received, accepts them and commends 
the deed. But being rich in grace and 
plenteous in mercy he gives to such due credit 
on the bank of heaven, and in due time they 
will receive their own with compound interest. 
Every act of sacrifice here is thus laying up 
treasures in heaven where moth and rust do not 
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through 
and steal. 

The manner in which each member of the 
body of Christ shall exercise his stewardship of 
the consecrated talents entrusted to his care 
is left by the Lord with each individual member. 
He may use either good or bad judgment 
in their use, but the Lord will commend 
and reward according to the motives and not 
according to actual results. The poor widow 
was commended for casting her last two mites 
into the Jewish treasury, because her evident 
motive was devotion to God and a desire to 
serve him; though actually she might have 
made better use of the money than in further 
supporting that system of worship which was 
then being displaced by the teachings of Christ. 
Good judgment, even when prompted by the 
most zealous spirit of sacrifice, would seldom 
prompt to the immediate surrender of all one's 
money talent. The poor widow probably still 
had, however, a surplus of health and strength 
and knew she could earn more for her immediate 
wants; and probably neither she nor a 
family of starving children lacked the necessities 
of life on account of it. 

If we have families dependent on us, the Lord 
has made the necessary provision for them our 
first duty. Children must be clothed and fed 



and sheltered and trained; and each consecrated 
parent can use only his own best judgment 
as to how it shall be done, remembering 
to do all as unto the Lord, and not as unto the 
world. If he does so, they will come up ready 
for the Master's use and will be trained in his 
love and in his service; the spirit of the world 
will be pointed out to them in contrast with the 
spirit of Christ; and they will learn to see the 
deformity of the one and the grace of the other. 

As much, therefore, of the money talent as 
in the judgment of any individual member is 
necessary to this work is properly used in it, if 
so used with an eye single to the glory of God, 
and without any reference to the spirit of the 
world. 

In view of this individual responsibility of 
the various members of the Church to God direct, 
we are also told not to judge one another. 
Each consecrated child of God is made a steward 
of the talents in his keeping— whether they 
be talents of money, of time, of influence or of 
intellect; and no brother or sister has any thing 
to do with those talents, either by way of management 
or of adverse criticism; nor can he 
covet them and stand before God guiltless. 
But he may observe their right use in any 
case, may emulate the example furnished, and 
may rejoice in their value to the Church at 
large. 

The question now arises as to how that love 
among the body of Christ, which should make 
them manifest to the world as the Lord's disciples, 
is to be manifested, if not by a socialistic 
community of goods. There are many 
ways. In the first place, this love will work no 
ill to its brother: it will neither slander his 
character, nor cheat, nor envy, nor in any way 
wrong him. And it will not only be thus negatively 
good to him, but it will be active to do 
him service. It will think as favorably of his 
motives of action as possible and decline to 
pronounce judgment against them; it will speak 
kindly and cordially to him and of him; it will 
sympathize in his afflictions and rejoice in his 
prosperity; it will, when desired, counsel with 
him in perplexity and assist him when possible 
and when needed in adversity; it will rejoice 
with him in the blessings of divine truth and 
engage heartily with him in its service. Indeed, 
all who thus love each other will stand shoulder 
to shoulder in the great work to which their 
united talents are consecrated, not coveting the 
talents of any for their temporal use, but anxious 
to see as much as possible directed into the 
great channel of the service of the truth. So 



the Lord loved the disciples, and so they loved 
each other and worked together in the common 
cause. 



R1344 : page 134 

RENEW A RIGHT SPIRIT WITHIN ME. 



Renew a right spirit within me, 

O Lord, is my prayer; 
That only the perfect and holy 

May find echo there. 

The spirit of faith's adoration- 
Devotion to Thee. 

No more should the world's senseless idols 
Hold sway over me. 

A spirit of humble submission; 

Of sweet, lasting peace— 
That warrings of earthly ambition 

Forever may cease. 

The spirit of Christ and His teaching— 

Thy spirit divine— 
Which finds in Thy service its duty, 

Its pleasure in Thine. 

A spirit of deep understanding, 

Of wisdom and love; 
As wise as the serpent, and harmless 

And pure as the dove. 

Renew a right spirit within me— 

All gifts of Thy grace; 
That all who my character study 

Thy likeness may trace. 

Oh! make me a living epistle- 
Inscribed with Thy name, 

And sealed with the blood of the Savior— 
Thy love to proclaim. — R. J. BALL. 



R1328:page 134 

DIVINE LOVE AND HUMAN RECIPROCATION. 



-John 3:1-21.- 



This subject forms part of a memorable discourse 
preached by Jesus of Nazareth to Nicodemus, 
a ruler of the Jews. The words, "God 
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life," must be 
understood in the light of their context, or they 
will be largely robbed of their beauty and 
power. It rarely happens that every element 
of this brief passage is taken into account; and 
yet, if anyone is left out the others become 
comparatively meaningless. It is necessary to 
consider each element in detail. 

I. -THE EXTENT OF GOD'S LOVE. 

This is expressed by a very familiar phrase, 
"the world." "The earth" is not "the world," 
nor is "the age." Both the words and their 
ideas are different. The world here contains 
many ages, but it is itself a unit. The primary 
idea of it appears to be that of "an arrangement," 
the human race under an arrangement. 
Of "the Word," who "was in the beginning 
with God," the Apostle says, "He was in the 
world, and the world was made by him, and 
the world knew him not" (John 1:10). The 
world here, which was made by "the Word," 
must include every individual of the human 
race, from the first man to the very last of his 
posterity. So with the world which God so 
loved, no individual who has descended from 
Adam can be beyond its scope. This is corroborated 
by another phrase in the immediate 
context— "That which is born of flesh is flesh." 
That which is born of the flesh is born into the 
world. "The flesh" and "the world," here, 
are co-extensive; and as these phrases cover 
every human being, so the love of God covers 
every human being. If the love of God does 
not extend to every man, the man to whom it 
does not extend cannot be part of "the flesh" 
spoken of here. 

II.-THE PROOF OF GOD'S LOVE. 

The love of God here does not supersede his 
justice. There is no genuine love where there is 
not absolute justice. God so loved the world 
that he GAVE his only begotten Son. The 
proof of God's love here is not in what he 
taught, or felt, or willed, or said, but in what 
he did: "In this was manifested the love of 
God toward us, because God sent his only begotten 
Son into the world, that we might live 



through him. Herein is love, not that we 
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his 
Son to be the propitiation for our sins." "He 
is the propitiation for our sins; and not for 

R1328:page 135 

ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 

world." (1 John 2:2; 4:9,10.) The same 

apostolic witness says, "The Word was made 

flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his 

glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the 

Father, full of grace and truth" (John 1:14). 

"The Word" and "the only begotten of the 

Father" here refer, of course, to the same person. 

Being made flesh, the sent of God and 

the gift of God refer to the same thing. Giving 

the Son, and sending him into the world, 

was making him flesh. In other words, these 

phrases all refer to one change— the change 

from his pre-human to his human existence. 

The idea of this change is not so much that 

from one locality to another, as it is from one 

nature to another. Being sent to the earth 

and being sent into the world (kosmos— arrangement) 

are not necessarily the same. Christ 

might be on the earth without being in the arrangement. 

He was sent into the arrangement, 

and he entered it when he became a factor of 

it. The chief need of those previously in the 

arrangement was never met, nor could it be 

met, until Christ met it. When genuine love 

gives, and gives wisely, it gives what is most 

needed. The love of God is real love, it is 

wise love. He gave that which meets the dire 

necessities of humanity, the dire necessities of 

every individual, from the first to the last. 

There are those who see in the Son of God 
taking upon himself our nature, and becoming 
the propitiation for our sins, no proof of the 
love of God. They say, That is proof of the 
Son's love, but where is the proof of the Father's? 
The answer is, In the Father's gift. 
A real father would much rather die himself than 
give a beloved child up to death. There 
is far more love displayed in God giving 
his only begotten and well-beloved Son up to 
death than there would have been in God dying 
himself, had that been possible. "Greater love 
hath no man than this, that a man lay down his 
life for his friends" (John 15:13); "but God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" (Rom. 5:8). 
The proof of the love of God is not 
only the most conclusive on record, but it is 
also the most conclusive conceivable. 



III.-THE PURPOSE OF GOD'S LOVE. 

In expressing this part of his subject our 
blessed Lord makes it as unmistakable and as 
forcible as possible. He says, "God sent not 
his Son into the world to judge (R.V.) the 
world." The world had been judged previously. 
The first life of the world had been judged 
in its entirety. That judgment was on the representative 
principle; and in it the whole world 
was judged in one man— the first Adam. God 
did not send his Son into the world to do that 
over again. Men blunder and have to do their 
work over again. God never blunders, nor has 
he ever to do his work over again. Christ says 
twice over that God sent his Son into the world 
that the world "should not perish." The world 
was already perishing. It had been perishing 
over four thousand years. God sent his Son into 
the world that it might not always perish. The 
penalty under which the world was perishing is 
death; and when a man is once really dead he 
is always dead, unless the penalty is nullified. 

On the positive side, Christ says that God 
sent his Son into the world "that the world 
through him might be saved"— "might have 
everlasting life"— "might have eternal life." 
The word here rendered "everlasting" and 
"eternal" does not necessarily mean endless. 
Competent authorities render it "age-lasting;" 
and the age may be long or short, according to 
the nature and circumstances of the case. Age-lasting 
life and salvation here are practically 
the same thing; and there can be neither soundness 
nor safety without untainted life. Salvation, 
of course, pertains to the whole man- 
physically, mentally, and morally— and when 
thus saved he continues to live. The purpose 
of God's love in sending his Son into the 
world is, in the first place, to nullify death— 
the first death; and, in the next place, to bring 
in untainted life— the second life. There could 
be no further judgment until untainted life was 
brought in, because the tainted life had previously 
been judged. 

"Now is the judgment of this world." Now 
the world's crisis has come. Now. Not before. 
This is the beginning of the second judgment. 
The second judgment is the judgment 
of the world individually. There could be no 

R1328:page 136 

individual judgment until there was individual 
untainted life, and there was no individual untainted 



life until Christ brought it in. Whenever 
and wherever he has been offered to any 
man, or will be offered to any man, his testing, 
trying, or proving has begun, or will begin. 
In view of this our blessed Lord exclaimed: 
"Now is the judgment of this world: now shall 
the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if 
I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men 
unto me."— John 12:31,32. 

IV.-THE RECIPROCATION OF GOD'S LOVE. 

The extent of the love of God is the extent of 
the world; the proof of the love of God is the gift 
of his Son; and the purpose of the love of God 
is that the world might have life. These were all 
matters of fact over eighteen hundred years ago; 
but that does not put the world into possession 
of this life. There is a definitely prescribed 
medium through which this life is communicated 
to man; and every man has to use this 
medium for himself. "As Moses lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life." The Israelites sinned against Moses and 
against God. They were bitten by fiery serpents, 
and were perishing in consequence. By 
divine command, Moses made a brazen serpent 
and set it upon a pole. That brought it within 
the range of their vision; "and it came to 
pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when 
he beheld the serpent of brass he lived." (Num. 21:4-9.) 
It was not when the serpent was 
made that the serpent-bitten men lived, nor 
was it when it was elevated: it was when they 
looked that they lived. Even so, it was not 
when "the Word was made flesh" that sin-bitten 
men lived, nor was it when the Son of Man 
was exalted, but it is when they look that they 
live. The serpent-bitten had to look with their 
physical eyes, and the sin-bitten have to look 
with their mental eyes. In each case the divinely-appointed 
medium of communication is 
looking, and that is indispensable. Looking 
with the eyes of the understanding is expressed 
by the word believing; and as this is the indispensable 
medium of communication it is imperative 
that there be no vital mistake respecting 
it. Recklessness will not do, nor will 
ignorance, nor superstition, nor credulity: it 
must be genuine faith. 

1. The basis of faith is the testimony of God 
himself.— "If we receive the witness of men, the 
witness of God is greater; for this is the witness 
of God which he hath testified of his Son. 



He that believeth on the Son of God hath the 
witness in himself; he that believeth not God 
hath made him a liar, because he believeth not 
the record that God gave of his Son." "That 
which was from the beginning, which we have 
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which 
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, 
of the word of life." "That which we 
have seen and heard declare we unto you, that 
ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly 
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his 
Son Jesus Christ." "I pray for them; I pray 
not for the world, but for them which thou hast 
given me." "Neither pray I for these alone, 
but for them also which shall believe on me 

R1329 : page 136 

through their word; that they all may be one; 

as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that 

they also may be one in us; that the world may 

believe that thou hast sent me." (1 John 5:9,10; 

1:1,3; John 17:9,20,21.) The testimony 

on which faith rests is not man's, it is 

God's own. Man had no testimony on this 

matter worth listening to until God spoke. 

God has made himself responsible for the extension 

of his testimony; and he who promised 

is faithful and sure to fulfil his promise. Those 

who live the life of God, breathe the Spirit of 

God, conform to the law of God, do the works 

of God, and speak the words of God, are the 

agency for the extension of God's testimony. 

"In due time" he will see that his testimony 

is extended, not only to "the ends of the 

earth," but to the uttermost extremities of "the 

world;" not only to every individual "on the 

earth," but also to every individual "under the 

earth." 

2. The testimony of God is (a) that Christ 
is the life of the world.— God sent his Son into 
the world "that the world through him 
might be saved," and there is no complete salvation 
without untainted life. "This is the 

R1329 : page 137 

record, that God hath given to us age-lasting 
life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath 
the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son 
of God hath not life." "The bread of God 
is he which cometh down from heaven, and 
giveth life unto the world." "The bread that 
I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the 
life of the world." (1 John 5:11,12; John 6:33,51.) 
The testimony of God is (b) that Christ 



is the light of the world: "In him was life, and 

the life was the light of men." "That was the 

true light which lighteth every man that cometh 

into the world." "I am the light of the 

world; he that followeth me shall not walk in 

darkness, but shall have the light of life." 

(John 1:4,9; 8:12.) The testimony of God 

is (c) that Christ is the love of the world: "He 

that loveth his brother abideth in the light." 

"This is the message that ye heard from the 

beginning, that we should love one another." 

"We know that we have passed from death unto 

life, because we love the brethren." "Hereby 

perceive we love,* because he laid down 

his life for us, and we ought to lay down 

our lives for the brethren." (1 John 2:10; 3:11,14,16.) 

And the testimony of God is (d) 

that Christ is the judgment of the world: "This 

is the judgment, that light is come into the 

world, and men loved darkness rather than 

light, because their deeds were evil." "As the 

Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, 

even so the Son quickeneth whom he will. 

For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed 

all judgment unto the Son." "As the 

Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to 

the Son to have life in himself and hath given 

him authority to execute judgment also, because 

he is the Son of Man." (John 3:19; 5:21-27.) 

Many talk about the judgment of the 

world without its love, and the love of the world 

without its light, and the light of the world 

without its life; but that completely reverses 

the divine order. Christ is the judgment of 

the world because he is its love, and he is its 

love because he is its light, and he is its light 

because he is its life. Some still talk about 

those who never heard the gospel being judged 

by "the light of nature," "the light of conscience," 

and so on. They might as well talk 

about them being judged by the light of darkness 

or enlightened by the life of death. The 

divine order is the life, the light, the love, and 

after that the judgment of the world. It is not 

enough that we exhort one another to "earnestly 

contend for the faith which was once delivered 

unto the saints." It is imperative that 

we see that it is the faith for which we contend. 

We may contend for something called "the 

faith," or for this, that, or the other element 

of the faith; but none of these will do instead 

of the faith. We must have the faith, the 

whole faith, and nothing but the faith, and 

earnestly contend for that. 

The man who denies that there is life in 
Christ for the world has no adequate evidence 



that there is life in Christ for himself. One 
says, I am one of the "predestinated," or one 
of the "elected," and therefore believe that 
there is life in Christ for me. But it requires 
as much evidence to prove that he is either 
elected or predestinated as that there is life in 
Christ for him; and where is that evidence? 
Another says: The holy Spirit in my heart tells 
me that there is life in Christ for me. But it 
requires as much evidence to prove that the 
holy Spirit says anything in any man's heart 
differing from what he says in his Word as that 
there is life in Christ for him; and where is 
that evidence? And another quite triumphantly 
quotes the words— "Whosoever believeth," 
and says, I believe, and therefore there is life 
in Christ for me. But faith is not the basis of 
testimony, it is testimony that is the basis of 
faith. Without testimony, what is called faith 
is mere credulity; and without adequate testimony 
there is no genuine faith. Here all men 
are on one level. No man has had a revelation 
to himself and for himself alone. Every 
man has to believe the testimony which is intended 
for all, or be without faith, because there 
is no other. This is a vital point for every man 
and for every mission. It is quite right to discredit 
all unscriptural theology, but let us see 
that it is replaced only by what is sound and 
defensible. The life, the light, the love, and 
judgment of God are all links of one chain, 
and pertain to the same individuals. Drop out 



*The words "of God" are not in the Greek text. 

R1329:page 138 

any one link of the chain and the others become 
useless and misleading. 

The mere assent to the truthfulness of even 
all the elements of the faith is not enough. 
We may advocate the life of God in Christ, and 
the judgment of God in Christ, while we remain 
as selfish as sin and as hard as nether millstones. 
To have unfeigned faith in Christ is 
to trust him, adhere to him, and be faithful and 
steadfast in conforming to him. Our perception 
of the love of God must lead to appreciation, 
our appreciation to reciprocation, and our 
reciprocation must never come to an end. 
This is particularly emphasized by our blessed 
Lord. He says, "This is the judgment, that 
light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light, because their deeds 



were evil. For every one that doeth evil hateth 

the light, neither cometh to the light, lest 

his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth 

the truth cometh to the light, that his deeds 

may be made manifest, that they are wrought 

in God." Here "evil" is the opposition of 

"truth." He "that doeth evil" is the opposite 

of he "that doeth truth." He who doeth 

evil has been begotten of the evil one, and he 

who doeth the truth has been begotten of the 

True One. He who has been begotten of the 

evil one loveth the darkness and hateth the 

light, and he who has been begotten of the 

True One loveth the light and hateth the darkness. 

He who loves the darkness remains in 

the darkness, and he who loves the light comes 

to the light. And he who remains in the darkness 

manifests that his deeds are wrought in 

Satan, while he who comes to the light manifests 

that his deeds "are wrought in God." 

Whenever and wherever God is manifested in 

the life, the light, and the love of Christ, men 

are being tested, tried, or proved, and ultimately 

they either reject or reciprocate the love of God. 

Those who reject the love of God cannot continue 

to live; and to those who reciprocate the 

love of God, the ratio of their reciprocation will 

always be the extent of their salvation. 

Some say, The love of God is omnipotent, 
and therefore all men will ultimately become 
pure and good. Were the writer to say, This 
talk about "omnipotent love" is omnipotent 
nonsense, the reader might say, and very truly, 
That is meaningless. Well, there is no more 
omnipotent love than there is omnipotent nonsense, 
there being neither the one nor the 
other. Love is a moral force, and no moral 
force can be omnipotent. Divine love, though 
it "passeth knowledge" in "breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height," is to man no 
force whatever until it is perceived; and its 
force is, and always will be, in the ratio of his 
perception, appreciation, and reciprocation. 
Man can no more be forced to love anything, 
or any being, than he can be forced to be free. 
Everyone will ultimately have an adequate opportunity 
of partaking of "the water of life 
freely," and every one who will not partake 
"shall be destroyed from among the people." 

Many admit that all who are "on the earth," 
at one time or another, will be offered the life 
that is in Christ, and deny that those who are 
"under the earth" will ever have an offer of it. 
That position is utterly untenable. Christ was 
sent into the world "that the world through 
him might be saved." Those who were on the 



earth when those precious words were uttered 
were not the world, they were a part of it— a 
small part. Those who were under the earth 
at that time were not the world, they were a 
part of it— a large part. Those who are on the 
earth now are not the world, they are another 
part of it— comparatively, a smaller part. And 
those who are under the earth now are not the 
world; they are another part of it— comparatively 
a larger part. So has it been ever since 
these words were uttered. The part which is 
on the earth at one time becomes a part of the 
part which is under the earth at another time; 
and so will it continue to be until all are raised 
from the dead. But no one can rationally affirm 
that any part of the world is the whole 
world. It requires all the parts to make up the 
whole, whether on the earth or under it; and 
as sure as Christ is "the life of the world," so 
sure is it that every individual will have an offer 
of life. Death itself cannot be any insuperable 
barrier in the way of this being accomplished: 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth 
my word, and believeth on him that sent me, 
hath age-lasting life, and shall not come into 

R1329 : page 139 

judgment, but is passed from death unto life. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming* 
when the dead shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God, and they that hear shall live." 



*Sinaitic MS. omits the words "and now is." 

R1330:page 139 

"Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in 

which all that are in the graves shall hear his 

voice, and shall come forth; they that have done 

good unto the resurrection of life, and they that 

have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment." 

(John 5:24,25,28,29.) The revisers 

having made a clean sweep of the word "damnation, 

some are quite busy trying to read the 

word "condemnation" into this glorious passage, 

as though it were the equivalent of the 

word "judgment." Condemnation is no more 

the equivalent of judgment than damnation is. 

The process of judgment will result either in 

justification or in condemnation, according to 

the merits or demerits of each case. The testimony 

which is necessary for the faith of those 

who are on the earth is necessary also for the 



faith of those who are under the earth; and as 
that testimony is being presented to some now, 
so will it, "in due time," be presented to all; 
and whether they are at present on the earth or 
under the earth cannot be permitted to interfere 
with God's gracious purpose. 

Others are ridiculing the idea of "post mortem 
salvation." "They know not what they 
do." Do they not teach the resurrection of the 
dead? If they do, they are ridiculing their 
own position, because that is certainly post 
mortem. The fact is this: Salvation, according 
to the Scriptures, and Resurrection, according 
to the Scriptures, are substantially one and 
the same thing. Tell me in what sense and to 
what extent you are being saved, and I will tell 
you in what sense and to what extent you are 
being raised from the dead. During the present 
age the moral element of salvation is coming 
first; so is it with resurrection. During 
the future age the physical element of resurrection 
will come first; so will it be with salvation. 
But the order in which their various 
elements will be fully realized makes no essential 
difference in either salvation or resurrection; 
because every element will have to be fully 
realized before there can be complete resurrection 
or complete salvation. 

"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are my ways your ways, saith the Lord. For 
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are 
my ways higher than your ways, and my 
thoughts than your thoughts." 

JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



R1330 : page 139 

"THE BOND OF PERFECTNESS." 



"And above all these things put on love, which is the 
bond of perfectness."— Col. 3:14. 

The Apostle says love is the bond of perfectness; 
and Jesus said love is the fulfilling of the 
divine law. Every intelligent being, from the 
humblest to the most exalted, craves love. The 
dog craves his master's affection and expresses 
his delight at every indication of it; a horse 
and even a cat will return your caresses; the 
birds reward your love with notes of joy; the 
lisping infant rewards your love with smiles and 
caresses. The young want to be loved; the 



middle aged, in the heat and strife of life's great 
battle, want the soothing solace of loving sympathy; 
the aged, weary and worn with the strife 
of years, want to lean upon the strong arm of 
love. The angels in all the glory of their 
higher state want it; our Lord Jesus wants it; 
and our heavenly Father wants it. We never 
grow weary of it; nor can we get too much 
of it. 

It is not merely weakness that craves love; 
but strength and glory want it, too. What is 
this desirable thing so universally craved by 
every grade of intelligent being? It is one of 
those things which pen cannot describe. People 
may sing about it, and talk about it, and 
read about it, and write about it, and yet have 
but a faint idea of its reality. But stop reading 
and writing and talking for a moment, and call 
to mind the few living illustrations of love that 
have chanced to cross your pathway. In the 
long past years of sunny childhood can you recall 
the tenderness of Mother's love that covered 

R1330 : page 140 

your dimpled cheeks with showers of kisses that 

could not half express the wealth of her affection? 

And do you not recall the tenderness 

of Father's care, who patiently toiled and sacrificed, 

and then delighted to see in you the 

fruit of his labor? Or perhaps you have tasted 

the sweets of conjugal love, and have realized 

in the chosen partner of your life one ready always 

to rejoice in your prosperity, to share 

your burdens and to cheer and urge you on to 

life's truest and highest attainments. 

Or in a dark hour of sorrow and tears 
some tender hand has soothed your throbbing 
brow, some kindly ministry has strengthened 
your weakness, or some timely word of cheer, 
of counsel and encouragement has inspired you 
with new zeal for the stern conflict of life. 
What life has been so barren and drear that no 
such gleam of sunshine has ever brightened the 
pathway? Such illustrations give us some idea 
of what it is to be loved. 

Then again consider for a moment the joy of 
loving— the joy of loving your own sweet child, 
or the manly glory of your noble husband, or 
the womanly grace of your devoted wife, or the 
tender sweetness of your sainted mother, or the 
ripened glory of your aged father, or the blessed 
communion of tried and faithful friends— the 
communion of saints. Then, rising above these 
earthly loves, some have tasted the sweets of 
that divine love that surpasseth all other loves. 



As yet, however, that divine love is only manifest 

to those who have faith in the divine 

promises and who walk in obedience to the divine 

commandments. 

Now with these illustrations of what it is to 
love and to be loved, let our imaginations 
widen the sphere of this noble virtue, and do 
we not see that, when it reigns in all hearts, it 
will prove to be just what the Apostle says it is 
—viz.: "the bond of perfectness," and the 
greatest of all the Christian virtues? Indeed 
he shows that, though we might have all the 
other virtues combined, yet, lacking this one, 
we would be as sounding brass and as tinkling 
cymbals. In fact, the putting on of the other 
virtues, except as prompted by this virtue, 
would be mere sham and hypocrisy. Yet with 
this, though lacking the others to some extent, 
the heart would prove itself loyal, though the flesh 
might be weak to perform the dictates of love. 

The Lord is saying a great deal for this virtue 
when he declares that love is the fulfilling 
of the law; or in other words, that if we had 
perfect love, we could easily and naturally keep 
the whole law of God. But here is our difficulty: 
we cannot love perfectly. Well, the Lord 
knows that we cannot, but he wants to see us 
endeavoring to love more and more, and making 
actual progress in this direction. Paul, 
too, shows us how love in the heart manifests 
itself in the outward life. We scarcely need to 
be told this, for the language of love is natural 
and its impulses are spontaneous; and yet, 
because we are not yet perfect in love, Paul's 
description makes manifest the absurdity of 
calling that love which is unworthy of the name. 
He says, "Love suffereth long and is kind. 
[It is kind even to the unthankful and the unholy, 
endeavoring to show them by example a 
more excellent way.] Love envieth not. [It is 
pleased rather to see another's success.] Love 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up. [There is 
no pride in love, delighting in display and 
vain glory: it is rather humble and retiring.] 
Love doth not behave itself unbecomingly 
[It is consistent with its profession in all its 
actions]; seeketh not its own [is not on the 
alert for self-interest, but more for the interest 
and blessing of others]; is not easily provoked 
[endeavors to make due allowance for the weaknesses 
of others]; thinketh no evil [is slow to 
impute evil motives, and anxious to see and to 
foster every good intent]; rejoiceth not in iniquity, 
but rejoiceth in the truth [has no pleasure 
in either hearing or telling evil tidings, or 
in evil of any kind, but delights in God's truth 



and in its fruitage of developed holiness]." 

"Love covers all things [makes due allowance 
for the weaknesses of the flesh]; believes 
all things [believes in the conquering power of 
love to help the weak and erring in the struggle 
against sin]; endures all things" [endures the 
necessary reproach and trials of faith and patience 
in the careful endeavor to build up and 
strengthen the weak]. 

The child of God who is studiously endeavoring 
thus to manifest and cultivate the spirit 

R1330:page 141 

of love will indeed become more and more like 
his blessed Master. What contradiction of sinners 
against himself did he bear! How patiently 
he bore with the weaknesses and the 
short-comings of his disciples! And how faithfully 
he taught them and led them to follow 
in his steps ! There was the perfect pattern of 
that self-sacrificing love which was set for our 
imitation. 

Well, says one, as he looks into this beautiful 
law of love, I would like to be fully actuated 
by such a noble principle, but some people are 
so despicably mean that I cannot love them. 
But are you sure you cannot love such people? 
Is it not rather the sins that you dislike and 
which ought to be despised by every heart that 
is truly loyal to God and righteousness? You 
say it is hard to distinguish between the two; 
and so it is sometimes, when inherited deformities 
of character have been fostered and cultivated 
and even gloried in, as they often are. 
But here is a way to examine the real disposition 
of your own heart toward such. Would 
you cheerfully do them kindness and help them 
to the extent of your ability to see the error of 
their way and to overcome it; can you tenderly 
pray for them and patiently bear with their 
weaknesses, their ignorance and their lack of 
development, and try by a noble example to 
show them a more excellent way? If such be 

R1331 :page 141 

the case, then it is the sin that you despise, and 
not the sinner. The sin you should hate, but 
the sinner, never. Not until God's unerring 
judgment declares that the sin and the sinner 
are inseparably linked may love let go its hold 
upon a brother man. 

Love, however, properly differs, both in kind 
and in degree, according to the worthiness of 
the object upon which it centers. There is a 



love of admiration, a love of sympathy and a 

love of pity. The former is the highest type 

of love, and is properly bestowed only upon 

that which is truly lovely and worthy of admiration. 

On this line our Heavenly Father 

and our Lord Jesus claim our supreme and 

most ardent affection; and all the good and 

noble and true of our fellow men, in proportion 

as they approximate the glorious likeness 

of God, may also share this love of admiration. 

Of this same kind is the love of childish innocence; 

and of this same kind should be the 

love of conjugal felicity. The chosen life partner 

should be one beloved in this highest sense; 

and parental and filial affection should also be 

established on the same basis, and then the 

dearest earthly relationship would be akin to 

the heavenly. 

The love of sympathy we can extend to the 
weakest one that is painfully toiling up the hill 
of difficulty toward a better life; and affectionately 
we may reach the sympathizing, helpful 
hand to such. If we are a step or two in advance 
of some such on the way, and if we 
realize a little less difficulty in making the ascent, 
let us thank God and use our superior vantage 
ground for the assistance of the weaker ones. 

Then there is the love of pity for those so 
steeped in ignorance and sin as to be unable 
even to raise their eyes heavenward to catch 
the first inspiration toward a better life. Would 
we indeed scorn the degraded, or add another 
pang to those already so bruised by the fall? 
Ah, no: love pities the vilest, sympathizes with 
the weakest and glories in the truest and purest 
and loveliest of earth and of heaven. Thus 
our blessed Lord loved supremely our all-glorious 
Heavenly Father; thus he loved with tenderest 
sympathy his devoted disciples; and thus 
he loved with wondrous pity all the fallen sons 
and daughters of Adam's race, even to the extent 
of giving his life to redeem them. Let us 
emulate his example and walk in his footsteps. 



R1331 :page 141 

ARRIVAL OF BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL. 



WATCH TOWER readers will be glad to learn 
of the safe arrival of the Editor and his wife, 
just as we go to press. They report a pleasant 
and successful trip through the most civilized 



portions of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, 
and promise an account in the next and succeeding 
TOWERS. An article intended for this issue 
miscarried en route. 



R1331 :page 142 

MR. GLADSTONE ON THE BIBLE AND SCIENCE. 



Dr. Reville, professor in the College of 
France, in his "Prolegomena to the History of 
Religions," 1884, questioned the correctness 
of what Mr. Gladstone had said some time before 
in support of "a primitive revelation in 
the testimony of the Holy Scriptures." Dr. 
Reville disputed the accuracy of the account of 
the creation and of the beginning of religious 
worship. In the Nineteenth Century of November 
last, Mr. Gladstone defends his position 
with signal ability, and completely demolishes 
his critic in regard to the dawn of worship. The 
article is entitled "Dawn of Creation and of 
Worship," and concludes with these sentences: 

"But none of these circumstances discredit 
or impair the proof that in the book, of which 
Genesis is the opening section, there is conveyed 
special knowledge to meet the special 
need everywhere so palpable in the state and 
history of our race. Far, indeed, am I from 
asserting that this precious gift, or that any 
process known to me, disposes of all the problems, 
either insoluble or unsolved, by which 
we are surrounded; of 

'The burden and the mystery 
Of all this unintelligible world.' 

"But I own my surprise, not only at the fact, 
but at the manner in which in this day, writers, 
whose name is legion, unimpeached in character 
and abounding in talent, put away from 
them, cast into shadow, or into the very 
gulf of negation itself, the conception of a 
Deity, an acting and a ruling Deity. Of this 
belief, which has satisfied the doubts, and wiped 
away the tears and found guidance for the footsteps 
of so many a weary wanderer on earth; 
which among the best and greatest of our race 
has been so cherished by those who had it, and 
so longed and sought for by those who had it 
not, we might suppose that if, at length, we had 
discovered that it was in the light of truth untenable, 
that the accumulated testimony of man 
was worthless, and that his wisdom was but folly, 



yet, at least, the decencies of mourning 
would be vouchsafed to this irreparable loss. 
Instead of this, it is with a joy and exultation 
that might almost recall the frantic orgies of 
the Commune, that this, at least at first sight, 
terrific and overwhelming calamity is accepted, 
and recorded as a gain. 

"Evolution, that is, physical evolution, which 
alone is in view, may be true (like the solar 
theory), may be delightful and wonderful in its 
right place; but are we really to understand 
that varieties of animals brought about through 
domestication, the wasting of organs (for instance, 
the tails of men) by disuse, that natural 
selection and the survival of the fittest, all 
in the physical order, exhibit to us the great 
arcanum of creation, the sum and centre of 
life, so that mind and spirit are dethroned from 
their old supremacy, are no longer sovereign 
by right, but may find somewhere by charity a 
place assigned them, as appendages, perhaps 
only as excrescences of the material creation? 

"I contend that evolution in its highest form 
has not been a thing heretofore unknown to 
history, to philosophy, or to theology. I contend 
that it was before the mind of Paul when 
he taught that in the fulness of time God sent 
forth his Son, and of Eusebius when he wrote 
the 'Preparation for the Gospel,' and of Augustine 
when he composed the 'City of God;' 
and, beautiful and splendid as are the lessons 
taught by natural objects, they are, for Christendom 
at least, infinitely beneath the sublime 
unfolding of the great drama of human action, 
in which, through long ages, Greece was making 
ready a language and an intellectual type, 
and Rome a framework of order and an idea of 
law, such that in them were to be shaped and 
fashioned the destinies of a regenerated world. 

"For those who believe that the old foundations 
are unshaken still, and that the fabric built 
upon them will look down for ages upon the 
floating wreck of many a modern and boastful 
theory, it is difficult to see anything but infatuation 
in the destructive temperament which leads 
to the notion that to substitute a blind mechanism 
for the hand of God in the affairs of life 
is to enlarge the scope of remedial agency; that 
to dismiss the highest of all inspirations is to 

R1331 :page 143 

elevate the strain of human thought and life; 
and that each of us is to rejoice that our several 
units are to be disintegrated at death into 
'countless millions of organisms;' for such, it 



seems, is the latest 'revelation' delivered from 
the fragile tripod of a modern Delphi. Assuredly, 
on the minds of those who believe, or else 
on the minds of those who after this fashion 
disbelieve, there lies some deep judicial darkness, 
a darkness that may be felt. While disbelief 
in the eyes of faith is a sore calamity, 
this kind of disbelief, which renounces and 
repudiates with more than satisfaction what is 
brightest and best in the inheritance of man, 
is astounding, and might be deemed incredible." 



page 143 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Receiving Volume 
Three, paper cover, Friday evening, answers 
my inquiry in regard to the same; so I 
will have some special circulars printed to put 
out with the Arp slips, and see if I cannot sell 
more DAWNS than I have of late. 

I have read the third volume to the 10th chapter, 
and every page is full of interest. It all 
makes me feel as though I would like to be free 
from all else except to try and interest others 
in the light. That does not seem to be the 
order of things, however, and I must continue, 
apparently, the local work with my other duties; 
but I want in some way to do more if I can. 
With the guidance of our heavenly Father and 
the wisdom he can give I shall, I trust, be shown 
the way. So may it be. In Christian fellowship, 
your brother, JOHN H. BROWN. 



California. 

MY DEAR SIR: -I am reading with profound 
interest your third volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I have read and re-read the first and 
second volumes. I am more than convicted 
of the correctness of your deductions. The 
Bible seems to me a new book, and yet it has 
always been to me a wonderful book. 

"Thy Kingdom Come" fills me with wonderful 
emotions. Blessed be God for the assurance 
that Babylon is fallen and that Christ is setting 
up his kingdom. Oh, how I have prayed that 
it might come, and be established in all the 
length and breadth of this world, casting down 
all usurpers. Praise God! It is too good, I 



sometimes say, to be true. God bless you. 
Yours for the kingdom in all the earth, 
G. W. MORGAN. 



Texas. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR: -Having seen, in a 
copy of your worthy paper, your generous offer 
to unfortunates— poor and unable to subscribe 
for your paper— I, as one of those who am not 
only poor, but separated by prison walls from 
the world, beg of you, in the name of him who 
said, "I was in prison and ye visited me," 
for as many or as few copies as you can find it 
convenient to send me. Not only myself, but 
all who have read the ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 
have expressed an earnest desire to read more and 
to learn from it the way of life more perfectly. 

And may you hear the blessed words, when 
you come to stand before the judgment bar of 
God, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto the 
least of these my brethren, ye have done it 
unto me." 

May the blessing of God rest upon you and 
yours. I am yours very truly, . 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I received 
the third volume of DAWN, and have 
hurriedly read it through. I shall read it all 
over again carefully, probably several times. 
I am much pleased with it all, and especially 
was I interested in the chapter on the Great 
Pyramid. It is all wonderful! but like all Jehovah's 
works. Man could never have planned 
it. He is scarcely able to comprehend it. Just 
so with the Bible— when rightly understood it 
towers far above the ability of any finite mind, 
and can be comprehended only when the added 
grace of God is vouchsafed to its assistance. 

I am more anxious than ever to send out 
"this Gospel of the Kingdom" to the hungry 
and thirsty children of God. I will send you 
$10. Please send me two copies of Vol. III., 
in paper, and one package of tracts, and apply 
the remainder for the spread of the Gospel. 

We are doing what we can here. The letters 
are coming in daily asking for help. May God 
direct us wherever we may be doing the harvest 
work. You will, of course, understand what 
this work is doing for me. When we settle a 
matter for another by the sure Word, it is fixed 
in our own minds. Verily it is more blessed to 



give than to receive. In Christian love, 
MRS. J.H. PATTERSON. 

page 144 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER:-I cannot refrain from 
writing once more to tell you that I have not lost 
any interest in the harvest work, but that I am 
thankful I can say it is steadily increasing, and 
I desire to engage in it more and more as the 
way is being gradually opened up to me. From 
a conversation last spring you know my circumstances, 
and my decision to continue in my profession 
till my debts are paid off; and as things 
look now, it would seem to require several 
months yet to accomplish this. Meanwhile, I 
am preparing myself as best circumstances permit, 
and am stirring up a few of the local 
preachers, in hopes some one among them may 
prove an efficient co-laborer in the near future. 

Your remark to guard against being blown 
away by every wind of doctrine, etc., is certainly 
very timely, and I will carefully heed it as best 
I can. Let us hope, however, that we will be 
spared spiritual cyclones, if not hurricanes, or 
be in the cleft of the rock while they pass over. 
I will look over the chronology you refer to, so 
as to get that still clearer in my head. Yesterday 
it was a stormy day in the New York pulpits, 
though very deeply significant to me, and 
all others who know something, at least, of the 
signs of the times. 

I expect ere long to be so busy and burdened 
with the grand work of the harvest that 
I will not have time to feel lonely at all. The 
tremendous importance of the work and the 
events now so close at hand demands all my 
zeal, time, attention and talents, so that nothing 
is left for anybody or anything else. I am 
pressing towards the mark. Your article on 
"Strong Delusion" in the April number proved 
to me strong meat in due season; for I shall 
need much of it, and trust you will remember 
me with all the brethren and sisters constantly, 
that I may be strong in the Lord and in the 
power of his might, fearless and with a clear 
insight in the truth now due to be revealed to 
the heirs of the kingdom. 

With best wishes and greetings to sister Russell 
and all the brethren and sisters, I remain 
your brother and fellow-servant, 

A. J. VERKOUTEREN. 



England. 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN THE TRUTH:-I have 
been preaching for the past fifty years (as a lay 
preacher), but have been blind to God's plan 
through Jesus Christ, as taught in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. But four years ago, through meeting 
a brother Cattermole, in London, my eyes 
were opened. He kindly loaned me "Food 
for Thinking Christians." I read it through 
once, laid it aside for a year, then took it up 
again. After reading it three times, the light 
began to dawn. 

Two years ago, I received from the same 
brother the PLAN OF THE AGES, and have been 
digesting it ever since; and I thank God from 
my very heart that I ever saw it. 

I commenced last September and preached 
from it my first sermon in a Methodist Chapel 
in the presence of some of their big men, and 
was kindly asked not to advance such doctrines 
again— to which I replied I would preach it to 
my dying day. 

I may tell you that I am a gardener by trade. 
I am now in my seventieth year, but, thank God, 
I enjoy the best of health and am so situated 
that I meet with many people, and I always 
take the opportunity of setting the Truth before 
them; but I cannot do as much as I would 
like. You will well understand the uphill work 
we have in England. The people here are very 
ignorant in spiritual truths, and the majority 
are still under the power of the Romanists. 

Sister Garrett has been here two Sundays, and 
together we have held a meeting on the seashore, 
and the people have behaved very kindly 
toward us. But as she is going away, I shall 
have to go alone as far as human help is concerned; 
yet I know my Father will support and 
strengthen me, and I hope to do a work, if he 
spares me this summer. I request your prayers 
that God will help me to stand firm though all 
human friends forsake me. 

I find that the people gladly receive the 
Tracts. And I know, by the questions asked, 
that they are seeking truth. Truly, "The harvest 
is great, but the laborers are few." 

I will not write much for the first time, but 
close with an earnest prayer that God will bless 
you and Sister Russell in your noble work. 
May you long be spared to give out "meat in 
due season." Yours in a loving Savior, 
SAMUEL BATHER. 



R1331 :page 144 



ANOTHER EVIDENCE OF THE WORKING OF 
THE GREAT TROUBLE. 

DEAR TOWER:— A great scheme has been devised 
within the Farmers' Alliance. It is proposed 
to withhold the year's crop from market 
until the farmers can get their own price. The 
plan is unfolded in a circular, issued to the 
farmers' organizations. It suggests a great combination 
of the organizations and has the relative 
importance and force of an official order for 
a strike. The circular, which is presumed to be 
a secret document, will be sent to the five and a 
half millions of farmers. WM. M. WRIGHT. 



R1339 : inside cover 
THE TOWER FOR 1892. 



In response to numerous requests from our 
readers, we purpose an enlargement of this 
journal. Commencing with the issue for January 
next, the number of pages will be increased 
from 16 to 28, under white covers. 
This will afford considerably more space and 
will, we believe, be much better every way 
than to make the paper a semi-monthly of its 
present size. We trust that the TOWER readers 
in general will coincide with our judgment in 
the matter of this change. 

This additional presswork, paper, composition 
and postage will necessitate an increase in 
the price to $ 1 .00 (4/-) a year. This price, it is 
hoped, will clear the cost of the publication- 
including those sent gratis to the LORD'S POOR 
interested in the present truth, who, because 
of infirmities of age or accident or other 
causes, are unable to pay for it. These constitute 
a much more numerous class than most 
would imagine, as the poor and the infirm are 
specially drawn to the "good tidings of great 
joy." Should any surplus remain after the actual 
cost of the publishing of the TOWER has 
been met, it will go into the Tract Fund for 
scattering Old Theology tracts, as the Editor 
and the Publishing Co. serve the cause gratuitously, 
from love for the Master and the Truth. 



OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



In the VIEW of this issue, we have shown the 
necessity for supplying large quantities of the 
O.T. Tracts gratis to interested brethren and 
sisters who can use them to great advantage for 
the spread of the Truth. We therefore propose 
a plan which, if it can be worked out, will, we 
believe, meet the case fully. 

(1) The new price for the TOWER will include 
a year's subscription for two copies of the 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, published quarterly. 
Thus every TOWER subscriber will be also an 
O.T. Tract subscriber, and will receive two 
copies of each tract as issued. 

(2) Any subscriber (as above— including 
those accepted on the list of the Lord's poor) will 



have the privilege of ordering FREE as many extra 
copies of any of the tracts as he can use judiciously 
—from No. 1 onward except Nos. 8 and 11. 
Thus all may become scatterers of the "hail." 

(3) It is proposed to meet this immense demand 
and the great cost which it will entail- 
even though with our great economy $1.00 will 
do nearly as much as $2.00 ordinarily— by the 
FREE WILL OFFERINGS of those whose hearts, 
touched by the truth, burn with desire to serve 
it and its Author. 

This will be a work of faith; yet seeing the 
necessity for it, we conclude to adopt the plan, 
feeling sure that he who declares that all the 
gold and silver of the mountains are his will 
send the amount needful for its economical accomplishment. 
We will not even wait until 

the first of the year, but invite all TOWER subscribers, 
who have the heart desire and the ability 
to engage in the work, to order at once such 
tracts as they can and will judiciously use. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



While passing through London we noticed 
some very beautiful Motto Cards suitable for the 
adornment of the walls of Christian homes, and, 
thinking the prices cheaper than in the United 
States, we purchased some, purposing to advise 
the TOWER readers and to supply orders if any 
desired them. We present herewith a descriptive 
list. The prices include postage. 



MOTTO CARDS. 

ASSORTED HEAVY MAROON AND GREEN CARDS 

STAMPED IN SILVER. 

No. EACH. 

1. LARGE STARS (6 different Mottoes), $ .25 

2. LONG SHAPED (4 " " ), 25 

3. SMALLER, Square shaped (4 Mottoes, with Chromo 
Illustrations), 20 

4. SMALLER, "REST IN THE LORD"-verses, 15 

5. " SHIELDS (6 Mottoes), 10 

MOTTO CARDS. 

PRINTED IN GILT AND COLORS, ON HEAVY, 

FINE, TONED PAPER. 

No. EACH. 



6. FAITH & LOVE (Moss Roses) (4 Mottoes), $ .10 

7. GOD'S FAVOR (Floral Wreaths) (6 Mottoes), 10 

8. LOOKING TO JESUS (Roses) (4 Mottoes), 10 

9. CHRISTIAN SOLDIER MOTTOES (2 Mottoes), 10 

10. EASEL MOTTOES FOR MANTEL (6 Mottoes), 05 

11. CHRISTMAS CARDS (assorted, illuminated), .05 & .10 



page 144 

CHRISTIAN SOLDIER CALENDAR FOR 1892. 

-VERY CHOICE- 

WITH A BIBLE TEXT AND VERSE OF POETRY FOR EACH DAY OF THE YEAR 1892. 

PRICE, 30 CENTS (USUAL PRICE 50 CENTS), POSTAGE INCLUDED. 



R1332 : page 145 

VOL. XII. NOVEMBER, 1891. NO. 11. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

THE HARVEST FIELD ABROAD. 

After all the vicissitudes of our long and 
rapid journey abroad, which included ten thousand 
miles by sea and seven thousand miles by 
land, in and between Europe, Asia, Africa and 
America, we are glad to greet the readers of the 
TOWER again from the home office. We arrived 
just as the last issue of the TOWER was 
ready for press, and therefore had to delay any 
account of our travels for this and subsequent 
issues. 

Toward the close of our journey we had the 
pleasure of greeting about one hundred and fifty 
of the interested ones at London and about the 
same number at Liverpool, who came together 
from various parts of England and Wales. 
The former company was brought together by 
the kindness of Sister Home and others, the 
latter by Brother and Sister Elam. Both were 
precious seasons in which we learned to appreciate 
very highly the depth and earnestness of 
the fellow-members of the body over there. 
You will not be surprised to know that the same 
spirit of the truth (the spirit of love— deep, 
earnest and active) characterizes the saints 
there, as it does all who joyfully and devotedly 
accept the same good tidings on this side the 
Atlantic. These gatherings reminded us of 
those which are held every Spring in Allegheny. 
Love, joy and peace, the fruits of the spirit of 
the truth, were expressed in the faces and by 



the hands as well as in the words of all. And 
fervent and earnest were the prayers of the 
saints there for their dear brethren and sisters 
in America, and for the great work in which we 
are unitedly engaged. In the intervals of the 
public meetings the personal interviews were 
constant and very earnest, disclosing a strong 
under-current of love and devotion to God and 
a longing for still greater usefulness in his 
blessed service. Their prayers and parting 
benedictions will never be forgotten, except in 
the joys of our glorious reunion in the heavenly 
kingdom. O may we each so run as to be 
counted worthy of that blessed consummation 
of our hopes! 

Arriving in New York, we were greatly surprised 
to find that Brother and Sister Fairchild 
had arranged for a gathering of interested ones at 
their home, to bid us welcome to the dear home 
land— the most favored in the world for the 
great harvest work. It was a warm welcome 
indeed, and most beautifully expressed by the 
floral decorations and elegant repast which loving 
hearts had planned and loving hands had 
executed. We greatly enjoyed this privilege of 
meeting and greeting the saints, about sixty of 
whom had gathered, some coming fifty and 
some a hundred miles, a majority of whom 
awaited our arrival. 

Reaching Allegheny early on the following 
Sunday morning, we were again surprised by 
the loved ones. Brothers Bryan and Morrow, 
a delegation of welcome, met us at the depot; 
and on our arrival home, after worship, while 

R1332 : page 146 

we breakfasted, a poem of welcome, written for 
the occasion by Sister Ball, of our household, 
was read to us. 

But our surprises were not yet complete. 
On our arrival at Bible House chapel, we found 
the stand and platform banked with potted 
plants and adorned with flowers, while upon the 
wall, in the rear of the desk, and beautifully executed, 
was the word Welcome. A congregation 
of about two hundred awaited our arrival, and 
Brother Weimar conducted the meeting, whilst 
we were shown seats among the congregation. 
The program consisted of an address of welcome 
by Sister Tuttle who, on behalf of the congregation, 
bade us Welcome Home in no uncertain 
language; and this was preceded and followed 
by the excellent rendering of two very appropriate 
hymns, specially prepared for the occasion 
by Sister Zech. 



Then, an opportunity offering, we responded, 
assuring our dear Brethren and Sisters that we 
heartily reciprocated all the love and tender interest 
which they had so forcibly and elegantly 
expressed toward us. We assured them that we 
accepted these loving expressions of welcome, 
not merely as personal matters, but chiefly as 
expressions of their sympathy and love for the 
Truth and the Master whom we seek to serve. 
We then briefly related some items of interest 
furnished by our journey, and the various evidences 
we had of the Lord's favor and blessings 
upon us and upon our mission abroad, promising 
more anon through the TOWER. 

While we realized that dangers beset us on 
every hand all through the journey, we gratefully 
remembered the prayers of the saints on 
our behalf, and the loving favor of God, whose 
presence was so signally with us all the way, so 
that every hindrance to the accomplishment of 
our mission was removed and our way was continually 
prospered. The seas were smooth and 
quiet, affording opportunities for letting our 
light shine among our fellow-passengers, although 
for a time we had to have a share of the 
discomforts of sea-sickness, which was doubtless 
for our good; and we sincerely hope that some 
lasting impressions were made upon the minds 
of some to whom we bore witness concerning 
our Father's plan. 

On the east-bound journey were some fifty 
Congregationalist ministers, bound for a convention 
of that denomination in London, having 
for its chief object the closer union of 
Congregationalists throughout the world; and 
on our homeward journey was a similar number 
of Methodist ministers, bound for a Methodist 
convention to be held in Washington city. 
On the Black and Mediterranean seas, on board 
a Russian steamer from Odessa to Jaffa, we 
had a fair sample of Jewish exiles and also 
of the Russian hatred of the poor wanderers. 
But all the individual Russians cannot be 
judged by the policy of their despotic government, 
nor by the superstitions of their national 
religion— the Greek Catholic. Among 
them we met persons of both head and heart 
culture and whom we would have reasonable 
hope of converting to the truth under favorable 
circumstances for its presentation. To some of 
these we have promised a copy of THE PLAN OF 
THE AGES in French as soon as it is published. 

On the Mediterranean voyages we also met 
and made the acquaintance of some fair representatives 
of the Greeks, Egyptians, French 
and Italians, and our appreciation of the kindly 



courtesy of these traveling acquaintances 
greatly enlarged our sympathy and love for the 
various peoples whom they represented; and as 
we exchanged cards on parting and wished each 
other a safe and happy journey, we promised 
each a copy of DAWN in German, French or 
English when they were familiar enough with 
any of these to read it. Throughout our journeys 
on the wave the Master's "Peace, be still," 
seemed to echo and re-echo; for though we 
heard of disasters abroad by sea and by land, 
our frail barques were always safely steered to 
their destination; and though all Europe was 
suffering from too frequent rains, and in many 
places damaging floods, we had fair weather 
and clear sunshine from the day we left home 
until our return, with the single exception of our 
last day in London, the rains and storms always 
being either in advance of us or in our rear. 
This, together with our continued physical 
health, notwithstanding the sudden changes of 
climate and the fatigue of constant travel and 
sight-seeing, we could not help marking as specially 

R1332 : page 147 

favorable to our rapid traveling and necessarily 
hasty observations, for all of which we 
sincerely thank God and you, dear brethren and 
sisters, who constantly remembered us before 
the throne of heavenly grace. 

Our travels by land were also blessed by 
numerous opportunities for making the acquaintance 
of representatives of various nations, 
with whom we frequently conversed, sometimes 
through interpreters, all conversation naturally 
gravitating toward the truth. The kind faces and 
cordial hand-shaking and good wishes of these 
traveling companions will long be remembered 
as among the interesting events of our journey, 
as links in the chain of love that binds us to our 
common humanity and as instrumentalities in 
causing our hearts to beat with a quicker impulse 
and a warmer affection for the "whole 
world," whom God so loved as to give his 
only begotten Son for their redemption and 
restitution. 

Yes, our sympathies have been greatly enlarged, 
our love strengthened and our zeal 
greatly stimulated to do our privileged part in 
the furtherance of that glorious plan of God 
which alone is equal to the emergency of our 
fallen humanity's desperate case. Our reason, 
as well as the Scriptures, clearly affirms that all 
efforts not on the lines of God's plan are vain 
indeed, and we long for the consummation in 



the blessed restitution of all things. But, as a 
means to that end, we see that the development 
and exaltation of the Church is of first importance, 
calling, therefore, now— in this harvest 
time— for the concentration of all our efforts 
here, in order that, under the future leading 
and government of the perfected and glorified 
Church, the world may believe.— John 17:21. 

We want to tell you all we can about our 
journey, but it will require time to do so. We 
would now in a word tell you that the Lord has 
greatly blessed us in it to the accomplishment 
of what we contemplated in undertaking it, as 
explained in the July issue. You will be glad 
to know this much briefly now and we will endeavor 
to communicate some particulars in 
which you will be interested in succeeding issues. 
While abroad we not only sought to see 
all that we could for our own sakes, but continually 
remembered that we were seeing for 
you also— as eyes for the body: this time seeing 
earthly things indeed, but seeing these with 
a view to their relationship with heavenly truths 

R1333 : page 147 

and interests. 

In view of certain leadings indicating that 
this journey would be the Lord's will, we did 
not hesitate to use a portion of the Lord's 
money for this purpose, though we felt impelled 
to accomplish the work in the most economical 
way possible, which we did by traveling generally 
in second class coaches, which also brought 
us more in contact with the people, as we desired, 
the first class coaches being very generally 
forsaken except by civil and ecclesiastical 
dignitaries and wealthy pleasure-seekers. We 
also found second class passage on the ocean 
quite comfortable, though not luxurious, and 
gladly availed ourselves of these methods of 
economizing, being pleased also to find that 
our unseasonable visits to Palestine and Egypt 
placed the hotel rates there at half the usual 
prices. Nor did we return home, as is the 
usual custom of travelers, laden with the luxuries 
of the old world, with samples of its art 
works, its rich laces or elegant silks, but we 
trust with a richer treasure of knowledge and 
experience valuable to the dear Lord's work. 
We have said we used the Lord's money, in this 
way, yet would not be understood to mean that 
we so appropriated any portion of the funds 
contributed to the spread of the truth, etc., 
every cent of which, and more too, is applied 
directly to the purposes intended. But we count 



all our private, personal means as the Lord's: 
hence the expression, "the Lord's money." 

When starting out we had specially three objects 
in view: (1) A study of the social conditions 
of Europe with a view to an unbiased 
judgment as to how soon the trouble which 
God's Word predicts may be expected there. 
(2) While so far on the journey we wanted to 
see Palestine and to judge of the fulfilments of 
prophecy and the prospects for the restitution 
work beginning among the Jews, and to meet 
and confer with our Jewish Brother Rabinowitch 
with reference to that phase of the harvest 
work which involves the Jewish question, so that 
these two parts of the work may proceed in yet 

R1333 : page 148 

closer sympathy. (3) While serving these main 
objects we proposed meeting and conferring 
with some of the TOWER readers and workers 
abroad, and from observation throughout the 
entire journey we hoped to see perhaps some 
way of forwarding the spread of the Truth, at 
least to some extent, in Europe. 

But the last and the least of our objects, in 
going on this mission, has turned out to be the 
first and uppermost one in our hearts. Therefore 
this must be the first feature of our report 
to you, viz., the openings and prospects we 
found for the spreading of the harvest truth 
among the Lord's sheep in Europe. 

It did not require long to convince us that 
we had underestimated the intelligence and religious 
fervor of God's people across the deep, 
especially in England, Ireland, Scotland, Norway, 
Sweden and Denmark. As your eyes we 
soon began to study how those members of the 
body of Christ, here, who have been so greatly 
blessed of the Lord by a knowledge of his 
gracious plans (present and future), could assist 
and bless and set free into the same glorious 
light of truth any of the fellow members of the 
same body in "the old world." The Lord 
seemed to say to us, "Lift up your eyes and see, 
for the fields are white for harvesting"— ready 
for the sickle of present truth. 

And now as your eyes we have this report to 
make as to the ripeness of the fields for your 
services and ours as co-reapers with the great 
Reaper in the present gathering of the ripe 
wheat into the great garner of safety, separate 
from the world and the tares and out of the fiery 
troubles which will shortly overwhelm them. 

We saw no opening or readiness for the truth 
in Russia, except on the part of Brother Rabinowitch 



and the Jews whom he is seeking to 
reach. We saw nothing to encourage us to 
hope for any harvest in Italy or Turkey or Austria 
or Germany. The Germans as a people seem 
to have had vital godliness and faith in the Bible 
almost wholly crushed out, and nearly all of the 
intelligent among them are at best moralists 
who reject the Scriptures except in so far as 
they imperfectly express their ideas of right, 
wrong, etc. The majority of Russians and 
Austrians seem to be immersed in superstitious 
formalism, into which intelligent appreciation 
of God and his Word does not seem to enter. 
The Italians have been so long under the baneful 
influence of the Papacy that they, like the 
French, are rapidly turning to open infidelity, 
although many still are blinded by gross Romish 
superstition. 

But Norway, Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, 
and especially England, Ireland and Scotland, 
are fields ready and waiting to be harvested. 
These fields seem to be crying out, Come over 
and help us! and we know of no more hopeful 
parts in which to thrust in the sickle and reap: 
no, not even in this our favored land of liberty. 
In all of these countries there are hearts hungry 
for the truth and many evidently consecrated 
to the Lord and anxious to prove their devotion 
to him by engaging in what they severally conceive 
to be his work. 

The Salvation Army is engaging the services 
of many of these, and is indeed doing a great 
work in its special line. By self-sacrificing 
methods they are continually planning and laboring 
to lift up the fallen and the degraded, and 
encouraging and assisting them to lead a better 
life. This, like every other humanitarian scheme, 
is a good work; and were we not aware of the 
better plans and ways and means which God 
has arranged for the lifting up and blessing of 
the world, such humanitarian works would have 
a large claim upon us. But we bear in mind 
that the harvest of the age is come and that the 
harvest work of thrusting in the sickle of present 
truth and gathering the elect from the four winds 
(from every quarter of the field) and from one 
end of heaven (the nominal Christian Church) 
to the other (Matt. 24:31) is the seasonable 
work of the truly enlightened now— the Lord's 
work and hence the work of his co-laborers. 

In Great Britain many earnest souls are 
preaching Christ on the street corners without 
waiting for the laying on of clerical hands. 
True, their zeal is coupled with very little knowledge 
of the truth, but their disposition to serve 
the Master is very manifest; and the attentive 



and respectful crowds of orderly, thoughtful 
looking people that gather about them indicate a 
desire on the part of the multitudes for the 
true bread of life. Among thinking Christians 

R1333 : page 149 

there is, too, a growing dissatisfaction with the 
sectarian forms of godliness which so lack its 
vital power, and there is a longing and a reaching 
out for something better. 

In Norway and Sweden there is also a great 
awakening and a growing revulsion against the 
established (Lutheran) church. The Swedes and 
Norwegians are serious, reverent, thoughtful 
people, and many among them are coming to 
realize that it is one thing to be born into the 
nominal Church and quite another to be a true 
Christian, a member of the one true Church 
whose names are written in heaven. But while 
many there are out and coming out of the old so-called 
orthodox ruts and systems and searching 
the Scriptures independently, without sectarian 
names, calling their meetings "Missions," the 
adversary is even there busily seeking to infuse 
pernicious doctrines of error, so that a general 
sifting process is going on among them as 
among us. And there, as here, chief among 
these false doctrines are those which in a very 
subtle manner deny the rock foundation of 
all true faith, viz.: the Ransom— that we were 
bought with a price, even the precious blood of 
Christ. A Mr. Waldstrom is one of the most 
active teachers on this line among them, while 
others strenuously oppose the error and are seeking 
for the old paths of the Lord and the apostles. 
The Danes, too, are in a similar attitude. 

While other parts of Europe have their claims 
upon the gospel, and while the Lord has in all 
probability some precious saints scattered here 
and there all over the world, we surely have 
reason to hope for a larger ingathering from 
these portions of the foreign field than from 
any other. 

And now the question forces itself upon us— 
What can we, who have been so highly favored, 
do for the precious saints abroad? How shall 
we thrust the sickle into these ripened fields? 
How can we bind up the broken-hearted and 
pour in the oil and wine of the Truth? What 
privileges of labor and self-denial will the dear 
Master be pleased to accord to us and to bless, 
for the gathering of his sheep to the green pastures 
and still, refreshing waters of his Word, 
away from the befouled streams of human tradition 
and speculation? 



In the first place, we see the great necessity 
for the translation of these harvest truths into 
the various European languages. The French 
translation of MILLENNIAL DAWN, now under 
way, will serve a good purpose all over Europe, 
as French is very generally understood and 
spoken everywhere, even among many of the 
common people. The German translation already 
completed for Volumes I. and II. is available 
for Germans wherever an interest can be 
awakened, though we can have little hope to 
find any considerable number of the elect in 
the midst of a nation so given up to pleasure 
seeking, beer drinking, military zeal and ambition, 
and where vital godliness has been almost 
crushed out by a cold, formal, state religion. 
The English edition will of course answer for 
England, Ireland, Scotland and for many in 
Wales, as well as for the United States and 
Canada, and for English speaking people scattered 
throughout the world. But there is a 
great need for a Swedish translation and also a 
translation which would serve both the Danes 
and the Norwegians, not only in their native 

R1334 : page 149 

lands, but here in the United States also; for, 
as perhaps few realize, these nationalities have 
millions of representatives here in our midst. 

As yet we see no way open for this part of 
the work, but it is at least our privilege to pray 
the Lord of the harvest not only to send more 
laborers into his vineyard, but also to provide 
what he may deem the necessary equipment for 
the work. We are, however, looking for and 
arranging with persons competent to do the 
work of translating, so that when it shall please 
the Lord to indicate the way or to supply the 
means this work may be expedited accordingly; 
for the Swedish tract is already stirring up considerable 
interest. 

Observation and conference with the saints 
in England, Ireland and Scotland indicate that 
one hindrance to a more rapid spread of the 
truth there is the inability of the interested to 
purchase as many tracts as could be circulated 
to advantage. In all the large cities great freedom 
and often protection from the police is 
granted for holding open air meetings; and on 
Sunday evenings especially, crowds gather and 
discuss religious and socialistic subjects from 

R1334:page 150 

various standpoints— many evidently being dissatisfied 



and truth-hungry. Besides these there 

are Mission and Salvation Army meetings in 

progress, in perhaps twenty places at once, in 

each large city. These afford excellent opportunities 

for the Truth— superior indeed to anything 

of the same sort in this land. The 

Brethren and Sisters there realize these to be 

excellent fields for tracts explanatory of the 

truth, and could judiciously circulate thousands 

more than they have the means to purchase; 

for there, as here, the deeply interested number 

few of the great and rich. 

We left them with the assurance that we saw 
this need and would do what we could to overcome 
the difficulty as the Lord would lead and 
grant the means for us to supply their need. 

We found a number of the friends anxious, 
too, to use their time and energy in the colporteur 
work— selling DAWN. They had learned 
how God has been greatly blessing and using 
this method for reaching many here with the 
truth, and they were anxious to be sharers 
in a similar work of self-denial for the sake 
of the Lord, his truth and his people around 
them. 

They pointed out that a depot for DAWN in 
London was almost a necessity to the work, as 
at present it required nearly a month to get a 
supply of books after they had taken the orders. 
Some, too, assured us that they longed to give 
themselves in this work, but that family obligations 
hindered them, as by it they could not 
earn enough to support their dependent ones, 
even though our recent allowance is admittedly 
liberal. This same difficulty has been encountered, 
too, by many here in America where 
money is less scarce and the sales and incomes 
consequently larger proportionately. 

To overcome the first of these difficulties, we 
made arrangements for a London edition of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, which, as soon as ready, will 
be duly announced in these columns. And regarding 
the second difficulty we will hope and 
pray that the way may yet open wide enough 
to permit all those to go into the service who 
are now hindered by financial necessities only, 
and whose hearts are filled to overflowing with 
an earnest desire to go forth and reap. 

Among other things we realized the necessity 
for some tracts still different from those already 
published— for The Skeptical Christian, 
for The Consecrated Christian, and one showing 
plainly The One True Church. These ideas 
we will endeavor to put into shape during the 
coming year, as issues of our Old Theology 
Quarterly. We will also get out a new small 



tract corresponding somewhat to the present 
Arp-slip. The latter will be much less costly 
than the others, and may be given away more 
promiscuously, whilst the larger tracts should 
be given only where there is some reason to 
suppose that they will be appreciated. 

Every opportunity for serving the Lord by 
the spread of his Truth means (during this age 
when evil abounds) an opportunity for self-sacrifice 
on the part of his consecrated ones. 
Our Master intends it to be so, because he would 
prove both to himself and to us the sincerity 
of our love. We may think that we love him 
and his Word more than we really do; and these 
opportunities, as they come, serve to show us our 
real attitude— the real depth of our love. And 
those whose hearts are really and fully consecrated, 
if they find a wincing of the flesh when 
an opportunity for sacrifice offers, will be put 
on guard thereby to see that their human will, 
pride, love of self and ease, etc., are more fully 
crucified— to the death. 

Ah! says some one, I have consecrated all to 
the Lord, and would gladly give both time and 
means in his service, but the necessities of this 
life absorb almost all of both, in caring for 
those dependent on me. I wish that I could 
see some way of attesting my love. The "servants" 
under the Law were commanded to give 
a tenth of their increase in the Lord's service, 
and I, a "son" made free from Law, and shown 
the realities of the divine plan, which the "servants" 
saw only dimly in types, feel a desire to 
do more and not less than they. But how to 
do it I find not: there are so many demands 
for every spare hour and every spare dollar. 

To such we believe that the Lord would have 
us deliver the following message which others 
will please not read:— 

Your difficulty lies in trying to do too much 
—more than you have ability to do— and in 

R1334:page 151 

overlooking the little things which are within 
your ability. You would love to preach the 
truth to great audiences with a thrilling "silver 
tongue," but have you such a talent? If not 
you had better begin humbly at home, and in 
a simple, quiet way tell the story of redeeming 
love to such of your family and neighbors 
as are "meek" and have "an ear to hear." 
It is to him who uses faithfully the talents which 
he has that the Lord promises to give greater 
talents and opportunities. Or perhaps, more 
humbly, you aspire to be the most successful 



colporteur or tract distributor— to sell and distribute 
thousands over vast extents— but cannot. 
Then turn and see how faithful you have been 
or can be in the use of opportunities which lie 
just at your hand on a smaller, humbler scale- 
humility may be one of your most needed lessons. 
Or perhaps you are saying, Would that 
I had thousands or millions of dollars, how 
gladly would I spend them in spreading the 
truth. 

You perhaps forget for the moment the great 
Master's remark (Luke 21:2-4), that the poor 
widow's two mites were more in his sight than 
the large bequests made by those who merely 
gave out of their abundance. "The Lord your 
God doth prove you," whether ye do love him 
and his truth supremely; and therefore he permits 
his work often to seem to lag for want of 
means, that the seeming necessity may give us 
the opportunity to deny ourselves in his service 
—for our benefit, our development, our blessing. 
(2 Cor. 8:1-15; 9:5-12.) Many who find 
the spirit willing but the flesh weak forget that 
God's Word takes cognizance of this, and marks 
out a straight path for our weak feet by admonishing 
those who would show their love in this 
way not to tempt themselves, but to adopt a 
regular habit of laying aside, on the first day of 
each week, whatever amount they feel disposed 
to give— according as the Lord hath prospered 
them during the preceding week. (1 Cor. 16:2.) 
How carefully God has provided for 
our guidance upon every subject: The Word 
of God is profitable that the man of God may 
be thoroughly furnished unto all good works." 
-2 Tim. 3:17. 



R1334:page 151 

FURTHER COMPLICATIONS FOR PRESBYTERIANISM. 



Every day may be said to furnish fresh disclosures 
proving the lack of sincerity of ministers 
prominent in various denominations— lack 
of honesty upon questions of doctrine. Their 
hearts are larger than their heads, but their love 
of popularity and a good living proves stronger 
than their conscientiousness toward either God 
or their denominations. 

The following dispatch to the public press 
explains itself: 

NEW YORK, Oct. 17. -"There is some agitation 



in store for President Patton, of Princeton, 
growing out of a speech he delivered to the 
Philadelphia society of Princeton college, on 
March 31, 1887. 

"During that year the controversy at Andover, 
on the question of future probation, was 
agitating the whole religious world. Dr. Patton, 
then professor of ethics in the college, as 
well as in the seminary, was invited by the students 
of the former institution to give an address 
on the subject in Murray hall, Philadelphia. 
A large audience listened to him with the deepest 
interest, his views being supposed to be safe 
and final. Two members of the staff of the 
Philadelphia Magazine, one of them a stenographer, 
reported the speech with care. At 
the request of a member of the faculty, the 
venerable Dr. Duffield, who deemed the address 
'very broad,' one of these students waited upon 
Dr. Patton the following morning, gave him the 
proof of his address and requested his permission 
to insert it in the magazine. To his surprise 
the professor emphatically forbade using 
it, saying that 'he had spoken as Dr. Patton 
and not for the seminary,' and that 'to publish 
his remarks would injure the seminary.' 

"Here is an extract from the Philadelphia 
address: 'We continually see men going into 
the other world imperfect; they must be imperfect 
when they reach there, and need some 
time for restoration or change. 

R1335 :page 151 

'"I am pretty sure that there is no doctrine 
that is put in jeopardy by the simple affirmation 
of this belief,' i.e., future probation. 

"The Presbyterian situation has been curiously 
complicated the last two days, first, by the 
discovery that Prof. Patton, president, of Princeton 

R1335 :page 152 

college, the rival of the Union Theological 
Seminary, and the leader of the anti-Briggs 
forces in the church, privately holds very much 
the same views as Briggs himself in regard to 
the doctrine of probation for the wicked after 
death. The second is that Dr. Hall, a celebrated 
Presbyterian divine of New York, and a 
trustee of the Union seminary, has resigned, 
because, while he did not fear being prosecuted, 
he was afraid to oppose the general 
sentiment." 



At the time of its proposal we pointed out 
sundry incongruities between the portions of 
the Presbyterian Confession of Faith proposed 
to be retained and the amended or altered 
words and sections. We showed that the parts 
of the same Confession thus amended would 
contradict each other. It seems that Presbyterian 
ministers are gradually reaching this conclusion, 
and present prospects are that the revision 
suggested will be rejected. However, 
all are more than ever dissatisfied with the old 
Confession and the result will probably be an 
entirely new Confession. The end is not yet. 



R1338:page 152 
LIVING FOR JESUS. 



"Living for Jesus day by day, 
Following just as he leads the way, 
Never a choice in great or small, 
Doing his will, and that is all. 

"Living for Jesus! All the while 

Hiding the tear with song and smile. 

The world could not feel if it knew the smart, 

And Jesus will comfort the sorrowing heart. 

"Living for Jesus everywhere! 

Dropping a seed both here and there; 

No care for the fruit that will surely come, 

For the Master will gather the harvest home. 

"Living for Jesus in pleasure or pain, 

Joy or sorrow, sunshine or rain! 

Culling rare flowers from the bitter and sweet, 

Learning great lessons the while at his feet. 

"Living for Jesus! Just little things 

In our daily life may take the wings 

Of messengers, swift and strong and brave, 

And— God only knows— a soul may save. 

"Living for Jesus! Living, not dead, 
Drawing rich life from the Fountain-head! 
Quietly watering, though unseen, 
Many a life from the Living Stream. 

"Living in Jesus! Abiding in him, 

His life, peace and rest, atonement for sin— 

All mine in their fulness and richness, replete 



With the joys of the Spirit— the Comforter sweet. 

"Such may life be, O glorious Son! 
Mystical union here begun— 
One with the Father, the Spirit and Thee, 
Living through time and eternity." —Selected. 



R1335 :page 152 

RUSSIA'S CHASTISEMENT. 



Recent dispatches state that a conservative 
estimate of the number of persons in need of 
relief in the famished districts of Russia would 
be 13,000,000; and that diseases superinduced 
by the scantiness of food and by the wretched 
substitute called "hunger-bread," composed 
largely of straw, bran, sweepings, etc., are becoming 
epidemic in some districts. Notwithstanding 
this deplorable condition and the laws 
prohibiting the exportation of grain, thirty-five 
millions more pounds of rye have been exported 
than last year— the attraction being the higher 
prices offered elsewhere. To add to the trouble, 
an unusually severe winter is threatened. 

The New York Times published, Oct. 25th, the 
following dark outlook, written by its London 
correspondent. We hope, nay, we believe, that 
this picture is far too dark— that the facts fall far 
short of the suggestion. It nevertheless gives 
an idea of what is possible. When the great 
trouble does come, we believe it will generally 
be introduced by famine. This at least points 
out possibilities not only for Russia but for the 
world. Starvation will awaken and energize 
people whom nothing else would arouse. The 
article runs as follows: 

"Winter began in Russia on Thursday with 
the first sharp frost. Living men cannot remember 

R1335 :page 153 

any other year in which this simple announcement 

meant what it does now. There 

are literally millions of human beings, at the 

farthest within a six-days' journey of London, to 

whom this frost comes as a sentence of death by 

starvation. Although the censors have forbidden 

the Russian papers to discuss the famine, 

the Novosti ventures the declaration that 20,000,000 

creatures are already without food, and 

that a sum four times greater than the recent 



loan extracted from France is needed to keep 
them alive. 

"Needless to say, no such sum is forthcoming. 
Indeed, in the matter of intelligent relief, 
nothing is forthcoming. Vague figures are given 
of money raised for the sufferers, quite often 
by eccentric emotional devices of self-denial, 
which show the warm-hearted childishness of 
the Slav, but nobody is able to tell how this 
money has been applied. The only intelligence 
which reaches us from the doomed districts is 
of the famine prices put everywhere upon food 
by the Russian merchants, and of Russian usurers 
and small traders who are going about trading 
on the misery of the peasants, buying hair 
from the heads of poor girls for a few shillings 
and stripping houses of every portable article, 
old icons and picturesque costumes handed 
down from mother to daughter, and the like, 
for next to nothing. 

RIOTS AGAINST THE JEWS. 

"In two or three cases the ferment of disorder 
which is seething under this terrible surface has 
broken out in riots directed against the Jews. 
Doubtless there will be more than melancholy 
aggravations of Israel's miseries during the winter 
in localities where a few bad Jews, or the 
even rarer rich Jews, have given the race an 
evil repute. But I risk nothing in predicting 
that if real and widespread violence results from 
the present famine; its force will be almost wholly 
directed against the native Russian officials, 
landlords, traders and village usurers, or Kulaks, 
to whom the peasants, as a rule, understand 
very well that they owe their sufferings. 

"Russian exiles here in London are greatly 
excited by the news they have been getting in 
the recent few weeks from subterranean sources 
inside the empire and from their associates in 
Switzerland and other Continental places of refuge. 
They decline to divulge this information, 
and the few things which have been told to me 
may not be printed, but it can at least be said 
that they expect little less than civil war spreading 
over vast tracts and whole regions of their 
native land. They say frankly that we outsiders 
exaggerate the good nature of the Moujik, 
or, rather, that side by side with that amiability 
in his nature exist possibilities of awful brute-like 
ferocity when the utmost limit of patience 
under provocation is exhausted. They think 
this has been reached, and they say the condition 
of seven-eighths of rural Russia is now infinitely 
worse than that of rustic France on the 



eve of the revolution. They look to see a Muscovite 

reign of terror begun this winter which 

will well-nigh efface from human memory the excesses 

and horrors begun by the fall of the Bastile. 

There are not lacking signs that this may 

be ushered in by striking personal events." 



R1337 : page 153 

FARMERS ALLIANCE CIRCULARS. 



A reader writes us objecting to Bro. Wright's 
statement with reference to the Farmers' Alliance 
and to a circular issued by them and sent 
throughout the country advising all to hold 
on to their grain for higher prices, etc. This 
brother advises us that he is a member of the 
Alliance, and assures us that nothing of the kind 
was done officially; that although such a circular 
as Bro. Wright described had been sent 
out to some extent, it was not an official document, 
and was not circulated by the Alliance 
itself, but by private parties; that no evil is 
premeditated by the Alliance; that its members 
merely desire to secure their own rights and to 
prevent the wealth of the country from being 
absorbed by the few. He says that the unofficial 
circulars were sent out by certain well-meaning 
parties to check the enormous rush of 
wheat and to get farmers to hold their grain 
until prices advance more nearly to what they 
will undoubtedly be in the near future. He 
says in conclusion, "While I have been a 
reader of your writings for the last seven or 
eight years, and believe the universal revolution 
is no great way off, yet I fail to see in this farmers' 
movement, to which Bro. Wright refers, 
much evidence of the great trouble." 

In reply we would say that we do not understand 
Bro. Wright's article to be specially intended 
as a reflection against the Farmers' Alliance, 
but merely a calling of attention to this 
as one of the signs of our times. That the 

R1337:page 154 

farmers are not actuated by any bad motives in 
their combination we do not question, nor do 
we think that other persons who combine, either 
capitalists or mechanics, have bad motives in so 
doing. Each class organizes because it considers 
organization a necessity to preserve what 



it considers to be its rights and best interests. 
The speculator who creates a corner in 
wheat, corn or pork has no ill-will toward the 
rest of humanity— no desire to run up the prices 
of the necessities of life upon the poor— but 
merely desires to conserve the interests of himself, 
his business partners and his family. And 
so with most people who make combines: it is 
not that they hate or desire to injure their 
fellow-men, but that they love themselves and 
their own interests more. 

We do not even say that it is wrong for the 
Farmers' Alliance to suggest to its members 
that they be not in haste to sell their crops for 
too small a sum, but that they seek to hold 
them for a period of greater demand and higher 
prices. We consider this to be entirely their 
privilege, and that in not crowding the market 
with more grain than it is ready to absorb at 
the present time, they would be merely taking 
the proper steps for getting a good market value 
for the produce of their labor. The point to 
be noticed, however, and the one which we presume 
Bro. Wright wished to impress, is that the 
farmers of the country, having organized themselves, 
are beginning to realize what a power 
they have in their hands, and in proportion as 
they come to a realization of this power they 
will be a more formidable party to deal with, 
and under the impression which seems to affect 
so many people of all classes, that "might 
makes right," they will be very apt, sooner or 
later, to come to an extreme in using their 
power, and then the Lord's consecrated people 
among them will surely have trouble to keep 
their conscience clear on the one hand, and to 
remain in the society on the other. 

Certain it is that the work of binding in 
bundles is progressing very rapidly throughout 
Christendom in general, and by-and-by the fire 
of social trouble which our Lord predicted will 
surely be seen. Our advice to all who are fully 
consecrated is, "So far as lieth in you, live 
peaceably with all men." If possible, "Be not 
entangled again in any yoke of bondage." "If 
the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed." 



R1335 :page 154 

THE BLOOD OF JESUS. 



"For we have not a High Priest unable to sympathize 



with our weaknesses; but one having been tried in all 
respects like ourselves, apart from sin."— Heb. 4:15— 
Diaglott. 

The Apostle Paul here brings clearly to view 
the effect of the Lord's suffering, the just for 
the unjust (1 Pet. 3:18), in qualifying him for 
his work as Mediator, High Priest and Leader. 
(Heb. 2:10; 5:9; 3:1; 5:5,3; 2:17; 6:20; 
8:1; 9:11; 10:21; 8:6; 9:15; 12:24; 
1 Tim. 2:5.) Having met trials and temptations 
of all kinds, apart from those arising through 
sin, he is able, as well as willing, to succor those 
who are tried, but who are not in affiliation with 
sin, and who come in meekness, and yet in boldness, 
to him. (Heb. 2: 18; 4: 16.) What a 
source of comfort and joy it is to realize that 
our Master knows the power of evil by experience, 
and so can fully sympathize through 
knowledge in all our temptations. And what 
added security we feel when we realize that he 
who is our strength was able to, and did resist 
unto blood (Heb. 12:4), laying down his life, 
shedding his blood— dying— rather than to partake 
of sin. What love of righteousness and 
hatred of wickedness!— Psa. 45:6,7; 
Heb. 1:8,9. 

In these last days, when evil men and seducers 
are waxing worse and worse, deceiving and 
being deceived (2 Tim. 3:1,13), those who are 
not ignorant of Satan's ways expect, and find, 
more subtle snares than ever before laid to entrap 
them; and, as ever, the Arch Enemy, and his 
servants— whether wilful or ignorant— in this 
work are presenting themselves as angels of 
light (2 Cor. 11:1-15). Of course, the main 
attack is on the ransom, by which "the man 
Christ Jesus" bought us with his own precious 

R1335 :page 155 

blood, shed on Calvary, as "of a lamb without 

blemish and without spot." (1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:5.) 

So we find Peter's prophecy of false 

teachers mingling among the saints and privately 

introducing destructive heresies, even 

"the having bought them Sovereign Lord denying" 

(2 Pet. 2:1. -Diaglott), fulfilled. And 

doubtless the work will continue and grow. 

We recently saw an article claiming that as 

"The blood is the life" (Lev. 17:11-14), "so, 

as a rule, where the blood of Christ is mentioned 

(in the Scriptures) it should be understood 

as meaning life, not death." Let us examine 

this statement in the light of the Scriptures, 

and not accept it on a mere assertion. If it 



is proven true, be thankful for more light, and 
walk in it; but if untrue, partake of the strong 
meat presented in demonstrating its fallacy and 
be strengthened thereby to resist further attacks 
of the enemy. 

We find the Lord's blood first mentioned by 
the Master himself, in Matthew 26:28, where 
he says, "This is my blood of the new testament, 
which is shed for many for remission of 
sins." Next, in Matthew 27:4, Judas says, "I 
have sinned in that I have betrayed innocent 
blood." Through him "innocent blood" was 
betrayed to death. After Judas had suicided, 
having first thrown the price of the betrayal 
into the temple, the chief priests could not put 
the money in the treasury, as it was the "price 
of blood" shed, or death. (Matt. 27:6.) 
Pilate proclaimed himself "innocent of the 
blood" (shed) or death "of this just person," 
which the people then called down on them 
and their children. (Matt. 27:24,25.) The 
"blood of the new testament... shed for 
many" (Mark 14:24; Luke 22:20) plainly 
presents Christ's death as the means through 
which he gained ability to benefit many. 

R1336:page 155 

The blood mentioned in Acts 5:28, and 
which the Sanhedrin feared, was blood shed, as 
evidenced by verse 30 of the same chapter; and 
Paul's reference to Christ's blood in Acts 20:28 
clearly points to his death, as that was the 
price given for the "Church of God," and also 
for the whole world. (See also 1 John 2:2.) 
Paul says in Rom. 3:24-25 that justification is 
given "freely by his [God's] grace, through the 
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God 
hath set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] 
through faith in his blood, to declare his [Jehovah's] 
righteousness for the remission of sins 
that are past." (See also Eph. 1:7.) The Scriptural 
explanation of the "redemption that is in 
Christ" will explain what signification attaches 
to "blood" in this text. In Matt. 20:28, 
the Lord himself settles this by saying that the 
"Son of man came. ..to give his life a ransom 
[the redemptive price] for many." Here 
again, then, "blood" means blood given, blood 
shed, or death. In Rom. 5:9, the statement 
is made that "being now justified by his blood, 
we shall be saved from wrath through him;" 
and the preceding verse explains that "while 
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." Thus 
again "blood" refers to blood shed as the 
evidence of death. The "communion of the 



blood of Christ" (1 Cor. 10:16) is explained in 

Matt. 26:28 as "the blood of the new testament 

[covenant], which is shed for many for the remission 

of sins," and 1 Cor. 11:25,26 shows 

that in drinking this cup of the new covenant 

we show forth the Lord's death till he come; and 

the context clearly shows that those eating and 

drinking unworthily are guilty of the body 

broken and the blood shed, viz., the death of 

the Lord. The "blood of Christ," bringing 

the Gentiles near to God and his promises, 

mentioned in Eph. 2:13, is explained in verses 15 and 16, 

same chapter, to be the blood of "the 

cross"— shed blood— death. The "blood" mentioned 

in Col. 1:14, being redemptive blood, 

is also explained by Matt. 20:28, and in Col. 1:20 

it is emphasised as the "blood of his 

cross"— death. In Heb. 9:14, we learn that 

the "blood of Christ," who offered himself 

"without spot to God," will purge our consciences 

from "dead works to serve the living 

God," and verses 11,12 and 13, same chapter, 

show that this offering of Christ to God was by 

the shedding of his own blood— death— typed 

for centuries in the Tabernacle services of the 

Jews, by the sacrifice of bulls and goats. 

The 9th and 10th chapters of Hebrews bear 
unwavering testimony to the efficacy of Christ's 
shed blood— death— as man's substitute, to bear 
the sins of many— the world— as a careful reading 

R1336:page 156 

of them will plainly show. Again, Hebrews 13:11,12 

says, "The bodies of those beasts 

whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by 

the high priests for sin are burned without the 

camp. Wherefore, Jesus also, that he might 

sanctify the people with his blood, suffered 

without the gate;" on the cross, shedding his 

blood— entering death. The "blood of the 

everlasting covenant," mentioned in verse 20, 

this chapter, is the same shed blood, causing 

death, from which God brought the "Great 

Shepherd." The "blood of sprinkling," mentioned 

in 1 Pet. 1:2 and Heb. 12:24, is clearly 

the blood of "Jesus, the Mediator of the 

New Covenant," explained fully in Matt. 26:28, 

as "shed for many;" in other words, the 

evidenced death. "The precious blood of 

Christ" mentioned in 1 Pet. 1:18-21 as redeeming, 

was blood shed as that of a "lamb 

without spot," as typed throughout the Jewish 

age. And the beloved disciple John joins 

in the grand song testifying that "the blood of 

Jesus Christ, his Son [the blood shed on Calvary], 



cleanseth us from all sin." (1 John 1:7.) 
The real, literal thing having existed and having 
been shed for many, the Lord explains to us in 
John 6:53-55 that to appropriate it and its 
merits to ourselves, we must acknowledge our 
own helpless and hopeless condition, and rely 
wholly on him and his work for us, thus appropriating 
or figuratively eating his body and 
drinking his blood, or there will be no life in 
us. As fleshly Israel gained a standing before 
God through the typical broken body and shed 
blood of bullocks and lambs, so we obtain 
"liberty to become sons of God" (John 1:12) 
in the merit of the sacrifice of our Redeemer. 

These texts include all places in the New Testament, 
exclusive of Revelation, where Christ's 
blood is mentioned; and thus we learn that in 
every instance it refers directly to the blood 
shed, which was given "upon the altar [shed] 
to make an atonement for.. .souls." (Lev. 17:10-14.) 
Hence we find that the statement 
that, "as a rule, where the blood of Christ is 
mentioned in the Scriptures it should be understood 
as meaning life, not death," is wholly 
without Bible support, being simply the baseless 
assumption of a theorist, which, as we 
proceed, we will see is made to do service to set 
forth Christ's blood as a common, unholy or 
unclean thing. And all who would be true to 
the Lord will beware of any sophistry which 
leads to this fearful apostasy of counting the 
blood of the Covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified an unholy thing— of no more value 
than the blood of any member of the condemned 
race.-Heb. 10:29. 

By comparing spiritual things with spiritual 
(1 Cor. 2:13), we gain a true understanding 
both of type and antitype, and learn that those 
not understanding the Lord's work, and those 
understanding but perverting it, cannot appropriate 
it, but remain in their sins. Yet, thank 
God, the former will have a "due time" to 
learn of and appropriate the good tidings in 
Jesus, and escape all evil, if they will. So 
Christ, the Redeemer and hence the proper 
ruler or "head of every man," will in the times 
of restitution give each man full knowledge and 
ability to come unto him, and only those who 
will "not have this man rule over them," who 
will not obey him, shall be cut off— die the 
second death. We also know from Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31 that during the Gospel age 
God will "judge his people," and that only 
those who "wilfully sin" after they "have received 
the knowledge of the truth" can "tread 
under foot the Son of God," and "count the 



blood of the covenant wherewith" they "are 
sanctified an unholy thing," and thereby "fall 
into the hands of the living God," who is a 
consuming fire to any who claim his gift of life, 
outside of his appointed way— through Christ 
the Redeemer. 

The death of Jesus— his shed blood— was 
paid to God's exact justice for the debt incurred 
by Adam in his wilful sin, and now 
Adam and all in his loins when he sinned— the 
entire human race— belong to him who redeemed 
them; and when the work of "taking 
out a people for his name" is ended, the highway 
of holiness will be opened up and the redeemed 
of the Lord will walk in it, until all shall 
know the Lord from the least even unto the 
greatest. 

Pending this time those who understand 
Christ's mission and its various phases can consecrate 

R1336:page 157 

to God in him, and become Christians 

—Christ's followers— learn the "fellowship of 

his suffering" and become "conformable unto 

his death." Others may make claims and criticise 

unsparingly the saints who refuse to fellowship 

as Christians with those denying "the having-bought-them 

Sovereign Lord," but the injunction 

to have "no fellowship with the 

unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove 

them" (Eph. 5:11) is plain. Besides, the loyal 

bond-servant, who willingly and gladly enters 

the service of the one having bought him, has 

no basis for fellowship with one who denies that 

the price paid— the ransom, the blood shed, or 

death— has any merit, and who counts the 

"blood of the Covenant" an ordinary or "unholy 

thing." We find ourselves out of harmony 

with such teachings and without basis for fellowship 

with the teachers and holders of such false 

doctrine. 

A few moments study of the Bible, with a 
Concordance as a guide, will convince any one 
that the animal used as a typical sacrifice represented 
the man Christ Jesus, who redeemed 
us with his "precious blood. ..as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot," by the sacrifice 
of himself and not by having a sinful 
nature and overcoming it— which could not in 
any sense redeem Adam or any of his condemned 
posterity. To support this false theory 
and to offset the scores of plain Scriptural statements 
to the contrary, the poor translation of 
Rom. 8:3 is made to do service. A literal 
translation would read, "God, sending his own 



son in the likeness of the flesh of sin [by a 

sacrifice for sin], condemned sin in the flesh." 

Then again, by artful adulteration, 2 Cor. 5:21 

is made to represent a sinner, instead of a sin-offering 

Read the Diaglott rendition and foot 

note, for full explanation. Besides, the text and 

context in the king James version (especially 

verses 14 and 15) show plainly that Jesus was 

made a sin-offering for us, and not a sinner 

or sin. 

Trusting in him who "knew no sin" and who 
as our substitute suffered death, the "just for the 
unjust, that he might bring us to God" (1 Pet. 3:18), 
and in his precious blood shed for many 
for the remission of sins, we will surely escape 
the "snare of the fowler," and continue to 
abide in "the secret place of the Most High." 
-Psa. 91. 

Injustice, our place was in unending death, 
the wages of sin. But for our substitute, "the man 
Christ Jesus," there could have been no escape: 
to be our Redeemer, this and no less was the 
price; yet it pleased God to lay on him the iniquity 
of us all (Isa. 53:4-10), and he obediently 
consented to the plan. (John 10:17,18.) 
He does not, and never again will, exist as the 
man Christ Jesus (2 Cor. 5:16,17): he is now 
the "express image" of the Father's "person," 
being "made so much better than the angels, 
as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent 
name than they." (Heb. 1:3,4; 2:6,7.) 
Having laid aside the glory which he 
had with the Father before the world began, 
where he existed in the form of a God (a mighty 

R1337:page 157 

one), and having taken the form of a servant 
(an inferior one) in which he suffered death, it 
pleased the Father to raise him from the dead 
and give him that grand name (nature) which 
is above every name. (Phil. 2:6-11. See also 
Heb. 10:5 regarding the inferior one). Thus 
the human nature remains forever dead, and 
mankind, having a substitute in death, can justly 
be brought forth from death, and will be, 
in due time— the Millennial or Restitution Age; 
and only those who then fail to obey the 
Great Prophet, then ruling, shall be cut off from 
among the people. (Acts 3:19-23.) Owning by 
purchase the issues or escapes from death, he will 
daily load the obedient with benefits, only wounding 
the head of his enemies— those who still go 
on in their trespasses.— Psa. 68:20,19,21. 

Praise God for such a full and free salvation, 
which in due time shall be witnessed to every 



individual, to equip them for a full escape 
from death. To the overcoming saints of the 
Gospel age, who follow the Lamb whithersoever 
he goeth, are given the exceeding great and precious 
promises, whereby they may, in their due 
time, become partakers in full of the divine 
nature. --1 Tim. 2:4-6; 4:10; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
W. E. PAGE. 
[The strength of the error lies in the fact that 
many who trust in the "precious blood" have 
never philosophized on the subject sufficiently 
to see that blood (shed) always represents death, 
a life given up.— EDITOR.] 



R1337:page 158 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Among the interesting letters in the TOWER 
this month, we insert a few of the many received 
while abroad and since our return to America, 
expressing the interest of the scattered household 
of faith in the object and results of our 
journey. And as time will not permit a personal 
answer to the many kind congratulations on 
our safe return and expressions of interest in, 
and prayer for, the prosperity of our mission, 
we take this opportunity to thank you all and 
to assure you of our appreciation of your love 
and fellowship of spirit. 

During all the journey the interests of the 
great work were our constant theme and study, 
and we believe much to our profiting, while the 
expressions of interest in our personal welfare 
proved to us the deep appreciation among the 
saints of the truths which it has been our privilege 
to proclaim and the firmness of that bond 
of love which makes us all one in Christ Jesus 
and in the glorious hope set before us in the 
Gospel. 

London. 

DEAR BRO. and SISTER RUSSELL:-When I 
first heard of your presence in Europe from our 
Brother Carey, it almost took my breath away 
with surprise and joy, although we are told nothing 
is so likely to happen as the unexpected. 

I hastened at once to write to the Poste Restante, 
Berlin, hoping to intercept you before your 
return to London, to offer our house in my 
husband's and my own name, as a resting place 
while in this great town. Then on the 17th 
inst. I received a visit from Brother Babbitt, 



who gave me your letter, which graciously entrusts 
me with the arrangements of meetings, 
etc. May the Lord endow me with all needful 
wisdom for this and every other work, as also 
I ask Him to bless you both and your travels, 
feeding you for both your own and our benefit. 
To-day I have received the ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
for July, explaining the motive of your journey, 
which I sincerely trust may be realized. Brother 
Babbitt [whose acquaintance we made on our 
eastward ocean voyage] took away three copies 
of Vol. I. I felt so overflowing with the news 
of your approach, that I fear I gave him too 
strong a dose of my heart about the truth. The 
result is in the Master's hands. 

Now let me once more request you both in 
the name of my husband and self to make this 
house your home for the four days you are in 
London. Indeed, I have taken it for granted 
that you will, and by general consultation with 
brothers and sisters have therefore decided it 
best to hold the meetings in a hall close by here. 
I need not assure you that we will esteem it 
a great privilege and delight to minister in 
any way to your comfort as a small token of 
gratitude for all the spiritual benefits derived 
through you. I am told that the poorest brother 
or sister among us will gladly make holiday and 
come a distance to greet you, and the fresh 
air of this neighborhood will make a change for 
them, and they can have a walk and refreshment 
between the discourses. 

I often think it will be too wonderful should 
the Lord select me as a member of his body; 
for it seems as if every one of you were more 
worthy than myself, yet I do unfalteringly uphold 
my Father and His beloved Son in my 
heart of hearts as the supreme objects of my 
love and reverence. May they keep me faithful 
to the end and remedy all that is lacking in 
me. The bare thought of living with them 
makes me entirely confused with tears of joy 
and humility at such immense condescension 
and kindness. 

We are all longing to see you, and I for one 
keep conjuring up to my fancy your dear faces. 

Hoping this may reach you safely and wishing 
you every blessing, with Christian love, 
Your sincere sister and servant to the Master, 
Jesus Christ, ELIZABETH HORNE. 



R1338:page 158 

London. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER: - 

You will be at home by this time, and I do 
trust that you are all the better, both in mind 
and body, for your visit to this country, and I 
pray God to spare your life for many years to 
come and to make you both a great blessing to 
many of our fellows, in guiding them into the 
truth. So far God is using your writings to 
open the blind eyes of very many people. These 
two last Sundays have given me proof of it in 
that so many are asking for the books. The 
other day I could have sold over twenty, but had 
only two with me. Sister Home and myself are 
being used mightily in the parks. The people 
are taking a great interest in our teaching, not 
opposing us as at first. A week ago last Sunday 
Sister Home spoke for three hours with good 
effect. You will be glad to know that we now 
have Sister Swartz to help us in the work. 
She took part last Sunday with us in the park. 

Oh! how precious to think that we are counted 
worthy to be co-workers with him and his dear 
son, Jesus Christ, and may our light so shine 

R1338:page 159 

among our fellow men that they with us may 
say, Deliverance is come, and may all who are 
loyal and true to our living Head be ambitious 
in doing all we can to let people recognize and 
accept the finished work of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to the glory of God the Father. 

My wife and daughter join with me in Christian 
love and best wishes to you both. Believe 
me ever yours in Christ Jesus and his work, 
SAMUEL BATHER. 



Liverpool. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Your 
letter of the 1 1th inst. to hand from Queenstown, 
from which we were pleased to learn that 
you were on your way to Palestine. Had I 
known a month earlier I should have been 
strongly tempted to join you. 

We shall be pleased to entertain you while 
in Liverpool, and if you can arrange to prolong 
your stay another week with us we would be 
glad. As to the all-day meeting on the 15th 
Sept., if agreeable to you we will undertake all 
the arrangements and write the friends we 
know in Liverpool and neighborhood, also Manchester, 
Nottingham and Sheffield. Our Mission 
Hall attached to our house, which seats 200 
people, will be convenient, and we think large 



enough, as you know that those who take an 
interest in the King and coming Kingdom are 
but a little flock. We shall be glad to carry 
out any other suggestions you may offer in order 
to make the meetings a success. 

I have just read through Vol. III. of DAWN 
with deep interest and pleasure, and thank you 
very much for the most beautiful unfolding of 
truth which it contains and which the Holy Spirit 
has revealed through you. I have for many 
years taken an interest in the Pyramid. I have 
read something of what has been written on the 
subject by Prof. Piazzi Smyth and others. 

Wishing you and Sister Russell a pleasant and 
profitable journey with a safe home-coming, 
with our united Christian love, ever yours in 
the Lord, CHARLES W. ELAM. 



page 159 



New York. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL -On board incoming 
steamer, City of New York, Quarantine Station, 
New York Bay. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL-Greeting. 
I intend to meet you at the steamer pier 
on your arrival in New York. We shall expect 
you to come directly to our home and stay with 
us while you are in the city. We have arranged 
to give a reception in your honor on 
the afternoon and evening of Wednesday, the 
23rd. Invitations have been sent to all the 
TOWER subscribers within one hundred and fifty 
miles of New York, and we have invited, in 
addition, a number of our personal friends. A 
number of letters received indicates that many 
will be present. 

Trusting that we shall see you soon, we remain, 
yours very truly, 

MR. & MRS. C. B. FAIRCHILD. 



Canada. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We are so pleased that 
you are safely back. We are all well and rejoicing 
in the truth. We know how you will 
be pressed with work now, and will not be disappointed 
if you leave us or any communication 
to us until others, weaker in faith, have 
been attended to. Hoping you will be continually 
prospered in your grand "gospeling" 
work, we remain, Yours in Him, 

BROTHERS WEBB & UTLEY. 



Minnesota. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Yours of 30th ult. 
received and read with much pleasure. It 
seems good to know you are among us again, 
and I thank our kind Heavenly Father for his 
mercies to you and us, in returning you to your 
post of service. May your fruitfulness in all 
things abound more and more. In all this, I 
include your esteemed and beloved help-meet, 
Sister Russell. Your thoughtfulness in all your 
pressing cares to write me is especially gratifying, 
but do not again do so until every dragging 
thing is brought up. My heart is all in 
the service, and I pray that the great Husbandman 
may continue to prune me, that my fruitfulness 
may increase. Sister Page grows in 
favor and knowledge, and her mother, who is 
with us and convalescing, is listening attentively 
and seemingly with increasing interest to 
our new things, becoming thereby more firmly 
established in her trust in the ransom, which 
she accepts. 

I enclose an order for DAWNS and Tracts on 
a separate sheet, also a check for the amount. 
Hurriedly, in Christian love, W. E. PAGE. 



N. Carolina. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-No 
doubt you are in receipt of many letters of 
congratulation from the brethren on your safe 
arrival from your long and tedious, but, it is to 
be hoped, pleasant and instructive journey, 
throughout which you have been followed with 
sincere prayers for divine protection and for 
your safe return to the scenes of your labors 
amongst us, and that your lives may be spared 
to expound the mysteries of inspired revelation. 
I never can express the gratitude I feel 
that ever MILLENNIAL DAWN came under my 

page 160 

notice. It has unfolded and made plain to my 
misinformed mind (for the first time) the glorious 
contents of that Book of books, the author 
of which is God. 

I have read Vols. I. and II. through seven 
times, Vol. III. four times, and I am about to 
start again. "O the depths of the riches both 
of the wisdom and knowledge of God." 

Owing to family afflictions, I feel grieved at 



not being in a position to strike out, sickle in 
hand, into the harvest field. Yet I am endeavoring 
within my limited sphere to do a little 
work. Since my return from England I have 
sold a few volumes of DAWN, and have published 
several letters in our local paper on the great 
subjects therein contained. 

It is now between two and three years since I 
first introduced DAWN to this little town, and, I 
am thankful to say, not without some visible 
fruit. Here, as elsewhere, the opposition comes 
chiefly from interested "Babylon;" but it is 
a great consolation to know that her deleterious 
power has forever passed away, and that she 
has fallen to rise no more, a prophetic fact of 
which she seems to be in sublimed ignorance. 

My own affectionate congratulations for the 
safe return of our dear Brother and Sister to 
their home. R. MARSTON. 



New York. 

DEAR BRO. AND SR. RUSSELL:-We are glad 
to welcome you again, giving thanks, also, that 
the things for which you went abroad prospered, 
the Lord giving you to rejoice in the 
work assigned to your stewardship. 

We have remembered you in your journey, 
and rejoice in the hope of the near reunion of 
all saints to be forever with the Lord. We 
know that when the "topstone" is fitted to 
its place the glory of the Lord will fill his 
temple and the nations shall walk in the light 
of it. O! how very near that day is, and what 
a grand contrast it will be to the darkness and 
tempestuous gloom of the storm now threatening, 
and that will surely overwhelm the earth. 
Accept our heart's welcome, with a hand greeting, 
which we extend to clasp your own, over 
the mountains and rivers between. Your fellow-servants 
in the cross and hope of glory, 

DR. & MRS. A. BOWEN. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am one of the 
little company which met you and Mrs. Russell, 
upon your return from Europe, at Brother 
and Sister Fairchild's residence in New York. 
I have thought many times of the pleasant and 
profitable time we experienced upon that occasion, 
and I wish personally to thank you for the 
very helpful words of cheer and encouragement 
given at that time. They have been to me, at 



least, "meat in due season." The other brethren 
who were present from this city also enjoyed 
the meeting very much. 

It has been my purpose, if the Lord wills it 
so, to be present at the Anniversary Meeting in 
Allegheny next April, and now my desire to be 
there is stronger than ever. I remain yours, in 
faith and fellowship, J. A. MITCHELL. 



Brooklyn, NY. 
DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER IN CHRIST: -I 

have placed the evening I met you both on record 
as one of the happiest events in my life. 
While you were speaking to us of love my mind 
was carried back to a period, I think about eight 
years ago, while I was home in England, when 
a much-worn copy of "Food for Thinking 
Christians" came into my possession. I read 
and re-read that book and gave it a special place 
upon my bookshelf next the Bible. It has 
since been my companion in all my travels. 
While reading it my heart went out towards the 
writer with a warm love because I found that 
he not only loved his Creator and Redeemer but 
his fellow-brethren also. Love naturally begets 
love, so last night, while you were speaking, the 
text came vividly before my mind, "Whom, 
not having seen, ye love." I have been loving you 
all these years for the testimony in that pamphlet. 

Little did I think when I first read your little 
pamphlet that I should ever have the privilege 
and great pleasure of personally meeting you; 
and indeed it was not until I came down here 
from Montreal, Canada, about eighteen months 
ago, that I learned from a fellow-workman that 
you had written other works, and where they 
could be obtained. 

What a blessed thing is personal communion! 
How it strengthens and binds together the hearts 
of those who are kindred spirits! And now, dear 
Brother and Sister in the Lord, may the Lord 
of glory bless you with his fondest, sweetest 
love. Yours in Christ, E.HARRIS. 



Ohio. 
MR. C. T. RUSSELL-DEAR FRIEND: -Please 

find inclosed Post-office money order for four 

dollars and fifty cents. Will you be kind 

enough to send me three sets, of three volumes 

each, of the MILLENNIAL DAWN. I have 

enjoyed each of your books, but the last overwhelmingly. 

Your description of the Great 



Pyramid was a revelation to me. How gracious 
our Father was to confirm his written Word in 
this wonderful manner. I hope you will pray 
for me that the few remaining years of my life 
may be spent acceptably to him, being made 
white with the blood of the Lamb, our Savior. 
Yours in the truth, MRS. E. M. SNOWDEN. 



R1361 : inside back cover 

To MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, SECRETARY 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY: 

DEAR SISTER:— I have read with interest the account of the openings for the 
TRACT and DAWN work in foreign 

lands and here at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in the 
spread of the Glad Tidings of the 

lengths and breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, voice, time, money, 
influence, all— to spread to 

others this knowledge which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted my own 
heart and placed my feet firmly 
upon the Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully and praying to be instructed how to use 
my various talents more to my 

Redeemer's glory and for the service of his people— those blinded by human 
tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 

for "the good Word of God," and those, also, who are naked, not having on the 
wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified who stand at best in the filthy rags of their 
own righteousness. I have decided that so 

far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule so clearly laid down 
for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according to my thankful 
appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute to the several 
parts of the Lord's work specified 

on the back of this letter. Of course I cannot in advance judge of or state 
particularly what the Lord's bounty may 

enable me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the sums put down 
to each object to be merely my 

conjecture or hope, based upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute 
more than I here specify; and 

should I not succeed in doing so well, the Lord will know my heart and you will 
also know of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be able to do in 
this cause, is to enable those in charge 

of the work of publishing and circulating the TRACTS, etc., to form estimates, 
lay plans, make contracts, etc., with 

some idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this my highly 
appreciated privilege. 

Signed 



Post Office State 



(Should you approve of the plan suggested above, please cut out and sign one 
of these letters and forward as per 
directions on the other side, keeping the other for your own remembrance.) 



back cover 

SHOULD YOU APPROVE OF THE PLAN SUGGESTED ON THE OTHER SIDE, ONE OF THESE SLIPS, 
WHEN FILLED OUT, SHOULD BE 
FORWARDED TO 

The Tower Tract Society, 
ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

THE OTHER SHOULD BE PRESERVED FOR YOUR OWN REMEMBRANCE. 

Communications to the TOWER PUBLISHING CO. relative to DAWNS or TOWER may be 
enclosed in the same envelope. 



R1361 : back cover 

To Officers of TOWER TRACT SOCIETY: 

My present judgment is that during the year 1892, by denying myself and 
taking up my cross, I shall be able 

to lay aside on the first day of each week for HOME and FOREIGN MISSION work 
(to assist in putting MILLENNIAL 

DAWN into other languages, and to assist fully consecrated Colporteurs who, by 
reason of family and other encumbrances, 

would otherwise be unable to meet their necessary expenses— in home or in 
foreign fields of labor), for 

publishing the series of OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS quarterly, and reprinting old ones, 
in various languages, and to enable 

large quantities of them to be circulated gratuitously (through the mails as 
sample copies and by the hands of 

brethren who have the heart and the opportunity so to use them), 
dollars cents per week. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send you what I shall have 
laid aside for this cause, at the 

close of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order, Postal Note 
or Money Order, as I may find most 

convenient, and will address the letter to the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, at above 
address. 



R1339:page 161 

VOL. XII. DECEMBER, 1891. NO. 12. 

GREAT CAUSE FOR THANKSGIVING. 

A DISCOURSE BY THE EDITOR, AT BIBLE HOUSE CHAPEL, 
ALLEGHENY, PA. 

"Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us 
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in 
light: who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, 
and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son." 
-Col. 1:12,13. 

A day of formal national thanksgiving to 
God for peace and plenty, for bountiful harvests, 
abundant rains and smiling skies, and for 
general national health and security, has just 
passed, and the occasion naturally leads those 
who are only aliens and foreigners here to consider, 
What have we to be thankful for? and 
how deep does the spirit of thankfulness penetrate 
our hearts? 

The above language of the Apostle calls forcibly 
to mind our wonderful favors over and above 
all those that call for the general rejoicing and 
thanksgiving. While as aliens and foreigners, as 
pilgrims and strangers sojourning in the most 
enlightened and civilized lands of the earth, we 
are blessed with a large measure of temporal 
prosperity, we are specially favored, first, in 
that we have been delivered from the power of 
darkness; secondly, in that we have been translated 
into the kingdom of God's dear Son; 
and thirdly, in that we have been made meet 
to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints 
in light. 

Sometimes, when opportunities for comparison 
of circumstances are lacking, or those less 
favored in life do not come closely under our 
observation, we fail to rightly appreciate the 
common temporal blessings that fill our daily 
pathway. If the humblest in this favored land 
could form an idea of the gloom and want and 
degradation of millions of their fellow men 
abroad, they would indeed see much cause for 
rejoicing over their richer inheritance. There 
are the poverty-stricken, ignorant, starving millions 
of Russia, the hunted and persecuted Jews, 
the benighted sons of Africa, China, India, the 
toiling exiles of Siberia and the poor of Palestine 
and Egypt, to whom the humblest little 
American home would be a great luxury. Let 
us not forget to thank God that the lines of his 
providence have fallen to us in such pleasant 



places— that civilized ideas have scattered the 
dense darkness of the ages past, that we are 
permitted to live in a land of liberty, of education 
and of general enlightenment. What a 
blessing it is to be relieved from the superstitions 
which retard the progress of so many of 
our fellow-men from advancement in civilization; 
and how great are the temporal advantages 
arising from progressive ideas, general 
education and personal liberty: advantages of 
peaceful home and family life, of comfortable 
dwellings and neat and convenient furnishings, 
of medical skill, of commercial enterprise, of 
religious freedom, of a free press and an open 
Bible. What inestimable privileges are these. 
And yet we who enjoy them are only a minority 

R1339:page 162 

of our common humanity. Thousands, if 

they had the means in their hands, would not 

know how to make life comfortable. The Mohammedan, 

for instance, marries several wives, 

and shelters them all with their families in one 

room, and often with a brother or a father and 

his several wives; and he feels at liberty to 

abuse them as he pleases, while the poor slaves 

know no other alternative. 

Let us appreciate these temporal favors more 
and more, and use them to the greater honor of 
God. And while we realize the inability of 
our own efforts to lift the pall of darkness, ignorance 
and superstition from the rest of the 
world, let us rejoice in the near approach of the 
kingdom of light and peace, and the rising of the 
Sun of Righteousness, which in due time will 
scatter all the gloom. And let us further consider 
that our present vantage ground is not 
ours because God is a respecter of persons, but 

R1340 : page 162 

because he is thereby preparing us to have part 
in his great plan for blessing all the families of 
the earth. As he prepared an Eden, like an 
oasis in the great world-desert, to be a suitable 
place for the trial of Adam and Eve, so he has 
prepared certain places and conditions for the 
development and discipline of his Church: not 
an Eden, however, but a place and station 
where civilized conditions exist, and where the 
general enlightenment may be used for either 
good or ill, and thus the choice of the individual 
be made manifest. 

These temporal advantages are our general 
favors; but let us consider the special favors 



granted us over and above these, first, in being 
delivered from the power of darkness and translated 
therefrom into the kingdom of God's dear 
Son. 

The power of darkness is the power of ignorance, 
superstition, sin and death— the power 
of Satan, who works in darkness. From this 
kingdom of darkness we have been graciously 
translated, lifted over, into the kingdom of 
God's dear Son. While yet we sat in darkness 
the message came to us that the price of our redemption 
had been paid, and that, if we had 
faith in the message and desired deliverance, 
we could be at once translated into the kingdom 
of light and peace— the kingdom of God's 
dear Son. Gladly we heard the message and 
gladly we accepted the free favor thus offered; 
and, as a reward of our faith, came the sweet 
peace of God into our hearts. The first new 
ray of light admitted was followed by more and 
more; and the darkness of ignorance of God 
and his ways, and of superstition and error, began 
to flee away, and the soul was flooded with 
light and joy and a peace that surpassed all 
understanding to the hitherto darkened soul. 
Great was our joy when we first realized this 
blessed change, when we were told that now we 
were the children of light, and were counseled 
to walk thenceforth as children of the light. 

As children of light and subjects of Christ, 
our Redeemer and King, we have been walking 
from day to day and from year to year in the 
light of his countenance and of his Word, going 
on from knowledge to knowledge and from 
grace to grace. The old errors of ignorance 
and superstition have been gradually replaced 
with truth and an intelligent faith in the pure 
Word of God. And daily, as we are enlightened 
by the truth, we endeavor to bring ourselves 
into fuller subjection to our King; and thus, 
having been delivered from the power of darkness 
and translated into the kingdom of God's 
dear Son, our precious Redeemer, we grow more 
and more fully into the divine likeness and 
favor. 

But in addition to all this favor we are further 
informed of our privilege to become partakers of 
the inheritance of the saints in light, which inheritance 
is that of joint-heirship with Christ 
in his kingdom and glory, when in due time 
his kingdom shall be established in all the earth, 
and also to be made with him partakers of the 
divine nature. For such a position we naturally 
feel our unworthiness; for what are we, or 
what good thing have we done, to make us 
worthy of such an inheritance. We look at 



the pit whence we were digged, and then at 

our present imperfection as measured by the 

standard of God's righteous and perfect law, 

and doubtfully say, That call must have been a 

mistake: it surely was never meant for me. 

Yet the heart bounds with joy at the first suggestion 

of such a favor, and when trembling 

faith is reassured by the statement that God 

R1340 : page 163 

hath made us meet for that inheritance, and that 
"Faithful is he that hath called us, who also will 
do it," we take courage and reckon ourselves 
henceforth as heirs of God and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ. 

By nature, or of our own selves, we know 
that we are not meet for that inheritance. Our 
sufficiency is in Christ, whose merit, applied to 
us through faith in his blood, makes up all our 
deficiency, while we earnestly strive to conform 
to the divine will. Thus we are now reckoned 
of God as meet for the glorious inheritance 
with Christ, until in due time our actual fitness 
shall appear, when, having fully submitted ourselves 
to the guidance and discipline of Christ 
our King, he will present us to himself a glorious 
church without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. -Eph. 5:27. 

Such, dear faithful ones in Christ, is our occasion 
for thanksgiving. Shall we set apart a 
special day in which to render praise and thanks 
to God for such unmeasured favor? Or, rather, 
shall we not set apart every day as a day for the 
expression, in deeds as well as in words, of our 
hearty thanksgiving to God for all his multiplied 
favors to us. Thanks be to God for preparing 
our way before us in a land where, though we are 
merely aliens and foreigners, we have such inestimable 
privileges and advantages for growing 
in knowledge and in grace, and for advancing 
the cause of truth; and thanks be to him 
for delivering us out of the kingdom of darkness 
into the kingdom of light and peace, and 
calling us to be the bride of Christ and joint-heirs 
of all things with his dear Son. 

In the few succeeding verses the Apostle endeavors 
to convey to our minds some idea of 
the glory of our inheritance in becoming the 
bride of the Son of God, saying, "He is the 
image of the [to us] invisible God, the first 
born of every creature: For by him were all 
things created, that are in heaven, and that are 
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be 
thrones, or dominions, or powers: all things 
were created by him and for him. And he is 



before all things, and by him all things consist." 

What a glorious Bridegroom! truly the chiefest 
among ten thousand, the one altogether 
lovely, and the heir of all things; for by him 
and for him were all things created. And 
all things are ours also, if we are Christ's— all 
dominions and principalities, all power and 
wisdom and might and glory and honor and 
blessing. And he is able "to present you holy 
and unblamable and unreprovable in his sight, 
if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, 
and be not moved away from the hope of 
the gospel, which ye have heard."— Ver. 22,23. 



R1340 : page 163 

THE ANGLO-ISRAELITISH QUESTION. 



To the Editor of THE BANNER OF ISRAEL- 
DEAR SIR:-The articles by Mr. J. G. Taylor 
reviewing Millennial Dawn, Vol. III., and especially 
its reference to the Anglo-Israel Question 
in connection with the return of the Jews to 
Palestine, have only now come to my attention; 
and as they seem to inquire for a reply I hasten 
to answer them briefly. 

Passing by Mr. Taylor's sarcastic flings and 
nudges, we would advise him and all of your 
readers that, by the grace of God, we have gotten 
past the point of boasting of being a 
"loyal Pennsylvanian," or of having any pride 
of ancestry according to the flesh, and have 
reached the position advised by our Lord and 
by the great Apostle, where we recognize that 
he is not a real Jew who is merely such outwardly 
and of fleshly descent, but that only 
such as are of the faith and covenant of Abraham 
are the children meant in God's promise- 
Israelites indeed in whom is no guile. 

The point of discussion turns upon the question 
whether after the separation of the ten tribes 
from the two tribes of Israel, in the days Rehoboam, 
they ever again became united, either 
actually or reckonedly. Mr. T. claims that 
there was no reunion and that the name, Israel, 
from that date forward belonged exclusively to 
the ten tribes and not to the two tribes, the 
Jews. This seems necessary to his theory; for 
he holds that the Anglo-Saxon people are those 
ten tribes, and that their prosperity is due to 

R1340 : page 164 



this fact. We hold that from the period of the 
seventy years desolation, and especially from the 
return from Babylonian captivity, the nation of 
Israel has been recognized by God as one, including 
all of every tribe who respected God's 
promises and went back to Palestine when Cyrus 
issued his decree of permission. We hold 
that all who did not return were not of the 
commonwealth of Israel, not Israelites indeed, 
but reckoned thenceforth as Gentiles. We affirm, 
too, that those "lost" ones who were not 
Israelites indeed will require recognition and 
blessing under the new covenant during the 
coming Millennial age, and not during the Gospel 
age. Upon some points there seems to be a 
slight misunderstanding of our position. We 
do not deny that the ten tribes separated from 
the two tribes, or that the ten, representing 
the majority, retained as such the original name 
of all— Israel, or that the two tribes became 
known as Judah, or that there was considerable 
cause for the separation, or that it was 
in accord with God's plan for their chastisement, 
or that the ten tribes went into captivity 
some seventy years before the two tribes, 
or that God possibly has some portion of 
blessing for the descendants of the ten tribes, 
as well as for those of the two tribes and for all 
the families of the earth, during the "times of 
restitution of all things which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

What we do claim is, that the Great Teacher 
was right when he declared that "Salvation is 
of the Jews," and that the great Apostle was 
right when he declared that God's order is— 
"Glory, honor and peace to every man that 
worketh good, to the Jew first and also to the 
Gentile; for there is no respect of persons with 
God." (Rom. 2:10.) Our understanding of 
this is, that after the Babylonish captivity the 
name Jew became synonymous with Israelite, 
and included all who held to the Law and 
hoped for the fulfilment of the Abrahamic promises 
—including some from the ten tribes as well 

R1341 :page 164 

as proselytes from the Gentiles— all who were 
circumcised. Moreover, even at the time of 
the revolt of the ten tribes all the individual 
members of those tribes did not join in it. 
Some continued faithful to the Kingdom of Judah 
and continued to live among the Jews.— 
1 Kings 12:17. 



We have found, and have pointed out the fact, 
that our Lord and the Apostles addressed the 
"twelve tribes" under one name— "the House 
of Israel"— and this, too, in speaking directly 
to the people living in Jerusalem, who, all admit, 
were chiefly of the tribe of Judah, but partially 
of all the twelve tribes. The fact that the 
Lord and the Apostles thus addressed the twelve 
tribes as one nation, and applied prophecies to 
them as such, seems to us quite sufficient reason 
for doing the same. 

To quote the texts of Scripture bearing on the 
different phases of the subject would require a 
great deal of time and space. Whoever will take 
a copy of Young's Concordance and turn to 
page 528, and note the various instances in 
which the word Israel is used in the New 
Testament, will have what seems to be overwhelming 
evidence that the House of Israel was 
no longer regarded by our Lord and the Apostles 
as the "ten tribes" merely, but, as it is expressed, 
"All Israel." Note especially the following 
texts: Matt. 8:10; 10:16; 15:24,31; 
27:9,42; Mark 12:39; 15:32; Luke 1:54,68; 
and especially verse 80; also 2:25,32,34; 
24:21; also note carefully John 1:31,49; 3:10; 
12:13; also Acts 2:22,36; 3:12; 4:10,27; 
5:21,30,31,35; 18:16,24; 21:28; Rom. 9:6,31; 
10:19; 11:25,26; 1 Cor. 10:18; 
Gal. 6:16; Eph. 2:12; Phil. 3:5; Heb. 8:8. 

"Salvation is of the Jews" or covenant-keeping 
Israelites in the sense that (1) our Lord 
Jesus, the Savior, came in this line, and in that 
(2) a remnant of these Jews (the Apostles, the 
early Church, etc.), called a remnant of Israel 
(Rom. 9:27; 11:1,5,7), became ministers of 
reconciliation to bear the message to the Gentiles, 
and in that (3) the Lord's provision is that, 
in the restitution work of the future, fleshly Israel, 
recovered from blindness, shall be used as 
a medium through whom the streams of salvation, 
issuing from the glorified, spiritual Israel, 
shall flow to all the families of the earth; as it 
is written, "The law shall go forth from Mount 
Zion [the Gospel Church, or spiritual Israel 
glorified] and the word of the Lord from 

R1341 :page 165 

Jerusalem [the re-established fleshly Israel.]"— 
Isa. 2:3. 

But in any case the ten tribes are left out of 
this and all such promises; for neither Zion 
nor Jerusalem [neither the typical nor the real] 
belonged to them. To have a share at all in the 
covenant made with Abraham, either they must 



be united to the spiritual Israel, of which the 
Lion of the tribe of Judah is the head, or they 
must become associated with the literal Judah 
at Jerusalem, in order to share his portion in the 
coming times of restitution; for "the Lord shall 
save the tents of Judah first."— Zech. 12:7. 

The arguments of Mr. Taylor, aside from his 
sarcasm, seem to be summed up in the following 
extracts, which we quote from your journal. 
He says:— 

"As to the non-return of Israel, a comparison of Jer. 29:1,4,10 
with Ezra 1:1 shows that the edict of Cyrus 
was in fulfilment of a prophecy which referred exclusively 
to the Jews, and from Ezek. 4:3-8 it is patent that 
Israel's term of captivity had to extend far beyond Judah's. 
There is no proof whatever that the Ten Tribes 
were embraced in the offer of Cyrus." 

We must take exceptions to such statements 
and ask Mr. T. and your other readers to examine 
more carefully the very texts cited. 
Jeremiah (29:1-10) does not advise the people 
to settle down contentedly, never expecting to 
return to Jerusalem, but that they should make 
themselves comfortably at home in the land of 
Babylon, because there would be no deliverance 
for seventy years— a much longer period of captivity 
than they had ever before experienced. 

Ezra 1 : 1 does not limit to the members of 
Judah and Benjamin the privilege or liberty to 
return. On the contrary, verse 3 declares that 
Cyrus extended the offer to "Whoever among 
you that is of all his people;" verse 4 repeats the 
"whosoever" and makes the invitation worldwide, 
as was Cyrus' dominion, by the words 
"in every place;" and verse 5 declares that 
not only the chiefs of Judah and Benjamin responded, 
but also "the priests and the Levites, 
with all those whose spirit God had awakened" 
—i.e., all whose hearts, like Simeon's, were 
"waiting for the consolation of Israel." 
Among such were some from the ten tribes, even 
though they were fewer. For instance, among 
those who with Simeon waited in the Temple 
for the consolation of Israel was Anna the 
prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe 
of Asher.— Luke 2:36. 

As for the citation from Ezekiel (4:3-8), 
Mr. T. offers no suggestion as to when he 
thinks the forty years upon Judah, or the three 
hundred and ninety years upon the remainder 
of Israel, were fulfilled. He apparently, however, 
overlooks the fact that although this trouble 
is divided into two portions it is all represented 
as coming against one people, as illustrated 
by the one capital city, Jerusalem, which 
was portrayed by the prophet as a part of his 



tableau teaching. Some suppose the lesson 

taught to be that God's wrath against the ten 

tribes dated from the time of the revolt, when 

they went into idolatry, about 390 years before 

the desolation of Jerusalem, and that the wrath 

against the two tribes dated from forty years 

before the desolation, when, under King Manasseh, 

the two tribes became idolaters, and that 

God's wrath ceased, or was assuaged, by the expiation 

for their sins in the utter desolation of 

Jerusalem and the land. If this be correct, 

his favor returned, while they were in Babylon, 

to all who revered his promises and waited for 

the seventy years of desolation to expire, that 

they might return to God's worship in his holy 

city and temple. 

We answer, then, that Mr. T. is in error: 
that there is no evidence that the willing, faithful 
ones of the ten tribes were hindered and 
did not return to the holy land after its seventy 
years of desolation. On the contrary, the 
evidence shows that they had the liberty to 
return and that some of them exercised it. 

After quoting from Millennial Dawn, Vol. 
III., "They [the ten tribes] deserted the Israelitish 
covenant, and became idolaters, unbelievers, 
and practically Gentiles," Mr. T. continues: 

"This is perfectly correct: the Ten Tribes did apostatize, 
and were formally divorced from the Mosaic covenant 
(Jer. 3:8). But he overlooks the companion jewel- 
namely, they were to be remarried in a new and better 
covenant (Isa. 54:4-8; Hos. 2:7,19; Jer. 31:31-33). 
The Israelites were indeed practically Gentiles, and are 
esteemed Gentiles to this day; but that is concordant with 
prophecy, for Ephraim's 'multitude of nations' are goyim 
or nominal Gentiles (Gen. 48:19); and the children of 
Ephraim-Israel, 'which cannot be measured nor numbered,' 

R1341 :page 166 

are the offspring of Lo-ammi, or nominal Gentiles. 
-Hos. 1:9,10." 

We beg to differ regarding the above statement. 
We deny that the Lord has remarried or ever will 
remarry the ten tribes. The citations prove 
nothing of this kind. Hosea gives some hard 
pictures of a bad people. Chapter 1:6,7 seems 
to mention the ten tribes separately from the 
two, but promises no more mercy— instead, an 
utter taking away of the ten, and mercy upon 
Judah. Verses 9 and 10 show the rejection (for a 
time) of all Israel the (natural branches of the 
olive) and the grafting in of spiritual Israel 
upon the original root or promise— those from 
among the Gentiles who formerly had not been 
recognized by the Lord as his people, who had 



been strangers and foreigners and aliens to the 
commonwealth of Israel, but who are now 
brought nigh and made partakers through 
Christ. This application of this Scripture is 
made by the Apostle Paul. (Rom. 9:23-26.) 
Verse 1 1 declares that "then," at the time of 
their rejection and at the time of the recognition 
of spiritual Israel, Judah and Israel would 
be reunited under one head. 

Hosea 2:1-7 includes one of Mr. Taylor's 
proofs; but the most careful search in these verses 
discloses no promise from the Lord that he 
will remarry them. Reading down to verse 13 
proves to the contrary. Then verses 14-18 
show the "door of hope" for these rebellious 
people, which the Millennial reign of the true 
spiritual seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29) will 
inaugurate; for verse 18 locates the date of this 
"door of hope" by declaring it to be after the 
time of trouble, when wars shall be no more. 

Verses 19 and 20, if applicable to the fleshly 
seed at all, should be applied to "all Israel" (last 
before mentioned)— see Chapter 1:11— and in 
that case would not call for fulfilment before 
the close of the Gospel age, when wars shall be 
no more. But there is good reason for believing 
that these verses (19 and 20) relate to the spiritual 
class, selected during the time when fleshly 
Israel has been cast off. To this view the 
23rd verse as well as Chapter 1:10 give support, 
both being quoted in Rom. 9:23-26, and agreeing 
well with the Apostle's other statement, 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh 
for, but the election hath obtained it and 
the rest were blinded."— Rom. 11:7. 

As for Isaiah 54:1-8, the Apostle Paul has 
thrown the light of superhuman wisdom upon 
it, and has applied it to spiritual Zion, our 
mother or covenant, symbolized by Sarah. The 
fleshly seed of Abraham had been cast out from 
being heir of the promise, and the true seed, 
Christ (typified by Isaac and Rebecca), had 
been received as the only seed of promise. — 
Gal. 4:22,24,26-31. 

Jeremiah 31:29-33 is quite to the point. It 
was written at a time when the ten tribes, called 

R1342 : page 166 

Israel, were separate from the two, called Judah, 
and hence it was necessary for the prophet to 
mention both, in order not to be misunderstood 
to mean the ten tribes only. But here, 
in verse 31, he puts the two together, and, after 
thus joining them as one, he uses the one name 
for all, in verses 33 and 36; and this is confirmed 



by verses 38-40, which describe places lying in 
the portion of the two tribes, in and about 
Jerusalem. 

But next let us notice that this is a prophecy 
not yet fulfilled, so that the ten tribes, even if 
they could clearly identify themselves now, have 
no cause for boasting yet. They would better 
wait until the New Covenant is made with them 
and until the law of that New Covenant has 
been written in their hearts. Then surely they 
will no longer boast themselves of their old 
covenant, but of the new. 

During the Gospel age the New Covenant 
and its blessed heart-writing and spirit-teaching 
is not for the ten tribes, nor for the two, but 
only for the remnant selected from the twelve, 
and the residue selected from among the Gentiles; 
the fleshly seed (Ishmael) must wait until 
the spiritual seed (Isaac) has inherited all, 
and must then get his portion through Isaac. In 
those days— when the fleshly seed receives its 
portion— the blessed Millennial privileges, mentioned 
in verses 29 and 30, will be realized. 

Beloved, let us make our calling and election 
sure by the obedience of faith, and not hope 
for spiritual blessings to come to us because of 
fleshly connections— which the Lord's Word 
clearly shows us cannot be. If the Anglo-Saxon 
races are the literal descendants of the ten 

R1342 : page 167 

lost tribes, it certainly is to their advantage 
that the Lord will overlook the relationship 
and count them as Gentiles; for his favor was 
withdrawn from the natural seed when the remnant 
had been selected, and he turned to take 
out the people for his name from among the 
Gentiles, who previously were not his people; 
and, as we have seen, no return of his favor is 
promised until the elect Church shall have been 
completed, in the Millennial Dawn. 

Nothing in our understanding of the teachings 
of the Scriptures is in opposition to the 
idea that Great Britain, Germany and the 
United States may contain some of the descendants 
of the ten tribes which separated from 
the two tribes in the days of Rehoboam. It 
could not be claimed, however, by any one who 
is familiar with the racial mixture which prevails, 
especially in the United States, that any 
of these nations are of pure Israelitish stock. 
Neither do we debate the question whether the 
prosperity of these nations, more than that of 
some other nations of the world, is due to their 
lineage. Perhaps this is true. What we do maintain, 



however, is that, so far as the Lord's "high 
calling" of his Church is concerned, the middle 
wall of partition having been broken down, 
the Israelitish origin of an individual or a nation 
would gain the individual or the nation no 
advantage over other individuals or nations of 
a different race under the terms of the New 
Covenant. From it "all Israel," "the natural 
branches," were broken off, except a "remnant" 
which accepted of Christ, the mediator 
of the New Covenant; and that "remnant" 
had no pre-eminence over others because of 
nationality. God, through the Apostles, has 
preached no favors to Israel according to the 
flesh during the period of the selection of spiritual 
Israel; but he has declared that when the 
company of spiritual Israel is complete, his favor 
will return to the fleshly house. 

Because we believe that the spiritual Israel is 
nearly complete, therefore we are expecting 
blessings upon the Israelites who are according 
to the flesh, and the turning away of their blindness, 
anticipating that they will be the first of 
the restitution class to be blessed by spiritual 
Israel, and so "receive mercy through your 
mercy." (Rom. 11:31.) After they have thus 
received mercy through the complete and glorified 
Church of Christ, they will indeed be used 
as the Lord's instruments for blessing all the 
families of the earth, and thus the Abrahamic 
promises will be fulfilled unto both the seeds— 
both that which is according to the flesh, and 
that which is according to the spirit— "To the 
end that the promise might be sure to all the 
seed, not to that only which is of the law, but 
to that also which is of the faith of Abraham." 
—Rom. 4:16. Yours truly, 

The Author of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



R1353 : page 167 
VERBAL INSPIRATION. 



DEAR WATCH TOWER: The following examples, 
from the Youth's Companion of May 24th, 
1888, of mistranslations from modern and secular 
writers may prove interesting and instructive 
to some good readers who, believing in verbal 
inspiration, apply it to the King James version 
rather than to the original languages in which 
the Bible was written, and thus fail rightly to 
divide the Word of Truth. Yours, 



W. M. WRIGHT. 
QUEER TRANSLATIONS. 

"Not only do school boys and girls, when 
studying a language, make absurd mistakes in 
translation, but authors who consider their efforts 
correct enough for the dignity of print 
are also likely to fall into the pit of blunders. 
In Cornhill are to be found numerous examples 
of mistranslation, which would do credit, or 
discredit, to a very young linguist. 

"A French writer, in translating the passage 
from Shakespeare: 
A man.... 
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone,' 
renders the italicized words: 

'Thus, grief, go away with you!' 

"A word used in a purely technical sense is 
apt to prove a stumbling-block to the translator. 
Thus an English historian says that Lord 
George Sackville was 'broken' for cowardice 

R1353 :page 168 

in battle, meaning simply that he was cashiered. 
A French writer translates the word into one 
indicating that the timid nobleman was broken 
on the wheel. As if to convince the reader of 
his unwavering belief in this interpretation, he 
adds a foot-note to the statement, commenting 
on the barbarity of this torture. 

"Miss Cooper, a daughter of the novelist, 
says that in a French translation of The Spy,' 
the phrase, 'He tied his horse to a locust,' was 
rendered, 'He tied his horse to a grasshopper.' 
The author of this obvious blunder then drew 
upon his imagination to justify the improbable 
statement, and informed his readers that the 
grasshoppers in America grew to an enormous 
size, and that one of them, dead and stuffed, 
had thus been employed for a hitching post. 

In one of Sir Walter Scott's novels, a party 
was served with Welch rabbit' for supper, and 
a translator, not aware that the term applied 
to a compound of toasted cheese— it is now 
spelled rarebit— set down the phrase as 'a rabbit 
of Wales.' Not content with this, he also 
inserted a foot-note informing the credulous 
reader that the rabbits of Wales were of such 
superior flavor that they were in great demand 
in Scotland, and were forwarded to that country 
in large numbers." 



R1346 : page 168 

THE DEAREST NAME. 



If Jesus from our faith to-day 
Were stricken, and we knew 

A Godless creed must meet our need- 
That nothing else were true; 

If Jesus from our heart were cast, 
From pages to be read, 

What word, in all the realms of thought, 
Would answer us instead? 

If Jesus, 'midst the mists of time, 

Were lost, and we could know 
He never died, our crucified, 

What could the new creed show 
To take his place, to vibrate through 

The prostrate human mind, 
To give the race a standing place, 

A hope for human kind? 

If Jesus from our faith to-day 

Were stricken, who could trace 
Another word the world hath heard 

To ever take its place? 
Could ever frame a sound so sweet? 

In all the realm of art, 
Who yet hath shown a single tone 

So priceless to the heart? — G. Klingle. 



R1342 : page 168 

A NEW GOVERNMENT FOR PALESTINE PROPOSED. 

COPY OF A LETTER OF SUGGESTION, 
WRITTEN BY THE EDITOR WHILE IN PALESTINE, 
TO THE TWO LEADING HEBREWS OF THE WORLD, 
BARONS ROTHSCHILD AND HIRSCH. 



November 20th, 1891. 

The following is a copy of a letter, written 
while in Palestine, but afterward separated from 
me by the loss of my luggage en route, and only 
recently recovered. C. T. R. 

Jerusalem, August 18th, 1891. 
To the Honorable BARON HIRSCH. 

RESPECTED SIR: -I, a Christian, but a 
lover of the seed of Jacob, especially because 
of the promises of God yet remaining to them 



and the Holy Land, address you upon a subject 
which I know lies close to your heart. 

That you may know of my interest in your 
people, I will cause to be sent to you a copy of 
each of two volumes of my own writings, in 
which the promises of God to your nation are 
cited and commented upon. 

At present, accompanied by my wife, I am 
in Palestine, taking a hasty view of the land of 
promise and its people, and considering the 
prospects of the soon fulfilment of the predictions 
of the prophets. As you will see from my 
books, we find the testimony of the prophets to 
be, that your nation will be greatly blessed and 
returned to divine favor between now and the 
year 1915, A.D. 

The present persecutions in Russia we believe 
to be a mark of divine favor rather than 
the reverse. The Lord declares that he 
will drive them out of all lands whither he has 

R1342 : page 169 

scattered them. We believe that so far from this 
persecution abating, the near future may see it 
greatly increased among the various nations of 
Europe in the midst of which Jews reside. 

We believe that the Lord's Word teaches 
that the people are to be in great part gathered 
into the land of Palestine, and the fact that all 
entrance thither has recently been barred inclines 
us to think that the time has come for 
opening the door thither yet wider than ever 
before. This seems to be indicated in the 
words of the prophet.— See Jer. 32:37-44; 
33:6-22. 

As I do not own an inch of ground in this 
land, I cannot be accused of having any selfish 
reasons for offering the following suggestions of 
what appears to me to be the only immediate 
solution of the difficulty. My suggestion is as 
follows, and refers to all Syria:— 

The revenues derived from Palestine by the 
Government amount to about L. 100,000 per 
annum. This sum, however, is absorbed by the 
local government of Palestine, and it is doubtful 
whether Turkey ever receives one piaster of 
it— except in the way of bonuses paid by those 
who obtain official positions in the land. I 
have been unable to obtain any reliable figures 
respecting the taxes of Syria as a whole, but it 
is safe to assume that the results to Turkey are 
no more profitable than those from Palestine. 

My suggestion is that the wealthy Hebrews 
purchase from Turkey, at a fair valuation, all of 
her property interests in these lands; i.e., all 



the Government lands (lands not held by private 
owners), under the provision that Syria and 
Palestine shall be constituted a FREE STATE, 
the government of which shall be in the hands 
of a board of thirteen Directors, appointed as 
follows: One Director to be chosen by each 
of the following Governments:— Great Britain 
and Ireland, France, Germany, Russia, Austria, 
Italy, Turkey, Greece, and the United States 
of America, should they approve the scheme; 
and the remainder of the thirteen to be elected 
by the suffrages of the people of Syria, none 
being eligible to said election who has not lived 
in the land for three consecutive years. 

Religious liberty should be fully guaranteed 
to all the inhabitants. Each Director should 
be a resident of the land during the tenure of 
office, and should receive LI, 000 sterling per 
annum, and no other fees, emoluments or 
bribes, under penalty of disgrace and banishment. 
Those Directors appointed by the various 
Governments should also be the Ministers 
Plenipotentiary of those Governments without 
additional fees therefor. 

Each of the nations invited to join representatively 
in the government should be required to 
contribute a sum of money, say L10,000, for 
the carrying out of the project and as a test of 
its interest in the welfare of the land and its 
people. Just at present all nations are interested 
in providing a home for the Russian exiles; 
and the poverty of Turkey would facilitate 
the purchase of her estate in Syria at reasonable 
figures. This I conceive to be a feasible plan, 
because all of the above nations are interested 
in Palestine, having directly or indirectly expended 

R1343 : page 169 

large sums of money there. The plan 
of making it a free state, under the control of 
all, I believe would be pleasing to all; whereas, 
to put the land under the control of any of 
them exclusively, would be strenuously opposed 
by the others. The land should, however, be 
free from all other nations, except through their 
appointed representative Directors. 

A liberal Constitution should be drawn up, alterable 
only by the consent of at least nine of the 
thirteen Directors. In all other matters the majority 
should rule— under the limitations of said 
Constitution. The new blood and new ideas 
thus introduced into the government would 
soon show upon the people and the land, and 
they would rapidly advance to civilized conditions 
in every particular. 



You are no doubt well aware that, notwithstanding 
the large sums of money sent here by 
Hebrews and others, many of the people here 
are far from comfortable; and all will agree that 
the two things most needful to this land are a 
wise, just and good government and plenty of 
water. 

The water is indispensable to health. The 
stench is dreadful as one passes through the city, 
especially in the Jewish quarter. I can only 
account for the absence of some plague by the 
extreme purity of the mountain air. In almost 

R1343 : page 170 

every other climate such filth and drouth would 
surely bring pestilence. In one more month, 
I am told, water will be selling at two or three 
piasters a skin. 

The present government and laws, although 
said to be a great improvement on those of the 
past, all will admit are very far from good. 
The poor peasants or fellah are robbed of almost 
all they can earn— first, by the money-lender, 
who exacts from 10 to 50 per cent interest, 
paid in advance, and secondly, by the 
tax-collector, who extorts all he can possibly 
squeeze of the balance. Many of the Jews 
coming from Russia are poor, and many are 
wealthy. Seemingly, the latter consider it their 
business to grind profits out of their brethren 
and neighbors instead of helping them, while 
the former, following the example of Romanists 
and Greeks, think it their duty to spend all 
their time in prayer and ceremonies, while they 
are supported by the donations of friends in 
Europe and America. Your charities and those 
of Baron Rothschild and Sir Moses Montefiore 
have been productive of great good and are still 
beneficial (except, perhaps, the payment of so 
many francs per head for support of some of the 
colonists, which is leading some to multiply 
their children and grand-children as rapidly as 
possible in order to increase their income). 

What is needed here, therefore, next to water 
and cleanliness, is a good government which 
will protect the poor from the ravenous and 
wealthy. 

Banking institutions on sound bases, and doing 
business honorably, are also greatly needed. 
The poor, I am told, hide whatever money they 
can save, in holes in the earth, where it is ultimately 
lost to themselves and the world. These, 
no doubt, would deposit in banks of whose 
standing they would have no doubt. 

I suggest further that as Jerusalem is so full 



of items of deep interest to the civilized world, 
as well as to the Jews, it would meet with general 
favor to introduce into the Constitution provisions 
guaranteeing that Jerusalem shall remain 
practically as it is at present— except that it be 
cleaned up— that all shops and business be prohibited 
inside the walls; that sanitary regulations 
be strictly enforced; that the city be sewered 
thoroughly— a very practical matter and 
one of but moderate expense if "Solomon's 
Quarries," underlying a great portion of the 
city, be utilized for the laying of the larger 
sewer pipes. 

Outside the city the minimum width of the 
streets and the minimum size of building lots 
should be subjects of law, as the people have 
narrow ideas as to what "will do." 

Under such an arrangement as above referred 
to, much money would be provided by lovers 
of the Holy Land for water, aqueducts, artesian 
wells, etc., etc., and soon the barren places 
would become a paradise. 

I believe that now is the Lord's time for the 
long promised deliverance of Israel (and my 
reasons for so believing you will observe in my 
two works mailed to you and above referred 
to); and that it will be accomplished by some 
such concerted project among the nations is, I 
believe, indicated by the prophet Isaiah: 

"And they shall bring all your brethren out of all nations 
as an offering unto the Lord, upon horses and in 
chariots and in litters and upon mules and upon swift 
beasts, to my holy mountain, Jerusalem, saith the Lord. 
...For as the new heavens and the new earth (the 
Kingdom of God) which I will make shall have permanence 
before me, saith the Lord, so shall exist permanently 
your seed and your name."— Isa. 66:20,22. 

See also Jeremiah 32:43,44:— 

"And the fields shall yet be bought in this land whereof 
ye say, It is desolate, without man or beast.... 
Men shall buy fields for money and write it in deeds and 
seal it and certify it by witnesses in the land of Benjamin, 
and in the environs of Jerusalem, and in the cities of 
Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities 
of the lowlands, and in the cities of the south; for I will 
cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord." 

May the God of Jacob direct you, my dear 
Sir, and all interested with you in the deliverance 
and prosperity of Israel, and blessed will 
they be who, to any extent, yield themselves as 
his servants in fulfilling his will as predicted. 

But please note, my dear Sir, that the sacred 
Scriptures predict the return to Palestine, and 
not a further wandering to the ends of the 
earth— to America or elsewhere. And, therefore, 
it is my humble opinion that Israel will 



find no rest for the sole of his foot until he 
finds it in the land of promise; and I pray you, 

R1343 :page 171 

therefore, not to waste your efforts in assisting 
emigration elsewhere, but concentrate them in 
the direction where God has indicated success. 
God bless you. 

Yours in the Faith of the Sacred Scriptures, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 

P.S. A copy of this letter has also been 
sent to your compatriot, Baron Rothschild. 



R1343 :page 171 

HELL OR ANNIHILATION. 



[Brother Wakefield has been seeking to serve 
the truth, by the use of his pen, through the 
columns of the secular press. We give below 
an article of his which may be of interest to 
some TOWER readers. We commend this plan 
of service to those who have a clear understanding 
of the truth, and the talent and education 
needful to a clear presentation of it] 

Editor of the New York Sun:— You say of 
the "Brooklyn Conference of Baptists, who are 
looking for the second coming of the Lord at 
an early day," that "they think it vain to look 
for the bringing of all men to Christ before the 
second advent, and hence they are pre-millennialists." 
The Scriptures being true, they could 
not with any show of reason have entertained 
the notion of "bringing all men to Christ before 
the second advent" at all; but the reverse. 

The Lord's own statement concerning the 
matter is unequivocal: "As it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the 
Son of Man. They did eat, they drank, they 
married wives and were given in marriage, until 
the day that Noah entered into the ark, and 
the flood came and destroyed them all." Also, 
as it was in the days of Lot and Sodom, "Even 
thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man is 
revealed." (Luke 17:26-30.) Paul's testimony 
is equally emphatic and pointed: "This know 
also, that in the last days perilous times shall 
come. For men shall be lovers of their own 
selves, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers, 
without natural affection, incontinent, fierce, untruthful, 
unholy, lovers of pleasures more than 



lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but 
denying the power thereof."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 

Scriptures of like import might be largely 
quoted, but with those already before us, it is 
enough to say that had the Brooklyn Conference 
really believed the testimony of the Lord and of 
his inspired apostle they could not have thought of 
such a thing as the conversion of the world before 
the second advent. But the confession of 
the hopelessness of human efforts being successful 
in the reformation of mankind before the second 
coming of Christ, and that he himself must 
appear as the personal head or leader of the grand 
campaign that is to culminate in the acknowledgement 
of Christ as King of kings and Lord 
of lords by all the nations of the earth, is a 
long step forward in the cause of truth. 

The language of the prophet Daniel (7:13,14) 
is very clear: "I saw in the night visions, 
and, behold, one like the Son of Man came 
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the 
Ancient of days, and they brought him near 
before him. And there was given him dominion, 
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, 
nations, and languages, should serve him: his 
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which 
shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which 
shall not be destroyed." 

But it then would seem that it is not the prevailing 
wickedness of the human race only that 
discourages these good people: the spread of 
Universalism is a matter of serious moment; 

R1344:page 171 

and the effort "to abolish hell" they regret as 
the latest work and "one of the most dangerous 
artifices of the devil." Concerning Universalism 
I will only say that if within the next seven 
days the world should be converted to that faith 
it would still remain for the Universalists to be 
converted to the truth. For am I persuaded that 
the Universalists have no truer conception of 
God's plan of saving the world than the so-called 
"orthodox;" and they are evidently at sea 
without rudder or compass. If "the orthodox 
faith is in present peril from enemies who have 
arisen and are multiplying in the very citadel of 
its defense," it is a sure evidence that "judgment" 
has already "begun at the house of 
God," and that the Laodicean church, while 

R1344 : page 172 

she imagines herself to be rich and needing 
nothing, is in reality "poor and blind and 



naked," and that she is shortly to be "spewed 
out," a "lukewarm," nauseous thing. It is 
another step toward the consummation. 

As to the atrocious dogma of an eternal hell 
of inconceivable torment, does our "sensitive 
modern philosophy" imagine that it has outgrown 
the Scriptures? Do men who "could 
not bear to see a dog in pain," to whose enlightened 
reason and refined sensibilities "the 
goodness and loving kindness of God seems to 
be totally inconsistent with the torments of 
hell," and who therefore refuse to believe their 
infliction possible, still believe that this frightful 
hell torment is the doctrine of the Bible? 
Alas, that the people of this day of Gospel light 
should still be willing to stumble along in the 
darkness of the middle ages! 

The Bible statement of the doctrine of future 
punishment is simple and straightforward, 
and not at all befogged with the horrible fancies 
which our theologians have thrown around it. 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die," is the 
simple statement of God's Word. Another of 
equal directness is, "The wages of sin is 
death." "Ah, yes!" says the theologian, "but 
the soul is immortal and can never die, and 
therefore the Scriptural idea of the death of the 
soul is a state of endless suffering, eternal torment. 
And when the apostle says the wages 
of sin is death, he must mean eternal death, 
which is simply eternal life in torment!" How 
very plausible such reasoning seems to be, and 
how easily it can be shown that "the wisdom 
of men is foolishness with God." 

There are several things that the clergy know 
and that the laity ought to know. The clergy, 
every man of them, know that the "immortality 
of the soul" is never once affirmed in the 
Bible. They know that in all the over nine 
hundred times that the word "soul" occurs in the 
Scriptures, there is never used in connection 
with it any word or phrase to indicate unending 
existence. On the contrary, they know that 
the "soul" is everywhere in Scripture spoken 
of as being subject to death or liable to die. 
And they know that the same word "soul" that is 
applied to man is also used with reference to 
the creeping things and fowls and beasts of the 
earth. The Scriptures being true, a moment's 
reasoning will show the absurdity of attributing 
deathlessness to the soul. 

Take the first text above referred to: "The 
soul that sinneth, it shall die." Consider death 
in any light you please, as physical, spiritual, 
eternal, political, or any other. Death is the 
opposite of life. 



But, again, the penalty of sin is death. Such 
qualifying terms as "temporal," or "eternal" 
death are never used in the Scriptures. The 
Word of the Lord is content to say "the wages 
of sin is death," and such as shall not be found 
written in "the book of life," in the judgment 
day, or age, shall be the subjects of the "second 
death." The "punishment" of the wicked 
will be "everlasting," without doubt, but the 
terms used in Scripture to define that punishment 
necessarily convey the idea of extinction. 
Thus the "everlasting punishment" in Matt. 25:46 
is "kolasin aionion," literally, "cutting 
off enduring." The righteous are received 
into "zoen aionion," life everlasting, and the 
wicked are punished by "kolasin aionion," 
"everlasting cutting off" from life. 

Truly, "an implacable God would be a hideous 
monster," and the creation of men predestined 
to hell from before the beginning of time 
outrages every sense of justice as diabolic sport 
with helpless mortals. And "this sentiment, 
which was once denounced as the expression of 
infidelity and impiety," and is now "prevalent 
among Congregationalists, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, 
and even Baptists," is but the beginning 
of the grand theological revolution which 
shall disrupt and utterly sweep away the present 
system of so-called "orthodox Christianity." 
It is the opening of a better, brighter day, in 
which, as the Apostle Paul says, God will have 
all men "come to a full knowledge of the 
truth." This will be "the day of judgment," 
"the times of restitution," the times in which 
the Prince of Peace "shall have dominion from 
sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of 
the earth;" when "he shall judge the people 
with righteousness and the poor with judgment: 
he shall deliver the poor and needy and break 
in pieces the oppressor;" when truth "shall 

R1344 : page 173 

go forth as brightness, and righteousness as 

a lamp that burneth," "and all flesh shall 

see the salvation of God." This will be the 

day of the world's probation, after Christ has 

come, when the dead shall be raised; in which, 

with full knowledge and understanding of the 

truth, every man shall have privilege and opportunity 

to decide for himself whether he will 

serve and obey the King or not. If he will, he 

shall be promoted to the inheritance of the 

kingdom prepared from the foundation of the 

world; if he will not, he shall be adjudged unworthy 

of life, and shall perish in that aionion 



fire (the fire of the age) in which sinners and 
sin, death, hades, the devil and all that is evil 
shall be destroyed together, and shall be no 
more forever. And so, ultimately, God will 
be glorified in all the works of his hands. 
R. WAKEFIELD. 



R1344 : page 173 

SPECIAL ITEMS TO REGULAR READERS. 



The only article in the present issue bearing 
upon the subject of our journey abroad is the 
copy of the Letter to Barons Rothschild and 
Hirsch, which we believe will interest all of our 
readers. 

The January TOWER will contain our View of 
Foreign Mission Work, and, in connection, a 
report upon the Home and Foreign Tract and 
Mission Work as connected with the WATCH 
TOWER office and its co-workers. This will 
be followed by a brief account of our travels 
and observations in Great Britain and Europe, 
from the pen of Sister Russell. Subsequently 
the story of our sojourn in Palestine and our 
views of the European situation will be given 
as opportunity may permit. 



So far as heard from, the proposition to increase 
the size of the TOWER meets with general 
favor. Some, however, urge that instead 
of it having more pages, its visits be twice a 
month, as they get too hungry between them. 
We have concluded to grant the request. Accordingly 
(D.V.) the issues will be at the 1st 
and 15th of each month during 1892. This 
will busy us still more, and you must expect 
still fewer and shorter personal replies to letters. 



page 173 



We correct our TOWER subscription list quarterly, 
but make special changes at the first of 
each year. As this involves considerable labor, 
we ask that those whose subscriptions expire 
with the present issue and those in arrears and 
those whose subscriptions would expire during 
the year 1892 send the amount that will pay 



their dues up to Dec. 1892 at once. Remember 
that the price of the TOWER for 1892 will be 
one dollar. 

Those who have been on our paid list for 
some time and who do not desire its continuance 
will oblige us by sending a postal card to 
this effect. 



Those interested readers who, because of age 
or other infirmities or disadvantages, are unable 
to pay for the TOWER, and to whom it is supplied 
FREE as unto "the Lord's Poor," will 
please remember to send at least a postal card 
in December, stating their interest, their inability 
still to pay, and their acceptance of it as 
a favor from the Lord under this offer made 
them in his name. 



The Tower Tract Society has received promptly 
quite a number of responses upon the blank 
slips furnished in the last issue. The evidences 
are that the harvest work for 1892 can be made 
much more effective even than this year; although 
this too has been a blessed year, as you 
will see by the report to appear in our next issue. 



We have a number of binders for the old 
TOWERS left over, which we offer much below 
cost— at 75 cents each. These patent binders 
will hold all back issues of the WATCH TOWER 
up to Jan'y '9 1 . They will be found a great 
convenience for preserving your old Towers. 



Do not forget the Missionary Envelopes. We 
have a new lot and supply them now at the reduced 
price of 25 cents per hundred, and 2.00 
per thousand. This includes delivery to you 
at your Postoffice. 



R1345 : page 174 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 



New York. 



DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST:-I am just opening 
up a practice here and, having some leisure, I 
asked a friend for a book to read to pass away 
time. He gave me MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., 
The Plan of the Ages. I have believed in 
the pre-millennial coming of my blessed Savior 
for twenty-five years. With some prejudice, 
however, I read it casually, i.e., not looking 
up the references. I am now re-reading it carefully. 
If it is Scriptural it is the most wonderful 
book I ever read. If it is true it is most 
marvelous, and marvelous also that I have never 
learned its precious truths before. I am inclined 
to be too credulous and cannot detect 
sophistry as soon as some, perhaps, but this 
seems not only Biblical but logical and reasonable, 
and I drink it in as a revelation from my 
Father, and it has made me unspeakably happy. 

If God's Word teaches a full trial of perhaps 
one hundred years under favorable circumstances 
for all our race, it would lift a great 
burden from my heart. 

You say this age is not for the conversion of 
the world, but for witnessing. What, then, is the 
legitimate work of Christians? I suppose it 
must be to get as many as possible fully saved 
and fitted for the bride of Christ. I must refer 
to my own experience. I was converted forty-four 
years ago under the labors of a man 
who taught that it was the privilege of even 
young converts to obey Rom. 12:1,2. I made 
the consecration, but was not steady until 
twenty-five years ago. After repeated scourgings 
in the holiness movement in the M.E. 
church in Illinois, I made an intelligent and 
complete consecration of all to God, which I 
have ratified many times, but from which I 
have never receded. 

I have been engaged in holiness meetings of 
various kinds most of the time since. Your 
teaching on that subject seems to me to be eminently 
Scriptural. I have suffered much with 
and for Jesus, and have by the grace of God 
classed myself with the overcomers, and have expected 
with them to sit with Jesus in his throne. 

I am not aware that there is any inharmony 
between my will and the will of my God. I 
have hoped for all you assert as the privileges 
of the little flock. But it seems to me so much 
above and so much more to be desired than 
the unsinning state of Adam restored, that I 
fear I cannot attain unto it. ["Faithful is he 
that hath called you, who also will do it." 
Trust him and be faithful unto death.— ED.] I 
have been hoping Jesus would come and that 
I, with all those who love his appearing, would 



be caught up to meet him in the air; and to be 
forever with the Lord has been my holiest aspiration. 
God is no respecter of persons. What 
you say about Christians justified only, preferring 
Adamic perfection in the world to being 
made partakers of the divine nature with Jesus, 
may be true, but the Word says without holiness 
no man shall see the Lord. There seems 
to be something necessary beyond justification 
even to occupy Adam's holy state. [Yes, there 
must be consecration and obedience to the extent 
of ability until perfection is reached.— ED.] 

Please send me Vol. II., The Time is At 
Hand, and some sample tracts and copies of 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Inclosed find amount 
in payment. 

I am yours and Christ's, J. E. VOAK. 



Chicago. 

DEAR TOWER BRETHREN:-I am very glad 
that MILLENNIAL DAWN ever came to my hands. 
I read it carefully (two volumes), and am convinced 
that it presents the truth. I was born 
and brought up in a Catholic country (Russian 
Poland) by Catholic parents. There is a long 
story, how I came from one light to another, 
from truth to truth. I sought the truth in many 
Protestant churches, but could not find it, 
though from time to time I believed I had it. 
For the last two years I have not belonged to 
any church, because I know their creeds are of 
men, and not of God. 

Several weeks ago I met a young Pole, who 
had just come from Poland. This man had 
sought the truth for eighteen years. When I presented 
the truth to him from the Bible, he accepted 
it with his whole heart, and wept for 
joy. We come together nearly every evening 
and every Sunday to study the truth in the 
light of the Bible, to which the DAWN is the 
true helping hand. I have to do the interpretation, 
as he does not understand English, 
though he speaks several other languages. We 
believe that the Lord brought us together to 
show the light to our own people. There are 
over 100,000 Poles in this city, and about 
1,500,000 in this country. Besides, I speak 
English and German, and having the DAWN in 
these two languages, I hope soon to begin to 
spread the books, and give my time entirely to it. 

Many Poles begin to see that the priests do 
not lead them right, and therefore cease to have 
confidence in them. In general the Poles do 



R1345 : page 175 

not read English, except the young people. 
Some of them read German, but do not like to 
read religious books in this language, because 
they regard the Germans as their political enemies. 
What they do read, and like to read, 
is Polish. 

Oh, I wish we had the truth in Polish also ! 
I want to give myself entirely to spreading the 
truth. The Lord has been so good to me, 
showing me his light, his truth, his love, I like 
to be his witness. Brother O. is willing to do 
the same. We spend every Sunday with Polish 
families, teaching them the good tidings. 
We do here all we can. 

In Christian love, I remain your brother, 
C. ANTOSZEWSKI. 



Newcastle on Tyne. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It gives me pleasure 
to note that you are safe at home again. I 
am looking with great interest for the promised 
account of your journey. I can easily understand 
that your time was fully occupied. I wonder 
how you arranged to crowd so much into it. 
I would have been delighted to meet you, but 
we cannot do impossibilities. I thank you for 
your words of brotherly encouragement, and 
gratefully acknowledge that your presentation 
of the divine plan has been to me a mental 
stimulus of immense value. 

What a miracle in stone the Great Pyramid 
seems to be! Its testimony is almost overpowering. 
I am just beginning to apprehend 
something of its sublime uniqueness. Of old 
the Pharisees said unto Jesus, '"Master, rebuke 
thy disciples.' And he answered and said unto 
them, 'I tell you, if these should hold their 
peace, the stones would immediately cry out.'" 
So it appears to be still. Bless his holy name! 

With best wishes, Yours truly, 

JOSEPH MOFFITT. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There is one 
question I would like to ask. Please answer, 
either by letter or through the columns of the 
TOWER. 

In your talk at Brother Fairchild's, in answer 
to a question in relation to the Sabbath, you 
made the statement that the Sabbath, as given 



to the Jews, was a type. In making such a 
statement to any of our "Seventh Day" friends, 
they meet us with this: Then "Thou shalt not 
steal," "Thou shalt not kill," and so on, are 
types? I desired to ask you then, how you 
would reply, but lacked the opportunity for 
want of time. I have been met in this way, 
and must admit to being nonplussed by it. 

I call upon you to bridge over this difficulty, 
as you have so many others in the past through 
your publications. The brethren from here, 
who attended the reception at Brother and 
Sister Fairchild's, at our regular meeting yesterday 
all bore testimony to the blessing received 
there, and have come home with renewed 
strength and courage to press the battle to the 
very gate of the enemy, and to "run with patience 
the race set before them." 

I have just heard from a DAWN that has gone 
into the "wilds" of Sullivan county, this state, 
and reached a former "dyed in the wool" 
Methodist. It has taken all the Methodism 
out of him and his wife, and they have become 
enthusiastic believers in the real full and free 
salvation. Praise the Lord— so it goes. 

Praying that our God will abundantly bless 
you, I remain yours in Christian love and 
fellowship, WM. H. CHEEKS. 

[We reply that not only was the fourth commandment 
typical of the rest into which we, Israelites 
indeed, enter, but that all of the commandments, 
as well as all other features of the 
law, were typical. They were typical of the 
higher law "which is briefly comprehended in 
one word"— love. The commandments, Thou 
shalt not kill, steal, covet, etc., are far inferior to 
the one commandment which is the basis of the 
new covenant. Any one who has accepted the 
new covenant of grace through Christ, with its 
law of love, has no need whatever of the ten commandments 
of the Jewish covenant. Can we 
suppose that if I love my brother that I would 
kill him? or steal from him? or bear false witness 
against him? Surely not. It is evident, 
then, that the Jewish law was only a less refined 
statement of the higher law which we now recognize, 
under which our covenant places us. 
It is therefore in perfect harmony with all other 
features of this, our higher law, to find that we 
have also a higher rest than had the typical Israel. 
Ours is not merely a rest of body: it is 
a rest of heart, a rest of faith, a rest from our 
own works as means of justifying ourselves before 
God, and a rest in the perfect work of 
Christ our Lord as the perfect law keeper, making 
full satisfaction for all our imperfections. 



It is by this resting (keeping Sabbath) in him, 
controlled by the spirit of love, that the righteousness 
of the law is fulfilled in us who walk 
not after the flesh.-EDITOR.l 



page 176 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XII., 1891. 



JANUARY.- 

View from the TOWER Page 1 

From Glory unto Glory (Poem) 5 

Thoughts for the New Year (Our Talents, Their Use) 6 

The Throne of His Glory 10 

An Important Question 13 

Reply by the Editor 14 

Meetings in Toronto 14 

The Anniversary Supper 14 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 15 

Allegheny Church Meetings 15 

FEBRUARY.- 

View from the TOWER 17 

Notices 21 

I am the Way (Poem) 22 

The Prince of This World 22 

Your Righteousness 26 

The Kind of Punishment 28 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 29 

MARCH- 

The Coming Anniversary Supper 33 

At All Times (Poem) 43 

A Jewish Kingdom Proposed 44 

As Viewed by Others 45 

Harvest Work and Meetings in Canada 46 

The Plank Bears 47 

APRIL. -- 

Acceptable to God 49 

The Jewish Hope (Poem) 51 

Jerusalem Reviving 52 

Strong Delusion 53 

A Criticism 56 

Progressive Japanese 62 

Rogue Catch Rogue 62 



Special Notices 63 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 63 

MAY.~ 

View from the TOWER 65 

Joseph Rabinowitsch and Israel 69 

A Seasonable Word on "Christian Science." 71 

A Voice from the Jews 76 

Items of Interest 77 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 78 

JUNE. --Special Issue-Millennial Dawn, Vol. III. 

JULY.- 

View from the TOWER 81 

Presbyterian Creed Revision 87 

Your Representatives Abroad 95 

Special Notices 96 

AUGUST.- 

View from the TOWER (Dr. Briggs' Doctrine) 97 

Deliverance (Poem) 108 

God is in the Midst of Her 108 

Items of Interest 109 

New Tracts 110 

Jewish Items Ill 

SEPTEMBER.- 

View from the TOWER (Perilous Times at Hand) 113 

Temptations 118 

What of the Night? (Poem) 119 

The Prophet Like unto Moses 119 

Jewish Population of Russia 125 

Letter from Russia to the Church at Allegheny 126 

OCTOBER. - 

View from the TOWER (As I have Loved You) 129 

Renew a Right Spirit (Poem) 134 

Divine Love and Human Reciprocation 134 

The Bond of Perfectness 139 

Arrival of Bro. and Sr. Russell 141 

Mr. Gladstone on the Bible and Science 142 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 143 

NOVEMBER.- 

View from the TOWER (The Harvest Field Abroad) 1 45 

Further Complications for Presbyterianism 151 

Living for Jesus (Poem) 152 

Russia's Chastisement 152 

Farmers' Alliance Circulars 153 



The Blood of Jesus 158 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 158 

DECEMBER.- 

Great Cause for Thanksgiving 161 

The Anglo-Israelitish Question 163 

Verbal Inspiration 167 

The Dearest Name (Poem) 168 

A New Government for Palestine Proposed 168 

Hell or Annihilation 171 

Special Items to Regular Readers 173 

Extracts from Interesting Letters 174 



