Announcements
● Literature offer for May: Watchtower subscription for one year for a contribution of $5.00. Awake! subscription may be offered on same basis. Six-month subscriptions and one-year subscriptions to monthly editions are $2.50. June: True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? for a contribution of $1.00. July and August: One of the following magazine-size brochures for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. Congregations that have the following books on hand may offer two for $1.00: Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on the Letter of James, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, or Is the Bible Really the Word of God? (For obtaining credit, elders should check guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988.) Additional copies of Commentary on James may be ordered from the Society. Congregations should not order the other three books mentioned, since they are out of stock.
● It is important that brothers planning charters to visit Brooklyn Bethel or Watchtower Farms first correspond by mail with the office at each location. Please provide information on the number coming and the dates for each location. The Society will provide directions and the route charter buses should take. Address your mail to Watchtower, Bethel Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201, and Route 1, Box 300, Wallkill, NY 12589.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in black or maroon​—Spanish
Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!​—Cebuano, Iloko, Indonesian, Tagalog
Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook​—Arabic
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Niuean
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Kinyarwanda
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Chinese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Ezekiel (set of five cassettes; congregation and public: $7.50; pioneers: $6.25)​—Japanese
Hosea through Malachi (set of three cassettes; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Spanish

