Continue Saying, “Come!” to Those Inclined to Listen
1 Jesus emphasized the need for people to listen attentively to the message of truth. (Matt. 11:15; 13:9, 43) He knew it was important for them to get the sense of his teaching, since he was imparting knowledge that could lead appreciative listeners to eternal life.​—John 17:3.
2 Such life-giving knowledge is an important part of “life’s water” that is now being made available to thirsting ones. (Rev. 22:17) As indicated by John’s words, it is not the private possession of a favored few, nor is it sold to those who have money and denied to those who do not. All who now thirst for righteousness need to be encouraged to take advantage of Jehovah’s generous free gift. (Isa. 55:1) Are you numbered among the millions today who are saying, “Come!” to those who are inclined to listen?
HOW YOU CAN SAY, “COME!”
3 May is the second month of our Watchtower subscription campaign. What better instrument could there be for calling attention to Jehovah’s wonderful provision for life? With special emphasis given to exposing the wicked designs of Babylon the Great, The Watchtower can help many gain freedom from religious superstitions and falsehoods. What opportunities do you find for offering the Watchtower subscription?
4 A fine way to offer the subscription is from house to house. But there are also a number of other ways, such as when making return visits or delivering current issues to people on your magazine route. Some publishers are successful in obtaining subscriptions from interested people they meet in the street work. We could encourage some who are already subscribers to send gift subscriptions to friends or relatives. You may also want to send a few gift subscriptions. Subscriptions may also be offered to business acquaintances, fellow workers, or classmates. You may think of other possibilities.
KEEP ON SAYING, “COME!”
5 Continue to show interest in helping those who subscribed during April. Be sure to call back soon. Make certain that they are receiving the magazines. On such visits, you can point out a specific article and encourage them to read it. Perhaps you can even start Bible studies with them and suggest they attend congregation meetings with you. By your showing sincere interest in them, they may respond favorably and be moved to make spiritual progress.
6 Memorial attendance figures for the United States show that more than one million people who are not yet publishers of the good news attend this most important event. Do you know who these interested people are in your congregation? Are they subscribers for The Watchtower? What is being done to help them grow spiritually?
7 The invitation, “Come!” is extended to people of all the nations. Through his Son Jesus, Jehovah has graciously made available the gift of life to all who will respond to the invitation, “Come!” and “take life’s water free.” Will you have a full share in extending the invitation to others during May?

