Getting God’s Law ‘Into Our Inward Parts’
1 It was prophesied that Jesus would have Jehovah’s law ‘within his inward parts.’ (Ps. 40:8) This proved to be true, and it helped him to accomplish his Father’s will.
2 His anointed disciples likewise had Jehovah’s law ‘in their minds and written in their hearts.’ (Heb. 8:10) This enabled them to maintain fine conduct and fully accomplish their ministry. How can all of us make sure that Jehovah’s law is in our minds and written on the tablet of our hearts?​—Prov. 3:3.
PERSONAL STUDY AND RESEARCH
3 Personal study of the Word of God can help us make the truth our own. Study involves research and meditation. It is a sustained, purposeful concentration with careful attention to details. Not only should we read the Society’s publications as they are received but we should also discipline ourselves to have a regular study program that will prepare us for all our weekly meetings.
4 Good study habits strengthen our conviction respecting the truth and brighten our hope for the future. Yes, we “grow to salvation.” (1 Pet. 2:2) When we learn interesting things from the Scriptures, we want to speak about them. We are thus moved to show love for our neighbors by speaking to them about the things we have learned. Our share in speaking “the word of the kingdom” with zeal is bound up with appreciation for spiritual things gained through good study habits.​—Matt. 13:19.
AIDS TO STUDY
5 Jehovah’s organization has provided us what we need to acquire an excellent knowledge of the truth. Are you making good use of the 1930-1985 Index? With this fine instrument and the various publications now available, what a treasure of accurate knowledge we have! Not to be overlooked are the Insight and Revelation Climax books. Are you effectively using these?
6 Getting the most from personal study will depend on how much we put into it. Within your daily circumstances, determine when and where you can find the needed quiet and solitude for concentration and meditation. Be sure to pray for Jehovah’s help before beginning study. To act wisely in these critical times, we need to have the truth of God’s Word inscribed deeply in our hearts and minds. (Prov. 7:1-3; Josh. 1:8) Jehovah uses his spirit to embed his law and reminders in our hearts. (John 14:26; 1 Cor. 2:10) He will not ignore a sincere request for help to find and understand the treasures of his Word.​—Prov. 2:1-6.
7 We need to be regular and consistent in our study program in order to get God’s law ‘into our inward parts.’ Thus we will develop greater spirituality, gain a much better understanding of the truth, improve our skills in helping others learn the truth, and maintain a more solid footing on “the path of life.”​—Ps. 16:11; Col. 2:7.

