Help Young Ones Benefit From the Convention
1 The invitation to the “Godly Devotion” District Convention goes out to every worshiper of Jehovah. Convention preparations have been made, keeping in mind the large number of young ones in our midst. Yes, young people, even “the little ones,” are expected to attend.​—Deut. 31:12.
2 Parents should teach their children that the convention is for them too. Fine spiritual progress can be realized when children understand that their being present and their listening to the convention program is part of their worship. Admittedly, it is not always easy for young ones to remain seated, quiet, and attentive during the sessions. Also, some of the material presented may be difficult for them to understand. So constant attention and effort, yes, hard work, on the part of parents is vital.
3 It is encouraging to observe the genuine interest in spiritual benefits manifested by young children and teenagers attending the convention. Although some enthusiasm may stem mostly from the opportunity to travel, the excitement of the crowds, eating out, and so forth, even very young children can be helped to appreciate the convention itself and gain spiritual benefits accordingly.
HOW PARENTS CAN HELP
4 Children need to have their minds directed toward spiritual matters in anticipation of the convention. Before attending the convention, why not sit down with your children and review the information in the Insight book under the subject “Godly Devotion”? Undoubtedly it will help all in the family to benefit from the convention program.
5 Many parents have reaped excellent results by equipping their children with their own Bible, songbook, and other literature. Instilling a proper view of the Bible and our literature will help control the tendency to play with the books by drawing or writing in them. Encourage children to take notes, and then review these with all the family in the evening. Also, it would be best not to bring toys, coloring books, and other playthings to the convention.
GIVE ATTENTION TO DISCIPLINE AND APPEARANCE
6 Some parents have allowed their children to become a disturbing element during the program. Even during prayers, some children play and distract others. Ask yourself, ‘What are my children doing during the prayers? Should they be allowed to leave their seats during the program?’ Concerned parents find it wise to sit close to their young ones. This enables them to exercise proper supervision so that they do not become a distraction to others. Even when parents have convention-related responsibilities, they should make every effort to sit with their children during the sessions. Children need the supervision of their own parents also during periods of recreation when away from the assembly place.
7 How do our young ones dress for conventions? If they wear casual clothes and playshoes, will this help them understand the seriousness of the occasion? On the other hand, children who dress appropriately for Christian meetings reflect the dignity and seriousness of the occasion. This brings praise and honor to Jehovah’s name.
8 A serious frame of mind can be encouraged by arranging for the children to do some work after the sessions. As mentioned in the insert, children under 16 can work along with a parent or other responsible adult under the direction of the Volunteer Service Department. Many young ones consider this a beneficial aspect of the convention.
9 Perhaps by reflecting on these suggestions, parents as well as others can be alert to help young ones derive greater benefit from the convention.

