Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 1
Song 71
 8 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Outline field service arrangements for weekend, and encourage family groups to participate in house-to-house ministry on first Sunday of May.
17 min: “Continue Saying, ‘Come!’ to Those Inclined to Listen.” Questions and answers. Have selected local experiences related as time allows. Emphasize offering subscriptions for both The Watchtower and Awake! on every appropriate occasion. Encourage publishers to make return visits without delay and to endeavor to start Bible studies with interested persons.
20 min: Hospital Information Services. To be handled by qualified elder. Read and discuss April 1, 1989, letter dealing with Hospital Committee work. Review points from article “Doing the Necessary Things to Please God,” in the November 1987 Our Kingdom Ministry. Reports show that some still have not spoken to their doctors as outlined therein. Ask: Have you completely filled out and signed and had others sign your Medical Document card? Emphasize that local elders have the responsibility of visiting and seeing to the needs of sick and hospitalized publishers. (1 Pet. 5:2; 1 Thess. 2:7, 8) Encourage all to become thoroughly familiar with information published in The Watchtower of March 1, 1989, pages 30-1, and Awake! of February 22, 1989, pages 26-7.
Song 216 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 8
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Demonstrate two or three brief magazine presentations that would be appropriate for local territory, each highlighting only one article.
20 min: “Help Young Ones Benefit From the Convention.” Questions and answers. Use final eight minutes to discuss key points with group of three or four exemplary youths. How have they benefited from convention programs? How have their parents or others helped them to benefit? What do they do to avoid distractions during convention sessions? What have they enjoyed most at conventions?
15 min: Youths Who Kept Integrity. Encouraging talk highlighting 1989 Yearbook experiences about the faith of youths in Austria. Include pages 111-12, 118-19, and 123-5.
Song 160 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 15
Song 59
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Commend congregation for material support given, and convey an expression of appreciation for contributions acknowledged by the Society. Outline field service arrangements for weekend, and encourage publishers to work with groups on Saturday and Sunday.
20 min: “Getting God’s Law ‘Into Our Inward Parts.’” Question-and-answer session on first four paragraphs. Brother handling this part then invites two exemplary publishers to platform for three-way discussion of paragraphs 5-7. May solicit brief expression of appreciation for newer publications. Group may relate how they or others have benefited from personal study and research.
12 min: Local needs, or have capable Congregation Book Study conductor help group of two or three publishers adapt introduction appropriate for local territory to current Topic for Conversation. Use pages 9-15 of Reasoning book.
 5 min: Experiences. Have publishers relate two or three brief experiences about interest found during subscription campaign.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 22
Song 18
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage publishers to be out in field service this weekend. Demonstrate two 30- to 60-second magazine presentations that would be appropriate for local territory. Outline special field service arrangements for Monday, May 29.
20 min: “You Are Invited to the 1989 ‘Godly Devotion’ District Convention!” Congregation secretary will conduct a question-and-answer discussion of paragraphs 1-13 and review briefly “District Convention Reminders.” When discussing paragraph 13, point out that arrangements are being made to have an adequate supply of any releases, and there will be sufficient food for all to enjoy refreshment without rushing to get in line.
15 min: Daily Reminders for Building Spirituality. Qualified brother discusses with two or three exemplary publishers how individuals and family groups benefit from daily reminders such as daily text, yeartext, and information on calendar. We need reminders from Jehovah. (Ps. 119:2; Acts 17:11) Show how frequent reminders can encourage us and prove useful in the ministry.
Song 91 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 29
Song 138
 8 min: Local announcements and Question Box. Encourage all publishers to be out in field service Saturday and Sunday. This will be first Sunday in June.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the True Peace Book.” Question-and-answer discussion of article.
25 min: “You Are Invited to the 1989 ‘Godly Devotion’ District Convention!” Presiding overseer discusses paragraphs 14-31 with congregation. Emphasize individual and parental responsibility to avoid giving reason for unfavorable criticism of Jehovah’s people. All should be concerned with avoiding any questionable conduct that would mar the good reputation of Jehovah’s people and bring reproach upon his name. Assign qualified brother to read paragraphs 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 25, and 26 when these are discussed. Refer to the January 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, and review key points in paragraphs 9 and 10. Emphasize items 5 through 10. Adhering to these instructions outlining the Society’s rooming arrangements will help to guarantee quality accommodations at reasonable rates for all of us at future conventions. Jehovah’s name will be honored as a result of the fine conduct of his name people. In conclusion, encourage family heads to review counsel in insert with family a day or two before attending convention.
Song 152 and concluding prayer.

