Presenting the Good News​—With the True Peace Book
1 As we see developments leading to the fulfillment of the prophecy at 1 Thessalonians 5:2, 3, we are determined to continue to be intensely occupied in warning men of what is impending. Accordingly, in our field ministry during June, we will feature the book True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It? This fine publication deals with what people are thinking about and offers them a sound basis for hope.
WHY TIMELY
2 Many people are wondering if current peace efforts of the superpowers will succeed or if their failure will throw the nations into a nuclear conflict. The True Peace book can comfort them with the knowledge that God will usher in lasting peace for mankind. His purpose for the earth does not allow for its destruction by men. Hunger, abject poverty, and homelessness are the daily lot of millions. The True Peace book points to the only real solution to the problems that plague the nations. Personal insecurity due to burgeoning crime makes many feel like hostages in their own homes. The True Peace book sheds Scriptural light on the remedy. Modern life-styles, including abuses and misuses of God-given sexual powers, have devastated the lives of countless individuals and families. The True Peace book points to God’s standards and the protection afforded those who choose to live by them.
YOUR PRESENTATION
3 “Source of True Peace and Security” will be the new Topic for Conversation beginning in June. The two scriptures to be used are 1 Thessalonians 5:3 and Micah 4:3, 4. You will find that several of the suggested introductions given on pages 9-15 of the Reasoning book can be adapted to this topic and to the needs in your local territory.
4 In your conversations, use the two cited scriptures to show that man-made peace is not lasting but that God’s peace is everlasting. After reading and commenting briefly on Micah 4:3, 4, you may be able to draw the householder into the conversation by asking what he thinks the fulfillment of that prophecy will mean for suffering mankind. Would he be happy to see this prophecy fulfilled in our time? Then you could turn to the illustration facing page 99 in the True Peace book, comment on it, and then call attention to one or two appropriate selected statements on the next few pages that point up the reliable hope of earth-wide peace and security. Invite the householder to investigate the subject further with the aid of the True Peace book. Of course, you may wish to call attention to another portion of the book in your discussion with a particular householder.
5 If you do not have a supply of the True Peace book or if you should run short, feel free to use any other 192-page book available.
6 True peace is not limited to the absence of armed conflict, since it includes health, safety, and general well-being. Only Jehovah, the “God of peace,” and his Son Jesus Christ, the “Prince of Peace,” can guarantee these eternal blessings to those who make peace with them. (1 Thess. 5:23; Isa. 9:6) We can help our neighbors to enjoy peace with God and his Son now and find comfort in the hope of earth-wide peace soon to be realized. We can do this if we keep our “feet shod with the equipment of the good news of peace,” offering the True Peace book during June.​—Eph. 6:15.

