Do You Remember?
Have you given thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? You may recall the following:
□ What is implied by the expression “moderate in habits” as used at 1 Timothy 3:2?
While it can apply to many aspects of life, the Greek word translated “moderate in habits” (ne.phaʹli.on) is defined as meaning “sober, temperate; abstaining from wine, either entirely or at least from its immoderate use.”​—Thayer’s Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament.​—4/15, page 25.
□ Why does Deuteronomy 14:21 say that the “alien resident” could be sold unbled meat while Leviticus 17:10 forbids the “alien resident” to eat blood?
The explanation involves the religious standing of the alien involved. It appears that the sort of person meant in Deuteronomy 14:21 was not a full proselyte, but a person who was not trying to keep all of God’s laws and who might have his own uses for a carcass considered unclean by Israelites and proselytes. But the “alien resident” mentioned in Leviticus 17:15 was a proselyte alien in the full sense of the word and thus obliged to keep God’s law about blood.​—4/15, pages 30, 31.
□ In what way did Jesus ‘feel pity’ for the crowds coming to him as described at Matthew 14:14?
According to one Bible scholar the Greek word here translated “felt pity” “is formed from the word splagchna, which means the bowels.” Jesus could not bear to see the suffering of others without easing the pain.​—5/1, pages 5, 6.
□ How only can you understand the book of Revelation?
To grasp the meaning of Revelation you need knowledge of the Bible as a whole as well as of God’s dealings with his people over the years.​—5/1, page 29.
□ How can we follow Christ’s admonition given to the congregation of Laodicea that they should be “cold or else hot”? (Revelation 3:15, 16).
We can do so by never allowing ourselves to become “lukewarm,” that is, apathetic, unfeeling or indifferent in our ministry. Instead, we must imitate Jesus’ example of putting Kingdom interests first. By reflecting his manner and personality, we can become stimulatingly hot to those who love God and refreshingly cold, soothing, to those wearied by sin and the burdens of life. (Matthew 11:28, 29; John 2:17)​—5/15, pages 12-14.
□ What is God’s view of homosexuality?
God’s law required that homosexuals in ancient Israel be “put to death without fail.” (Leviticus 20:13) His law for Christians shows that his view on the matter has not changed. “Homosexual perverts” are classed with others who “will not possess God’s Kingdom.” But homosexuals can repent and gain God’s approval. (1 Corinthians 6:9, 10, Today’s English Version)​—6/1, page 25.
□ What must we do if we want God to hear our prayers?
The apostle John said: “Whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and are doing the things that are pleasing in his eyes.” (1 John 3:22) So we must do God’s will and obey his laws. We have to work at what we pray for and show God by our actions that we really mean what we say.​—6/15, pages 8, 9.
□ Why is the book of Genesis so valuable to Christians?
It gives Christians a basis for faith, hope and courage. It inspires faith in Jehovah and hope in the promised “seed” of blessing. (Genesis 3:15; 22:18) It also helps Christians to face the future with courage as did early witnesses of Jehovah.​—6/15, page 25.
□ Does God care for mentally ill persons?
The Bible provides spiritual guidance and infuses hope for all depressed persons. (Romans 15:4, 13) It lays the primary obligation to care for the mentally ill upon the closest family members. (1 Timothy 5:4, 8) The Christian congregation, with the elders taking the lead in offering help, is yet another way Jehovah shows his care for those mentally ill. (1 Thessalonians 5:14)​—7/1, pages 28-31.
□ What makes this generation so different from all others?
No generation prior to 1914 has experienced two world wars or has been faced with self-destruction by nuclear weapons. No previous generation has ruined the earth by such widespread contamination and pollution as exist today. All of this has resulted in an unparalleled feeling of fear and insecurity. And no other generation has seen such a widespread preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14)​—7/15, page 7.
□ Can a true Christian be harmed by spiritistic practices of others?
No, for God can defeat anyone who tries to use witchcraft or magic on those who remain faithful to him. A Christian, though, must trust Jehovah completely and keep on the spiritual armor he provides. (Psalm 34:7; Ephesians 6:10-12)​—7/15, pages 8, 9.

