Kingdom Proclaimers Report
A Search for the True God Is Rewarded
IN THE tenth century B.C.E., the two-tribe kingdom of Judah was overrun with false worship. Amid this rampant idolatry, however, lived a man whose heart was right toward God. His name was Jehoshaphat. The prophet Jehu said regarding him: “There are good things that have been found with you, because you have . . . prepared your heart to search for the true God.” (2 Chronicles 19:3) Similarly today, in these “critical times hard to deal with,” millions of people have ‘prepared their hearts’ to search for the true God, Jehovah. (2 Timothy 3:1-5) This is borne out by the following experience from Togo, West Africa.
Casimir attended a Catholic school and had his first Communion at nine years of age. By the time he turned 14, however, Casimir had stopped going to church. This caused him to live in fear because he thought that missing Mass would result in his going to a fiery hell, or at least to purgatory.
In school Casimir joined a group of youths who met once a week to study the Bible. He also started to read the Bible on his own. On one occasion Casimir read in the book of Revelation about a terrifying wild beast that came out of the sea. (Revelation 13:1, 2) When he asked the leader of the Bible study group about it, he was told that the beast was real and that it would actually come out of the sea. This explanation troubled Casimir because he lived not far from the Atlantic Coast. He was convinced that he would be among the first victims of the wild beast.
Casimir began saving his money so that he could flee to the desert up north in order to avoid the wild beast. He told a classmate about his plans. Being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the classmate assured him that no such literal beast would be coming out of the sea. Shortly after that, Casimir was invited to the meetings at the Kingdom Hall. He enjoyed the meetings and began to attend regularly. He also accepted a home Bible study.
As Casimir progressed in his study, family opposition set in. His family practiced ancestor worship and ate unbled meat left over from sacrifices. When Casimir politely declined to eat the meat, he was threatened and asked to leave the house. Casimir stayed calm, and the threats were not carried out. However, for three months, only such meat was served at the family meals. Casimir had a problem getting enough to eat, but he endured this and other hardships.
Casimir continued to make spiritual progress to the point of dedication and baptism. Later, he was appointed a ministerial servant and attended the fourth class of the Ministerial Training School in Togo. Presently, he enjoys doing volunteer work at the branch.
Yes, how true the words of King David have proved to be in many instances: “If you search for [Jehovah], he will let himself be found by you.”​—1 Chronicles 28:9.
[Pictures on page 8]
Casimir (right) enjoys volunteer work at the branch

