Cultivating Interest Stimulated by Kingdom News No. 36
1 Have you completed distribution of your allotment of Kingdom News No. 36? It asks a timely question for all to contemplate: “The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?” As the year 2000 approached, expectations of what the new millennium would bring varied greatly. Kingdom News No. 36 considers some of those expectations and reminds us that world conditions do not provide a basis for optimism. The only millennium that will bring the peace and security that most people seek is the Millennial Reign of Christ Jesus. Our confidence in the reality of his Kingdom has impelled us to distribute Kingdom News No. 36 to everyone we can.
2 Responses to Kingdom News: Previous distributions of Kingdom News have proved to be a fine stimulus to us in our work. Regarding Kingdom News No. 35, the Canada branch wrote: “This special campaign was supported enthusiastically by the publishers and pioneers in the field, and many encouraging experiences were enjoyed.” No doubt you have shown like enthusiasm for the distribution of Kingdom News No. 36.
3 The current Kingdom News campaign is scheduled to end on November 17, 2000. Has all of the territory assigned to your congregation been covered? If not, the elders may ask you to continue the campaign until the end of November.
4 What has been the reaction thus far to the distribution of Kingdom News No. 36 in your locality? A few people will fill out the coupon and request a copy of the Require brochure and/​or a home Bible study. However, the majority of those who show initial interest in the subject of the millennium are not likely to take action until one of Jehovah’s Witnesses calls back. All who have shown interest should be visited again. When would be a good time to do this? The follow-up should be as soon as possible.
5 Note these experiences that resulted from returning on placements of Kingdom News No. 35. A pioneer in Ireland left Kingdom News with the owner of a restaurant. The woman was impressed with the message and invited the sister back. The sister returned in two days, and a Bible study was started. In Denmark, a copy of Kingdom News was left at a house where no one was at home. That same day the woman who lived there sent the coupon to the branch office, which forwarded it to the local congregation. Before the week was over, two sisters called, a study was arranged, and the woman attended her first meeting at the Kingdom Hall!
6 What to Say When You Return: Making return visits on Kingdom News placements is relatively easy and is an enjoyable part of our ministry. When doing so, it would be advisable to carry with you a copy of Kingdom News No. 36, since the householder may not have his copy. You might try these suggestions.
7 After you have reminded the householder of who you are, you could say:
▪ “I left a folder entitled ‘The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?’ Wasn’t it encouraging to read that soon the Millennial Reign of Christ Jesus will begin, bringing Paradise conditions to the earth? [Show illustrations of Paradise in Kingdom News No. 36.] On the back page, you are invited to request a copy of the brochure What Does God Require of Us?” Show the brochure, turn to lesson 5, read the first question and paragraphs 1 and 2, and ask the householder to comment. Read and discuss a scripture or two. If possible, consider another question and paragraph, then arrange to return and continue the discussion.
8 Since the follow-up offer for November will be the “Require” brochure or the “Knowledge” book, you might say:
▪ “When I recently visited you, I left a copy of ‘The New Millennium​—What Does the Future Hold for You?’ It contains an offer of a free home Bible study. I have returned to show you the study aid that we use. [Show the Require brochure, and turn to the back cover; or show the Knowledge book, and turn to pages 188-9.] The Millennium spoken of in the Bible will bring conditions such as you see in this illustration. To qualify for life in Paradise, we need to take in accurate knowledge of God. Please allow me to demonstrate briefly how we study the Bible.”
9 The distribution of Kingdom News No. 36 has motivated us to intensify our share in the ministry, producing a grand witness. Likely this has stimulated the interest of many individuals in the territory. Our united effort to cultivate this interest will, with Jehovah’s help, result in our joyfully locating more sheeplike ones.​—Matt. 10:11; Acts 13:48, 49, 52.

