Where Is the World Heading?
WORLD UNITY. It sounds so good. Does not everyone want it? Yes, there has been much talk about unity. Again and again, meetings of world leaders have focused on the subject. In August 2000, more than 1,000 religious leaders met at the United Nations in New York for the Millennium World Peace Summit. They discussed solutions to world conflicts. However, the conference itself was a reflection of the world’s simmering controversies. A mufti from Jerusalem refused to come because of the presence of a Jewish rabbi. Others were offended because the Dalai Lama was not invited to the first two days for fear of antagonizing China.
In October 2003, world security issues were discussed by Pacific Rim nations at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit held in Thailand. The 21 nations present pledged to dismantle terrorist groups and agreed on ways to increase global security. Yet, during the conference several representatives grumbled about one prime minister’s remarks, which were said to be a hate-filled attack on the Jews.
Why No Unity?
Though there is a lot of talk about unifying the world, we see few concrete results. Despite the sincere efforts of many, why has world unity continued to elude mankind into the 21st century?
Part of the answer is reflected in the comments of one of the prime ministers who attended the APEC conference. He said, “There is this thing called national pride.” Yes, human society is steeped in nationalism. Each nation and ethnic group is driven by the desire for self-determination. National sovereignty combined with the spirit of competition and greed has produced a volatile mix. In one case after another, when national interests conflict with global interests, national interests win out.
Nationalism is well described by the psalmist’s expression, “the pestilence causing adversities.” (Psalm 91:3) It has been like a plague on humanity, leading to untold suffering. Nationalism with its resultant hatred of other peoples has existed for centuries. Today, nationalism continues to fan the flames of divisiveness, and human rulers have not been able to stop it.
Many authorities recognize that nationalism and self-interest are the root of the world’s problems. For example, former United Nations Secretary-General U Thant observed: “So many of the problems that we face today are due to, or the result of, false attitudes . . . Among these is the concept of narrow nationalism—‘my country, right or wrong.’” Still, nations today, engrossed in self-interest, are clamoring more and more for their own sovereignty. Those who have the advantage do not wish to give up even a little of it. For example, the International Herald Tribune made this observation about the European Union: “Rivalry and mistrust remain basic patterns of European politics. For most EU member states, it is still unacceptable for one of their peers to gain greater influence and take the lead.”
God’s Word, the Bible, correctly describes the result of all human rule, saying: “Man has dominated man to his injury.” (Ecclesiastes 8:9) By breaking the world up into their own separate dominions, groups of men as well as individuals have experienced the fulfillment of this Bible principle: “One isolating himself will seek his own selfish longing; against all practical wisdom he will break forth.”—Proverbs 18:1.
Our Creator, who knows what is best for us, never purposed for humans to set up their own governments and rule themselves. By doing so, men have ignored God’s purpose and the fact that everything belongs to him. Psalm 95:3-5 says: “Jehovah is a great God and a great King over all other gods, he in whose hand are the inmost depths of the earth and to whom the peaks of the mountains belong; to whom the sea, which he himself made, belongs and whose own hands formed the dry land itself.” God is the rightful Sovereign to whom all should look for rulership. By pursuing their own sovereignties, the nations are working against his will.—Psalm 2:2.
What Is Needed?
The only way the world will become united is by having one world authority that works in the interests of all people. Many thinking people recognize this need. Those who do, however, often look in the wrong place. For example, many commentators, including religious leaders, have urged people to look to the United Nations for world unity. However, human organizations, no matter how noble their ideals, have never been able to solve mankind’s international problems. Rather, most of these organizations have simply become a reflection of the disunity that exists among various nations.
The Bible warns against looking to human institutions for the solution when it says: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” (Psalm 146:3) Does this leave us at a dead end as far as world unity is concerned? Not at all. There is another way.
Many are unaware that God has already set up a government that is capable of uniting the world. The Bible says about Jehovah God: “I, even I, have installed my king upon Zion, my holy mountain. Ask of me, that I may give nations as your inheritance and the ends of the earth as your own possession.” (Psalm 2:6, 8) Note that the scripture refers to Jehovah God as having ‘installed his king,’ whom he refers to as “my son” in verse 7. This is none other than God’s foremost spirit Son, Jesus Christ, who has been given authority over all nations.
How World Unity Will Come About
Most people do not recognize this heavenly rulership that God has set up. The nations tenaciously hang on to their own perceived right to sovereignty. However, God will not tolerate those who refuse to recognize his sovereignty and the government that he has set up. Concerning those who refuse to accept this arrangement, Psalm 2:9 says: “You [the Son, Jesus Christ] will break them with an iron scepter, as though a potter’s vessel you will dash them to pieces.” Whether they realize it or not, the nations are now on a march that will lead to a collision with God. The last book of the Bible speaks of “the kings of the entire inhabited earth” being gathered together “to the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Revelation 16:14) The nations and their divisive ways will be put out of existence. This will pave the way for God’s government to go about its work unhindered.
As the Universal Sovereign, Jehovah God through his Son will wisely exert the power to make the changes necessary for a united world. God’s government will bring about true unity and will bless all lovers of righteousness. Why not take a few minutes to read Psalm 72 in your Bible? There, a prophetic picture is given of what rulership under God’s Son will do for mankind. People will experience true world unity, and all their problems—oppression, violence, poverty, and so forth—will be gone.
In today’s divided world, many think that such a hope is unrealistic. But it would be a mistake to think so. God’s promises have never failed, and they never will. (Isaiah 55:10, 11) Would you like to see this change? You can. In fact, there is already a people who are preparing for that time. They come from all nations, but instead of fighting, they are now unitedly submitting to God’s sovereignty. (Isaiah 2:2-4) Who are they? They are known as Jehovah’s Witnesses. Why not accept the invitation to visit their meeting places? Likely, you will enjoy refreshing association with a people who can help you to submit to God’s sovereignty and enjoy unity that will never end.
[Pictures on page 7]
People from all nations are preparing for life in a united world
[Picture Credit Line on page 4]
Saeed Khan/AFP/Getty Images
[Picture Credit Lines on page 5]
Woman grieving: Igor Dutina/AFP/Getty Images; protesters: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty Images; armored cars: Joseph Barrak/AFP/Getty Images

