Announcements
“PREACH THE WORD” TESTIMONY PERIOD
December, the final month of 1950, has been designated as “Preach the Word” Testimony Period. How could this eventful year be more effectively concluded than by taking the word of God upon your lips and heralding it forth to all who will hear? That is what Jehovah’s witnesses will be doing, in harmony with Paul’s counsel at 2 Timothy 4:2. The 320-page book “This Means Everlasting Life” will be offered to those displaying interest in God’s Word, on 35c contribution. We suggest you report to us the results of your preaching.
1951 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Of the increase of God’s government and peace there will be no end. This Scriptural truth is convincingly proved by the report of the 1950 service year as presented by the president of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society in the 1951 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses. In addition to this annual report covering more than. 100 regions, the Yearbook contains the president’s comment on the yeartext for 1951 and a daily text and comment for each day of the coming year. Those associated with a group should send in combined orders, as through the servant of a company, to save time and expense. A remittance of 50c per copy should accompany each order.
1951 CALENDAR
Prominently displayed across the top of the 1951 Calendar published by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is the new yeartext, “They said: ‘Praise Jah, you people, because Jehovah our God, the Almighty, has begun to rule as king.’” (Rev. 19:6, NW) Beneath this appears a beautiful view of the Society’s newly enlarged printing plant in Brooklyn, New York. The calendar pad attached below this picture presents six different scenes of theocratic interest in pastel shades, overprinted by the calendar for 1951. The calendar pad also furnishes the Scriptural themes for the six bimonthly testimony periods and service themes for the intervening months. This service calendar will be sent to any address at 25c a copy or $1.00 for 5 copies sent to one address, postpaid. Groups or companies are encouraged to order in quantity, through the appointed servant, sending remittance to cover the cost.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of December 24: Subjection to the Higher Powers, ¶1-24
Week of December 31: Subjection to the Higher Powers, ¶25-33; and Execution of Judgment upon Opposers, ¶1-13.

