R535 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1883. NO. 3. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send by Draft, P.O. Money Order, or 
Registered Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 
send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 



can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. 



SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



SEND the names of any to whom you 
think sample copies of the TOWER 
would be a blessing; or we will send 
you samples for your neighbors-Free. 



"YOUNGS CONCORDANCE" cannot 
be sent by mail to foreign countries except 
Canada on account of excessive 
weight. Expressage to Europe is costly, 



hence foreign readers can probably purchase 
them there to best advantage. 



THE post office authorities now refuse 
all papers not properly addressed. This 
will account for some not getting their 
papers recently. When the name of 
your village or town is different from 
the name of the post office be sure to 
send the latter. 



R535 : page 1 

DARKNESS COVERS THE EARTH. 

"Behold the darkness shall cover the earth 
and gross darkness the people; but the Lord 
shall arise upon thee and His glory shall be seen 
upon thee. And the Gentiles (heathen) shall 
come to thy light. "- v Isa. 60:2\ 

The above diagram is powerfully 
suggestive of the statement of the 
prophet: "Darkness shall cover the 
earth." It was published here by the 
"WOMENS PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF 
MISSIONS" and is termed "A Mute 
Appeal" on behalf of foreign missions, 
and was first issued by the "LONDON 
MISSIONARY SOCIETY." 

Each square of this diagram represents 
ten hundred thousand human beings. 
The lights, shades and blackness 
tell of the darkness and blindness 
which has overspread the earth, while 
sin and evil have ruled mankind, and 
cause us to look longingly for the 
bright Millennial Day when the Sun of 
Righteousness shall arise with healing 
in his wings, causing the knowledge of 
the Lord to fill the whole earth and to 
bless all mankind. 



The Watchman-the "Y.M.C.A." 
journal of Chicago-published this 
same diagram, and commenting on it, 
says: "The ideas of some are very 
misty and indefinite in regard to the 
worlds spiritual condition. We hear 
of glorious revival work at home and 
abroad, of fresh missionary efforts in 
various directions, of one country after 
another opening to the gospel, and of 
large sums being devoted to its spread; 
and we get the idea that adequate 
efforts are being made for the evangelization 
of the nations of the earth. 
It is estimated to-day that the worlds 
population is 1,424,000,000, and by 
studying the diagram we will see that 
considerably more than one-half-nearly 
two-thirds-are still total heathen, 
and the remainder are mostly either 
followers of Mohammed or members 
of those great apostate churches 
whose religion is practically a Christianized 
idolatry, and who can scarcely 
be said to hold or teach the gospel of 
Christ. Even as to the 116 millions of 
nominal Protestants, we must remember 
how large a proportion in Germany, 
England and this country have lapsed 
into infidelity-a darkness, if possible, 
deeper even than that of heathenism, 
and how many are blinded by superstition 
or buried in extreme ignorance. 
So that while eight millions of Jews 
still reject Jesus of Nazareth, and while 
more than 300 millions who hear His 
name have apostatized from His faith, 
170 millions more bow before Mahomet; 
and the vast remainder of mankind are 
to this day worshipers of stocks and 
stones, of their own ancestors, of dead 
heroes, or of the devil himself; all in 
one way or other worshiping and serving 
the creature instead of the Creator, 
who is God over all, blessed forever. 
Is there not enough here to sadden the 



heart of thoughtful Christians?" 

Some might suppose at first that the 
view is too dark and rather overdrawn, 
but we think the reverse of this. It 
shows nominal Christianity in the 
brightest colors possible. For instance, 
the 116,000,000 put down as Protestant 
is far in excess of the true number. 
Sixteen millions would be fully sufficient, 
we believe, to include every professing 
church member, and ONE MILLION 
would, we fear, be far too liberal 
an estimate for the "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus," who "walk not after the flesh 
but after the Spirit." 

It is, indeed, a sorrowful picture of 
ignorance and darkness and sin from 
any standpoint; but, viewed from the 
so-called "ORTHODOX" standpoint, it 
is truly 

AN AWFUL PICTURE. 

If we hold "Orthodoxy" to its own 
creeds, it believes that all of these 
billions of humanity, ignorant of the 
only name under heaven by which we 
must be saved, are on the straight road 
to everlasting torment. And not only 
so, but all of those 116,000,000 Protestants, 
except the very few saints, are 
sure of the same fate. No wonder, 
then, that those who believe such awful 
things of Jehovahs plans and purposes 
should be zealous in forwarding missionary 
enterprises-the wonder is that 
they are not frenzied by it. If we believed 
such things it would rob life of 
every pleasure and shroud in gloom 
every bright prospect of nature. 

That we have not misstated "Orthodoxy" 
on the subject of the fate of the 
heathen, we quote from their pamphlet 
--"A mute appeal on behalf of Foreign 
Missions"-in which the diagram 
was published. Its concluding sentence 



is: "Evangelize the mighty generations 
abroad-the ONE THOUSAND MILLION 
SOULS who are dying in CHRISTLESS 
DESPAIR at the rate of 100,000 a day." 

But another peculiar thing is, that the 
"Mute Appeal" on behalf of Foreign 
Missions is issued by the WOMENS 
PRESBYTERIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS." 
The peculiarity is that a denomination 
which in its creed declares its faith to 
be, that God did from all eternity predestinate 
some to knowledge and salvation, 
and all others to ignorance and 
damnation, should so disregard their 
"old landmarks" and prejudices as to 
attempt to change the arrangement 
which they declare was predestinated. 

But, really, we rejoice at this as an 
evidence that creeds of the darker centuries 
are losing their power over 
thinking people of every sect. We are 
glad, too, that their hearts are better 
than their creeds, and that they are 
superior to their estimate of God; for 
while they think that God looks calmly 
and unmoved upon this mass of humanity 
going down to hell at the rate of 
100,000 a day, and never exercising 
His power to give them the needed 
knowledge, they are superior in that 
they are moved to pity and to benevolent 
action by the sight. 

The great difficulty with "Orthodoxy" 
is, that they fail to recognize 
plan and method in Gods word and 
dealings. Such will, perhaps, gather 
from our foregoing criticism, that we 
have no care for, nor interest in the 
heathen; but we can most heartily assure 
them that this is not the case. The 
reason why they would thus judge us, 
would be the same if they applied their 
judgment to the actions and teachings 
of Jesus. He went not to the Gentiles 
(heathen), and commanded the disciples 
likewise. fMatt. 10:5\) He did 



not cry aloud nor "lift up his voice in 
the streets," shouting to and exhorting 
sinners or heathens to beware of eternal 
torture; neither did any of the apostles. 
In his preaching, Jesus said of some, 
"No man can come unto me except 
the Father, which hath sent me, draw 
him." fJohn 6:44\) The disciples he 

R536 : page 1 

taught specially, saying, "Unto you it 
is given to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of God, but, unto them that 
are without, all these things are done in 
parables, that seeing they may see and 
not perceive, and hearing they may hear 
and not understand, lest at any time 

R536 : page 2 

they should be converted." fMark 4:11, 12\) 
But when we 

RECOGNIZE THE PLAN AND ORDER 

revealed in Gods word all is clear, 
beautiful, reasonable and harmonious. 

We claim that, as Jesus said, the 
Gospel in this age is a WITNESS to the 
world and not designed to now convert 
all. All must agree with us that if God 
intended it to be a converting power to 
the world in this age, his plans have 
most signally failed, as the above diagram 
proves. But let us take Gods 
plan as he presents it, viz: to elect or 
select a church-a "little flock"-who 
shall be taught, tried, tested, polished 
and made ready for his service in an 
age to follow this; when through this 
spiritual seed of Abraham, all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed and 
enlightened. CGal. 3:29\) 

How strange it does seem that these 
dear Christian brethren and sisters who 



issue the "MUTE APPEAL," and others 
who seem so zealous and anxious for 
the salvation of men and the spread of 
the knowledge of the "only name" as 
a means to that end, should feel such 
an opposition to the teaching of the 
Apostles concerning the coming TIMES 
OF RESTITUTION of all things spoken 
by the mouth of all the holy prophets. 

Can they not see that Gods missionary 
enterprise is much grander and 
more comprehensive than theirs? Theirs, 
even if their prayers and desires were 
to be answered this very year, by the 
conversion of every living being on 
earth to the love and service of our 
Lord; this surely would not answer the 
cravings of sympathizing, loving hearts, 
and they would still pray: O, Lord, 
extend thy mercy and thy love to those 
in everlasting torment; and they would 
plead that those billions of the dead far 
outnumbered the millions of the living. 

How strange that they will not allow 
the Lord to tell them of HIS WAY of 
carrying on mission work, and how 
much comfort and peace they lose, and 
how many burdens they bear, because 
they have no ear to hear when He 
speaks through his word. 

Gods plan is to first select a "Royal 
Priesthood" during this age and have 
that priesthood teach and rule and bless 
the world in the next age. 

Now we are just at the threshold of 
the age of glory. The midnight 
shadows of the diagram are just beginning 
to flee before the "Sun of Righteousness," 
and the printing and scattering 
of millions of Bibles in the past 
87 years is one means toward the great 
work. In a word, then, these dear 
friends stand at our side in hope of the 
spread of truth, the great difference 
being that they expect to do it in their 
present weak, humble, mortal condition; 



and we expect to be glorified and 
clothed upon with heavenly form and 
power, as a means to the desired end. 

One of the great stumbling blocks 
which hinders " Orthodoxy s" reception 
of Gods grand missionary plan, of a 
special age in which the world (including 
those in their graves) will be taught 
and blessed by the knowledge and 
merit of the ransom, is their false idea 
of what constitutes DEATH. They have 
accepted Satans first lie, "Thou shalt 
not surely die," instead of Gods statement 
that men do die; hence they do all 
in their power to convince themselves 
that Satan was the truth-teller, and will 
not believe that when men die they lose 
life. They will not believe the Scriptural 
testimony. ("Rom. 6:23"; "Eccl. 9:10"; 
"Psa. 6:5"; "Job 14: specially vs. 1,10 and 21"; 
"2 Tim. 4:8".) Hence they 
are forced by their adherence to Satans 
theory, to claim that when men die 
they go to a place of woe or happiness 
and continue really to live, though they 
admit they seemed to die. 

If they would take Gods word simply 
and lay aside traditions, they would 
see that all men go to ("sheol," 
"hades") the condition of death, and 
that the power is with God to bring 
them to life again, to bring them up 
out of their GRAVES. ("Ezek. 37:12".) 
Then they would see the reasonableness 
of death as the penalty of sin and of 
the RANSOM from it, by the death of our 
Redeemer, who substituted his life for 
ours and died the just for the unjust. 
Thus he bought for all the right to a 
return to life (resurrection-restitution) 
when at the hands of the Royal Priesthood 
it shall be testified to every man 
that Christ died for ALL. (1 Tim. 2:6".) 

While God has foretold the gross 
darkness now covering the world, let 
none overlook the fact that he also 



foretells by the same prophet that when 
the government shall be upon the 
shoulders of Him called "Wonderful," 
the rod of the oppressor (Satan) shall 
be broken, and the people who walked 
in darkness shall see a GREAT LIGHT. 
CIsa. 9:2,4,6\) 

By the same prophet the Lord again 
says of Christ (head and body), "I will 
preserve thee and give thee for a covenant 
of the people, to establish (order, 
rule) the earth, to cause to inherit the 
desolate heritages; that thou mayest 
say to the prisoners (in death-in 
hades) Go forth; to them that are in 
darkness, show yourselves." (Come to 
the light-the truth.) flsa. 49:8,9\) 

Soon it shall be manifested that not 
in name only, but in deed and in truth, 
Jesus is "the true light which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world." 
CJohn 1:9\) "And in that day shall 
the deaf hear the words of the Book, 
and the eyes of the blind shall see out 
of obscurity and out of darkness. The 
meek also shall increase their joy in the 
Lord." flsa. 29:18\) Surely we are 
now entering "that day," and for it 
thank God. 



R536 : page 2 

CHURCH GOVERNMENT. 

The article in a back issue of the 
TOWER (Vol. 4, No. 4), entitled "The 
Ecclesia," furnishes our understanding 
of what constitutes the Church of Christ 
and the spirit of love and truth which 
binds and unites the saints of all ages. 
But we have inquiries from a number of 
ministers and others who are coming 
back from sectarianism to the original 
and only true church which includes all 



SANCTIFIED believers in the ransom, 

asking whether we recognize local organizations 

such as the Apostles established 

in every city ("Titus 1:5"), having 

elders and deacons, etc.; and if we do 

not have such, Why? Is such organization 

not as proper now as in the 

Apostles days? And if there are no 

such organizations, how is the work of 

the ministry and teaching conducted 

successfully? 

We reply, that the circumstances now 
differ from those of the Apostles day 
in that their work was more to organize 
and lay the foundation for an age of 
work just beginning, while our work is 
the reverse almost of this; it is the ending 
or harvesting of this age; and the 
methods of then and now might be as 
different as are the methods of a farmer 
and the implements he uses in sowing 
seed and in reaping his harvest. 

The methods of Jesus, in harvesting 
the Jewish age, furnish a better guide to 
present work. It is with us much as it 
was with him: His mission was not to 
bring peace but a sword-division ("Matt. 10:34".) 
In some respects, dividing 
and tearing down are not as agreeable 
employment as building up; but if we 
are anxious to do the Masters will we 
have no other wish, and especially if he 
has shown us the necessity of the separation 
in order to the glorifying of the 
saints and the bringing in through them 
of an age of blessing to the world in 
general. Seeing this, harvesting becomes 
the most enjoyable work in the 
vineyard. 

For the same reasons that Jesus did 
not organize congregations while present 
with his disciples in the Jewish 
harvest, we do not consider expedient or 
necessary organizations even simple 
and unsectarian as those established by 
the Apostles. Our Lord is again present, 



not again in the "form of a servant," 
in the flesh, but a spiritual being; 
and he, being present, is in all things the 
guide and director of every laborer. 

But, though no earthly organization 
is attempted, yet we are as one-all 
united to the one head and following 
the leadings of his Word and Spirit. If 
we see any among us turn aside and 
"err from the truth," each other member 
will feel a loving duty to do what 
he can to restore such a one to the 
truth; yet we feel that the further responsibility 
of disciplining, etc., is with 
our present Lord, who also will do it. 
We labor to do his will and leave results 
to him. 

Our ministers, if assembled, would contrast 
nearly as strongly with those of 
the nominal "church" as did Jesus 
followers at the first advent contrast 
with the Scribes and Pharisees. 

The ministers of the nominal Church 
seek for and receive the popular approval; 
and for their labor they have 
their reward, being abundantly supported 
and honored. In fact, a young 
man of talent finds no easier or more 
direct road to the honors, ease and 
comforts of life than to enter the ministry 
of the Nominal Church. But far 
different is it with those who, for the 
love of the truth and the glory of God, 
go forth to declare the whole counsel of 
God whether men will hear or forbear. 
These are by no means salaried lords of 
Gods heritage, but, like their Master, 
they are despised and rejected of men; 
but they esteem it a privilege to receive 
the wages of persecution, hardship, 
and trial of the present time, 
while joyfully looking forward to the 
glory to be revealed. They use whatever 
talents they possess to the best advantage, 
whether they be many or few. 



R537 : page 2 

Some, through the columns of the 
"TOWER," are stirring up the gift that is 
in them; and some, who have the opportunity, 
travel from place to place preaching 
by word and printed matter, while 
others, whose field is not so wide, are 
thus engaged in their own immediate 
neighborhood. Few can give all their 
time directly in the Gospel work: 
the mass of them, in order to "provide 
things honest in the sight of all men," are 
obliged to "labor, working with their 
hands." 

The majority of these ministers [servants] 
of Christ do their work by 
searching out the "saints," for whom 
present truths are meat in due season, 
and by conversation on these subjects 
and the loaning of a paper containing 
some article which they have marked, 
they endeavor to build them up in the 
most holy faith, helping them to understand 
the word of God more perfectly, 
as did Aquilla and Priscilla with 
Apollos fActs 18:26"), and each doing 
with his might what his hand finds to 
do, using whatever talents he possesses, 
seeks thus to glorify God in body and 
spirit which are his. It is the mistake 
of very many Christians, however, and 
one which all should guard against, to 
suppose that they are serving the Lords 
cause when they are indiscriminately 
distributing anything which claims to 
be a religious tract or paper. The careful 
servant will be judicious and discriminating 
in this and in everything he 
undertakes. Such are the simple methods 
of the majority, and their work, under 
Gods direction, is mighty in the 
pulling down of strongholds. Here a 
little and there a little, Babylon and 
her wall of errors is crumbling before 
the truth. Another question in connection 



with this subject is: 

WHAT CONSTITUTES "A CALL TO THE 
MINISTRY?" 

All who consecrate are led of the 
Spirit (if they will follow) into more and 
more of an appreciation of Gods goodness 
and loving plans; and as they become 
filled with the spirit of love and 
see those about them needing the precious 
truth which they so freely received 
of God, and which so blessed 
and helped them, they realize that this 
very condition of things is a call from 
God to declare it to them, using their 
best talents in their heart- work, and 
letting their light so shine as to glorify 
their Father in heaven. 

Of every member of the anointed body 
it is true as of the Head-- "The Spirit 
of the Lord God is upon me because 
the Lord hath anointed me to 
preach good tidings unto THE MEEK." 
CIsa.61:l\) 

The Master is saying even now to 
every consecrated one: Go ye also 
into my vineyard-why stand ye idle? 
Reading matter for judicious use we 
will supply free. Sample copies of the 
TOWER will be sent free to those you 
think might be interested if you send 
us their addresses. We consider this 
one of the means in our hands for 
spreading the good news. 



R537 : page 2 

WHERE DID MOSES GET THAT LAW? 

An infidel, wishing to examine into 
the truth of the Christian religion, inquired 
of an elder of the Presbyterian 
church as follows: "What books, sir, 



would you advise me to read?" "The 

Bible," said the elder. "I believe you 

do not understand me," resumed the 

unbeliever, surprised in his turn; "I 

wish to investigate the truth of the 

Bible." "I would advise you, sir," repeated 

the elder, "to read the Bible; 

and," he continued, "I will give you 

my reasons: Most infidels are very ignorant 

of the Scriptures. Now, to reason 

on any subject with correctness, we 

must understand what it is, about which 

we reason. In the next place, I consider 

the internal evidence of the truth 

of the Scriptures stronger than the external." 

"And where shall I begin?" 

inquired the unbeliever, "at the New 

Testament?" "No," said the elder, 

"at the beginning-at Genesis." 

One evening the elder called and 
found the unbeliever at his house or 
office, walking the room, with a dejected 
look, his mind apparently absorbed 
in thought. He continued, not noticing 
that any one had come in, busily to 
trace and retrace his steps. The elder 
at length spoke: "You seem, sir," said 
he, "to be in a brown study; of what 
are you thinking?" "I have been 
reading," replied the infidel, "the moral 
law." "Well, what do you think of 
it?" asked the elder. "I will tell you 
what I used to think," answered the infidel. 
"I supposed that Moses was the 
leader of a horde of banditti; that, having 
a strong mind, he acquired great 
influence over a superstitious people; 
and that on Mount Sinai he played off 
some sort of fireworks, to the amazement 
of his ignorant followers, who imagined, 
in their mingled fear and superstition, 
that the exhibition was supernatural." 
"But what do you think 
now?" interposed the elder. "I have 
been looking," said the infidel, "into 
the nature of that law. I have been 



trying to see whether I can add anything 
to it, or take anything from it, so 
as to make it better. Sir, I cannot. It 
is perfect." 

"I have been thinking," he proceeded 
"where did Moses get that law? I 
have read history; the Egyptians and 
the adjacent nations were idolaters; so 
were the Greeks and Romans; and the 
wisest and best Greeks or Romans 
never gave a code of morals like this. 
Where did Moses get this law, which 
surpasses the wisdom and philosophy 
of the most enlightened ages? He 
lived at a period comparatively barbarous; 
but he has given a law in which 
the learning and sagacity of all subsequent 
time can detect no flaw. Where 
did he get it? He could not have 
soared so far above his age as to have 
devised it himself. I am satisfied where 
he obtained it. It came down from 
Heaven. I am convinced of the truth 
of the religion of the Bible. "--Selected. 



R537 : page 2 

IMMOVABLE FOR CHRIST. 

The old Lollards were called "Holdfasts," 
not only because of their firmness 
under persecution, but of their strong 
grasp of the truth. Coleridge said, 
with a practical aptness unusual with 
him: "What does not withstand has no 
standing-ground." "Hold fast, then, 
the form of sound words, in faith and 
love, which is in Christ Jesus." Be 
modest, unostentatious in all that is 
your own, willing to concede everything 
you have a right to yield, but be scrupulous 
and immovable about all that is 
Christs. -Selected. 



page 2 

SINCE three cent stamps are less useful 
than formerly, if you have more on 
hand than you know how to use otherwise, 
we will accept such during this 
month in payment of subscriptions. 



R537 : page 3 
HOW TO LIVE. 

He liveth long who liveth well! 

All other life is short and vain; 
He liveth longest, who can tell 

Of living most for heavenly gain. 

He liveth long who liveth well! 

All else is being thrown away; 
He liveth longest who can tell 

Of true things truly done each day. 

Waste not thy being; back to Him 
Who freely gave it, freely give; 

Else is that being but a dream: 
Tis but to be, and not to live. 

Be what thou seemest! live thy creed! 

Hold up to earth the torch divine; 
Be what thou prayest to be made, 

Let the great Masters steps be thine. 

Fill up each hour with what will last; 

Buy up the moments as they go; 
The life above, when this is past, 

Is the ripe food of life below. 

Sow truth, if thou the truth wouldst reap; 

Sow peace, and reap its harvest bright; 
Erect and sound thy conscience keep; 

From hollow words and deeds refrain. 



Sow love, and taste its fruitage pure; 

Sow peace, and reap its harvests bright; 
Sow sunbeams on the rock and moor, 

And reap a harvest home of light. 
-Horatius Bonar. 



R537 : page 3 
OUR SECT. 

Webster defines sect to mean "A 
part cut off," "Hence a body of persons 
who have separated from others 
by virtue of some special doctrine, or 
set of doctrines, which they hold in 
common." 

Since we hold to a set of doctrines 
delivered to the saints by Jesus and the 
Apostles, and since we separate and 
cut ourselves off from all other religious 
jurisdiction and control, therefore 
it follows that we are a SECT. We 
"separate from sinners" and "have no 

R538 : page 3 

fellowship with the unfruitful works of 
darkness." fEph. 5: IT; v 2 Cor. 6:\T). 
Because there is no concord between 
Christ and Satan, nor between a believer 
in Christ and an unbeliever in 
his ransom and Lordship, therefore we 
obey the Lords command, "Come out 
from among them and be ye separate, 
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean, 
and I will receive you, and will 
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be 
my sons and daughters, saith the Lord 
Almighty." f2 Cor. 6:17,18*). 

In doctrine we hold firmly to the 
glad tidings preached by Jesus and explained 
by the Apostles, and will receive 
none other, even though it should 
be delivered by an angel from heaven. 



It is briefly stated by Paul thus: "I 
delivered unto you first of all, that 
which I also received [first of all], how 
that Christ died for OUR SINS according 
to the Scriptures." fl Cor. 15:3"). 
This is the basis; and built upon it, is 
our realization that we are justified and 
cleansed from all sin in Gods sight, by 
his offering or sin- sacrifice who "died 
the just for the unjust." Realizing this, 
"we have redemption through his blood, 
the forgiveness of sins." fEph. 1:T). 
All who accept of their share in this 
atoning sacrifice are properly termed 
Christians. 

This was the faith of the early 
church. True, they progressed beyond 
these first principles to the use of the 
"strong meat," and to a comprehension, 
with all saints, of the deep things of 
God; but the "babes in Christ," and 
those "who, by reason of use, had 
their senses exercised," were all one 
family-"all one in Christ Jesus." The 
more advanced in grace and doctrine 
bore the infirmities of the weak, each 
and all seeking to grow in grace and 
knowledge more and more. Where 
this apostolic rule was observed there 
could be no sect, no division in the 
body. It was only when error began 
to develop in the congregations that 
Paul wrote to some: I hear that there 
are divisions (sects) among you, and I 
partly believe it; for it is evident from 
what I learn of the worldliness and 
error coming in among you, that there 
would of necessity be divisions; for 
those true to the Lord could not have 
fellowship with such unfruitful works 
of darkness, but must rather reprove 
them, fl Cor. 11:18,19"). 

But while divisions were objected to 
in the true church, while all the apostles 
taught that there was one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism and one body-- 



church of Christ-yet this church was 
a sect itself-a split off from the Jewish 
church- which was cast off and left 
desolate, and it was also separated 
from the world. It was "the sect 
everywhere spoken against." fActs 28:22 v ). 
Thus, we see, that Christians are 
a sect or separated class- separate from 
the world- separate from sinners- separate 
from all others, in that they accept 
of Jesus, and salvation through his 
blood. But there should be no schism 
or division of this sect; all who are of 
it should be one. There is one fold 
and one Shepherd, fl Cor. 12:25^). 

It is not remarkable that Satan 
should seek to divide and separate the 
sheep and to put up fences, such as the 
denominational creeds prove to be, 
which would hinder some of the sheep 
from following the Shepherd into green 
pastures of fresh and living truth. This 
would be but wisdom on his part. But 
it is strange that he should be able to 
fetter the reason of so many, that they 
should think it a mark of spirituality 
to say, I am of Luther, a Lutheran; I 
of Calvin and Knox, a Presbyterian; I 
of Wesley, a Methodist, and so on; 
while Paul, on the contrary, to some of 
his day, who were in danger of this 
spirit of sectarianism, said: While one 
saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, 
and I of Peter, are ye not carnal? Is it 
not in direct opposition to the spirit of 
Christ to think or act thus? "Is Christ 
divided?" Did Paul or Peter or Knox 
or Calvin or Wesley or anyone else 
than Christ die for your sins and redeem 
you? They, as servants of Christ 
and the church, should be esteemed 
very highly for their works sake, but 
to name the Bride after any other than 
the Bridegroom is manifestly improper. 

Oh, that all could see that in Gods 
sight there is but one church-whose 



names are written in heaven-and that 
God cannot and does not sympathize 
with or recognize any split in the real 
church. He does not recognize the 
narrow creeds in which so many of the 
sheep are confined and starving. As 
we have shown, he has placed but one 
fence around his fold. Inside of it there 
is plenty of room, both for the lambs 
and the fully matured sheep of Christ, 
to feed and grow continually. 

A PARABLE. 

Fix in your mind a picture of a fine 
large pasture surrounded by a strong 
and high fence- -the Law of God- 
which surrounds and keeps all the 
sheep within, but which recognizes no 
means of access to that fold-justified 
condition-except Christ, the door, 
faith in whose sacrifice for sin is the 
only way into the fold. All climbing 
into the fold by any other way are 
thieves and robbers. This is the pasture 
provided by the Good Shepherd 
for his sheep, for whom he once laid 
down his life. Into the true fold of 
Christ quite a flock of sheep have entered. 
They belong to the true Shepherd; 
but as we look before us at the 
grassy slopes, only a few sheep, a little 
flock indeed, seem to be enjoying the 
liberty of the fold-the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. 
Where are the others? We look and 
see inside the door, on either side of 
the pathway, small enclosures. Over 
each is written its peculiar name-Presbyterian, 
Methodist, Baptist, Second 
Adventist, Roman Catholic, Greek 
Catholic, Episcopalian, Lutheran, etc. 
Looking at these pens we find them to 
differ. Some are built like prisons with 
iron frames and bars and chains, others 
less strong, and some are merely marked 



out "dead lines" over which the 

sheep understand that they must not go. 

These pens are full of sheep, but they 
are weak, delicate and sickly for lack of 
proper exercise and fresh, nourishing 
food. They are regularly fed, but only 
upon husks, with occasionally a little 
milk, but they eat without relish and 
get no good from it. Many of them 
are leaner and poorer than when first 
they entered the fold, and some have 
become blind. Strange to say all 
seem to be perfectly satisfied, each with 
his own pen, and very seldom does one 
attempt to escape. 

Perplexed to know why these should 
thus submit to be penned, we watched 
to see how they were induced to enter 
the various enclosures. As the sheep 
entered by faith the fold of Christ 
through the only door, under-shepherds 
who had been appointed to help the 
sheep to find and appreciate the pastures 
of the entire fold, had conceived 
that they knew better than the Chief 
Shepherd how to manage the flock, and 
accordingly they had constructed these 
various pens. Each class stood at the 
door of his own, and as the new sheep 
came in, they tried to impress upon 
each, both by manner and voice, first of 
all the necessity of getting into some of 
the many pens; and secondly, each one 
tried to show the superiority of the one 
he represented. As a consequence, 
nearly all the sheep which entered got 
penned, and only a few passed on to 
enjoy all the liberty of the fold. The 
under-shepherds sought continually to 
impress upon their sheep that the free 
sheep were heretics and en route to 
destruction. 

We watched to see what would be 
the end of this matter, for we learned 
that the Chief Shepherd was expected 
by some, and we knew that his coming 



would soon demonstrate whether he 
approved of this dividing and imprisoning 
His flock. The under- shepherds 
mostly claimed that he would not come 
for a long time yet. 

Presently among the free sheep we 
heard great rejoicing. We looked and 
found that the Chief- shepherd had come 
quietly, unobservedly ("as a thief"), and 
was now recognized by some of the 
sheep, and hence the rejoicing. Some 
of those imprisoned heard the Shepherds 
voice; they looked and listened, 
yet could scarce believe. It was indeed, 
the voice of the shepherd as he 
tended and ordered his flock. All who 
were his true sheep seemed to hear his 
voice condemning the penning process 
and saying unto his sheep: "Come out, 
my people." 

Some leaped the fences and gained 
liberty and food from the Shepherds 
hand. But some were so weak and 
faint for lack of nourishment that they 
trembled with fear and dreaded the 
under- shepherds too much to come out. 
We noticed outside the fences that some 
of the free sheep brought food to the 
bars, and thus some of the weak ones 
were strengthened and then came out. 
The under-shepherds, meanwhile, were 
alert with redoubled vigilance, and by 
varying policies sought to keep the 
control of their (?) flocks. Some denounced 
and scoffed at those without, 
and threatened the sheep within; and 
others redoubled the customary exercises, 
the "forms of godliness." 

We waited to see the outcome, and saw 
the unfaithful under-shepherds bound 
and beaten with stripes, the prison pens 
all destroyed, and the fold used as designed 
-the flock one, its name one, and 
its head Christ Jesus. 



R538 : page 3 

"LEARN WHAT THIS MEANETH." 

"Go ye and learn what this meaneth, I desire 
mercy and not sacrifice. "— v Matt. 9:13 V -R.V. 

This injunction is just as pertinent 
now as it was when Jesus gave it, yet 
we cannot but think, according to our 
experience and observation, that if he 
were to make the same remark now to 
those who, "after the most straitest 
sect" of their religion, live Pharisees, it 
would be met by some such words as 
the following: "Why, Lord, do you 
ask us to learn the meaning of those 
old sayings of the prophets? They 
are expressed in language that is highly 
figurative and are so full of symbols 

R539 : page 3 

and metaphors that it is impossible for 
us to understand them; indeed we think 
we ought not to pry into such things." 

But this was an important lesson, 
and Jesus wished to call their attention 
to it. His friendship with publicans 
and sinners seemed to them to be out 
of order and so they were questioning 
the disciples, doubtfully, regarding it, 
and this called forth the statement of 
Jesus quoted above. 

It is doubtful if they ever learned 
that Gods work in Christ was not to 
sacrifice the world, but to save it, for, 
says Jesus, "The Son of man is not 
come to destroy mens lives but to save 
them." fLuke 9:56 v ). When Christ 
Jesus speaks we may see at the time 
but one phase of what is meant, while 
he causes the word spoken to span the 
everlasting relations of the subject. 

When Jesus, in v Matt. 12:7\ referred 



to these same words of the prophet 
Ho sea 6:6 V ), he did so in connection 
with the question of the observance of 
the Sabbath, saying, "If ye had known 
what this meaneth, I desire mercy and 
not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned 
the guiltless." This was equivalent 
to saying that they did not know 
its meaning. Then, rather peculiarly 
comes in the words, "For the Son of 
man is Lord of the Sabbath." 

In both these cases it was the lovingkindness 
of Jesus that disturbed their 
Pharisaical natures and called forth their 
opposition. It is the mercy of God in 
Christ toward the world that distressed 
the Pharisees of Jesus time, and distresses 
the same generation now; for 
"this generation" of vipers (this kind 
or class) has not yet passed away and 
will not have passed away until all the 
prophecy of the twenty-fourth chapter 
of Matthew is fulfilled. CMatt. 24:34 v ). 

Those who are not in spirit with 
Christ Jesus have ever been opposed to 
having mercy shown to the world in a 
limited way and time, professing to believe 
that Christ came to save the 
world, but yet that only a small proportion 
of them will be saved in any sense; 
that Jesus came to save men from the 
calamity which befel the race in Adam, 
but will only half, or not half, succeed. 

They think that when men die in 
Adam they pass a line beyond which 
mercy and the power of Christ to save, 
cannot go, thus limiting the wisdom 
and the power of God, "who will have 
all men to be saved and come to the 
KNOWLEDGE of the truth." fl Tim. 2:4 V ). 

It is "a thing incredible" with them 
that God should raise the dead, though 
they profess to believe in a "resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and 
unjust," but still if one talks about the 
real resurrection of all men to actual 



life and hope again, "this generation," 
like their fathers who so beset Jesus, 
cry out in disgust, and act as though 
they thought of us as they did of Paul 
when he spoke of being sent "far 
hence unto the Gentiles," "away with 
such a fellow from the earth, for it is not 
fit that he should live." fActs 22:22\) 

How strange it seems to us, that the 
love of God so strikingly manifest in the 
gift of his Son, should be so buried up 
under papal rubbish as to make it seem 
to have no existence. 

That the restitution of all things, 
spoken of by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets," should be entirely dropped 
out of the teaching of the nominal 
church, and the destruction of most 
things substituted, shows the need of 
their "learning what this meaneth, I 
desire mercy and not sacrifice: for the 
Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath." 
But it also shows, as Jesus said, that 
these things are hid from the wise and 
prudent and revealed unto babes. In 
the Sabbath just now approaching, that 
mercy will shine forth in "the exceeding 
riches of his grace." But many do not 
wish to "learn what this meaneth." 
How full of meaning were Jesus 
words! J. C. S. 



R539 : page 3 

OLD LANDMARKS. 

Some whose attention is drawn to the 
clearer light now shining on the word 
of God, fear as they say, to leave old 
landmarks. This is a false veneration, 
bred of fear, and it requires only a moments 
reflection to show this. 

We asked such an objector, recently, 
how much he meant by old. Did he 



mean creeds formulated fifty years ago? 
Would he go further back to the Wesleyan 
movement? Even that is but recent. 
Perhaps he had better go further 
back to the "Presbyterian" movement, 
or to the "Lutheran" or "Episcopalian," 
to find old landmarks. Still there is the 
same difficulty. All of these are but 
comparatively recent landmarks, and if 
a really old creed is wanted, the Roman 
Catholic certainly should have the preference 
on the score of age. 
He saw, finally, his mistake and acknowledged 

R539 : page 4 

that he had been looking 
at matters from a false standpoint, and 
that the only OLD LANDMARKS worthy 
of confidence, are the inspired teachings 
of our Lord and the Apostles-the 
very ones to which we always appeal as 
the only True Standards of the Church 
whose names are written in heaven. 

In this connection we take occasion 
to make some extracts from a recent 
number of "The Scotsman" (published 
in Edinburgh, Scotland,) in which it reviews 
a lecture by Dr. A. F. Mitchell, 
Prof, of Ecclesiastical History. It serves 
well to show how the thinkers of even 
old, slow Scotland are awakening to the 
absurdity of some of the doctrines which 
have separated the children of God into 
sects and denominations, and have 
largely succeeded in substituting the 
creeds and traditions of men for the 
Word of God. The extracts are as 
follows: 

"THE WESTMINSTER ASSEMBLY; ITS 
HISTORY AND STANDARDS: BEING 
THE BAIRD LECTURES FOR 1882. 

Readers will find in Dr. Mitchells 
lectures an intelligent and exceedingly 



well informed account of the origin, purpose, 
history and results of the famous 
Westminster Assembly, by one who has 
made a special study of the subject. 

The intrinsic importance of the Westminster 
Confession, and its position as 
a test for our University Theological 
Chairs, cause us just now to turn with 
more interest and curiosity to its origin 
and authorship. In June, 1643, an ordinance 
was issued by Parliament calling 
that Assembly which met to settle a pure 
faith for England and framed those 
Standards which were adopted in Scotland. 
The principle on which representative 
divines were chosen was, that two 
should be elected from each English 
county, each University, and the Channel 
Islands, one for each county in 
Wales, and four for the city of London; 
while Scottish Commissioners were only 
invited to be present. In all, about 160 
divines and laymen were appointed, 
each member who attended receiving 
four shillings a day for expenses. Although 
in the list of those called we find 
a few names of reputation for learning 
and ability, it is impossible to say that 
they represented the best scholarship 
and most cultured views of the age. 
We miss in the roll several men, famous 
still for ripe learning, high theological 
attainments and grasp of intellect, who 
would have been fittest to join in this 
memorable Synod, though they would 
have opposed many of its decisions; 
while in the number are a host of estimable 
but utterly obscure men, whose 
support gives no weight and adds no 
value to one dogmatic conclusion of the 
meeting. 

It is evident that the orthodox see 
nothing absurd, nothing humorous in 
the opinions of these men being binding 
on after generations of clergy and all 
future theological Professors in our universities, 



centuries after these respectable 
gentlemen themselves, having quitted 
their fleshy tabernacles, have peradventure 
discovered, to their surprise, in 
another and better world, that they have 
been quite mistaken, and the General 
Assembly of the firstborn does not hold 
or enforce any Calvinistic creeds on its 
elect members. Even when they were 
deliberating on most weighty articles, 
the attendance was so small that the 
three committees were reduced to a 
quorum of six each; and we find in full 
Assembly only forty out of a hundred 
and fifty voting on a dogma, which has 
henceforth been imposed on the minds 
and consciences of millions of Presbyterians. 
Yet these worthy members confidently 
discover the hidden decrees of 
God and decide the fate of men, of angels, 
of devils and of infants: they interpret 
the most debatable parts of Scripture, 
and the most perplexing parts of 
Pauline dialects and simile; they formulate 
the most mysterious purposes of 
Providence. 

It is marvelous to think that these 
decisions by men whose opinions on the 
simplest points of politics, agriculture 
and physics, we would not listen to, 
should be binding on the nineteenth century, 
though the whole tide of thought 
has left them dry behind. Criticism has 
shown that it supports conclusions on 
corrupt texts, and on misinterpreted 
passages. Science has proved that it 
makes assertions which are profoundly 
erroneous. Advancing civilizations and 
higher cultivation have shown that its 
views of the purpose of God can be contrary 
to the true humanity on which we 
base our elementary ideas of the nature 
of the Deity. If the Assembly, whose 
views were discarded by the English 
Church a few years after, had been held 
a hundred years earlier, it would have 



been Roman Catholic; if it had been 
held fifty years later it would have been 
Arminian; what, then, gives perpetual 
authority in Scotland to this Calvinistic 
parenthesis in ecclesiastical history and 
doctrine? It is difficult to see why the 
theological views of the seventeenth 
century should be taught in our university 
chairs any more than the scientific 
opinions of that age. 

Suppose it had been laid down that 
every Professor of Medicine and Surgery 

R540 : page 4 

in future should conform to the 

standard of an association of doctors of 

1643, we should find them now teaching 

the most ghastly methods of therapeutics, 

insisting on drugs which ruin 

the carnal constitution, and practicing 

phlebotomy, which drains the human 

being of his blood, increasing insanity 

by the means taken to cure it, and denouncing 

the circulation of the blood as 

a flagrant heresy. If, in our Chairs of 

science, the opinions of the Royal Society, 

founded in 1660, were still binding 

we should find in natural philosophy, in 

geology, in chemistry, opinions taught, 

as in Roman Catholic institutions, as 

purest science and undoubted facts, 

which research has exploded and sent 

long ago into the limbo of extinct notions 

and curiosities of by-gone credulity 

and ignorance. Why, then, 

should the notions, on far more difficult, 

obsolete points, by this Assembly, 

be held as sacred and imperative, and 

entitled to hold the minds of posterity 

under the fatal law of intellectual 

mortmain? 

Still, must each Professor teach, under 
the yoke of their "dead hand," the inspiriting 
doctrine of total depravity, 
which holds that man is so corrupt that 



he can do no good thing, and yet that 
he will be damned if he does not do it; 
that he deserves eternal torments for 
sin; that millions are doomed for not 
accepting a gospel which they never 
heard; that it is the duty of the civil 
power to punish and extirpate heresy; 
that the world was made in six days, 
although the geological Professor in 
the same college will tell his students 
that the world was millions of years 
without a human being. That it is the 
"elect infants" only who are saved; 
that "God as a righteous judge doth 
blind and harden" the wicked. Such 
doctrines are denied by the vast majority 
of civilized people, and discarded 
by the highest, clearest minds and 
hearts in Christendom; yet still Professors 
of Theology are bound by these 
standards, are forced to shut their eyes 
and mouths to all that speculation, 
learning, science have taught for centuries, 
and are endowed by the State to 
teach the opinions of a few estimable 
but erroneous gentlemen, who, after 
much prayer and contention, agreed 
upon them more than two hundred 
years ago. 

Dr. Mitchell, whose views are interesting 
only as specimens of other admirers 
of the Confession of Faith, is 
not unconscious of some difficulties in 
maintaining some dogmas which are 
contrary to fact, science and humanity; 
and he has his "answers to objections," 
which he gives with an air of profound 
satisfaction and with complete unsuccess. 
The Confession says the creation 
of the world took place in six days, 
"which now almost all orthodox divines 
grant it did not." We therefore 
naturally conclude that these "orthodox 
divines," as regards the Confession, are 
heretics. Not at all, says Dr. Mitchell, 
who is in the same case; these words, 



he argues, are almost identical with 
those in Scripture, and therefore must 
be interpreted in the same non-literal, 
non-natural sense, as divines conveniently, 
but uncritically, put on those in 
Genesis. Now, can the lecturer deny 
that the Westminster Assembly meant 
them as six literal twenty-four hour 
days? Can the lecturer deny that 
these words are given as the statement 
of an historical fact, and are not a quotation 
which may be accepted as metaphorical 
or poetic, if we please? It is 
nothing to the point to show that some 
writers-Dean Colet or Philo-had 
previously regarded the "days" in a 
figurative sense; and it is ridiculous to 
say that the Assembly showed their intention 
not to exclude such a fanciful 
interpretation because they did not 
write "six natural or literal days." 

If we are allowed to treat the standards 
when we choose as metaphorical, on the 
ground that the Scripture passages 
they paraphrase are figurative, we shall 
be led into a delightful chaos, and have 
a most comprehensive Church. The 
phrase, "Son of God" is figurative; 
"redemption" is a Pauline metaphor 
from Greek law; "adoption" a metaphor 
from Roman law; "everlasting" and 
"eternal" punishment have been interpreted 
in various ways in Scripture; 
may we, therefore, explain them for 
ourselves with corresponding variety in 
the Confession? and if not, on Dr. 
Mitchells theory, why not? What is 
allowed to the Calvinist may be allowed 
to the Universalist and the Unitarian. 

But, in fact, the whole notion is 
absurd. The Standard is a formal, 
prosaic, legal document, to be interpreted 
by what it says. The lecturer, 
further, in argumentive despair maintains 
that when it is said, "elect infants 
dying in infancy are saved," it is not to 



be inferred from these words that there 

are any who are not elect! If so, we 

would have fancied these divines, so 

shrewd as not to say "literal days," 

would have been equally shrewd to 

omit "elect," in order to prevent a misconception, 

seeing that the opinion was 

so prevalent that there were infants 

non-elect, and therefore lost. Besides, 

this notion that all dying infants were 

humanely elected to life because they 

should die before they have power and 

time to sin, is contradictory of the article 

in the Confession, which says that 

when God elects to salvation it is without 

any foresight of good works,... 

or any other thing in the creature, 

as conditions or causes moving 

him thereto." We greatly fear that Dr. 

Mitchell should be looked after. If he 

had lived in the Puritan age, he would 

have been violently denounced as a 

heretic, denied Church privileges by 

the ministers he reveres so deeply, or 

put in jail by the civil magistrate whose 

authority he respects so highly, and reduced 

to be an "ambassador in bonds." 

How is it that with so many disputable 
and denied doctrines in a Standard 
containing about 16,000 propositions, 
that in successive generations ministers 
accept and sign it without any hesitation, 
though ordinary men cannot 
agree together on twelve questions? 
It is a curious problem which we can 
only explain by supposing that perfect 
belief is required only when we swear 
to one or two articles, but that a reduction 
is allowed, as by grocers, on taking 
a quantity. Dr. Mitchell has issued a 
useful work, proving the urgent necessity 
for the abolition of tests in our 
Universities if we desire to see freedom 
of thought, honesty of assertion, and 
progress of religious opinion and theological 
knowledge. 



R541 : page 4 
RESTITUTION. 

The restoration of the world to their 
"former estate" (life on earth) is a doctrine 
held by few Christians to-day 
through lack of seeing the glorious 
"plan" of salvation" God has revealed 
to us in his word. When once you 
get hold of restitution as a starting-point, 
you will soon find that God has a "plan", 
and diligent study of Scripture will open 
your eyes to see Gods love and wisdom, 
if you will only believe what God says, 
and not "human traditions." "Seek, and 
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you." 

We read in "Acts 3:21" of the times 
(years) of restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began. 
And in "Rom. 8:21", "The creature itself 
shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of 
the children of God." Yes; the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for 
all ("1 Tim. 2:6"). By the righteousness 
of one the free gift came upon all men 
unto justification of life" ("Rom. 5:18"). 
"For as in Adam all die, even so in 
Christ shall all be made alive" 
fl Cor. 15:22\) 

All praise be to God, Christ has 
bought the "world," and in due time 
will deliver them all from the prison-house 
of death, for he says, I have the 
keys of hades and of death ("Rev. 1:18".) 
But every man in his own 
order: Christ (the first-born from the 
dead,) the Head, then his body-the 
Church-after the Church has been 
glorified— the "world"— to their "former 



estate." For the earnest expectation of 
the creature waiteth for the manifestation 
of the sons of God fRom. 8:19^). 
Waiting and groaning (though ignorantly) 
for the Son of Righteousness to 
arise with healing in his wings. Then the 
promise to Abraham will be fulfilled: 
"In thee and in thy seed (The Christ) 
shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." fGen. 28: 14\) 

Let us look at what the Prophets say 
about this glorious day (one thousand 
years.) Please read carefully the 
following: "Ps. 96:10-13"; "Isa. 11:1-10"; 
"61:4-11"; "65:17-25"; "Jer. 31:31-40"; 
"Ezek. 16:48 to end"; "28:25 and 26"; 
"34:24-31"; "Hos. 2:14-23"; 
"Rev. 21:3-5". After the world has 
been restored to their "former estate" 
under the righteous reign of "The 
Christ," it will be their "Judgment Day" 
(before the great "White Throne" of 
Truth), on trial for Eternal Life, having 
had a complete experience of good and 
evil in this present age, and then having 
full knowledge and power to obey. 
If they then willfully sin, they will die 
the second death-die for their own sin. 
CJer. 31:30"; "Acts 3:23"; "Rev. 21:8\) 

Truly we who see Gods plan can 
sing, Great and marvelous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and 
true are thy ways, thou King of nations. 
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and 
glorify thy name? for thou only art 
holy: For all nations shall come and 
worship before thee—for thy judgments 
are made manifest. Amen. Thy Kingdom 
come. ("Rev. 15:3 and 4\) 
R. COSSAR. 



R540 : page 4 

HIS WILL, OUR MEAT AND DRINK. 



The language of very many grateful 
hearts, who have realized their sins forgiven 
through the precious blood of 
Christ, has been, Lord, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest. But very 
few, perhaps none at first, actually realized 
the full meaning of that covenant 
or promise; nevertheless the Master declares, 
"Him that cometh unto me I 
will in no wise cast out." fJohn 6:3T). 
But he would have us understand that 
it is no easy thing to follow him, for his 
was a thorny, difficult way, promising 
no gratification to the natural man. 

When on one occasion one came to 
Jesus, saying, "Lord, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest," he replied: 
"Foxes have holes, and birds of the air 
have nests, but the Son of man hath 
not where to lay his head." fLuke 9:57,58\) 
That is to say, Are you willing, if 
need be, to be thus homeless and comfortless 
that thereby you may render 
greater service to our heavenly Father. 
It is my meat and drink to do his will. 
Shall it be yours also? It might be 
and sometimes is the case, that some 
can serve the Lord better by having a 
home and using its hospitality in the 
service. When, as was generally the 
case, the work in which Jesus was engaged 
called him about from place to 
place to preach in public, heal the sick, 
etc., he went, regardless of personal 
comfort. When near the homes of his 
disciples he often tarried with them; 
thus the home of Martha and Mary and 
Lazarus was often blessed with his 
presence; but most frequently after the 
toil of the day he sought repose for the 
night in the wilderness or on the mountains. 
Sometimes, however, when the 
interests of the work required it, he 
chose a regular dwelling place, for we 
read fJohn 1:38,39") that on one occasion 



two men were following Jesus, and 

R540 : page 5 

he, turning and seeing them follow him, 
said to them, "What seek ye?" And 
they said unto him, Master, "Where 
dwellest thou?" They wanted to have 
a personal interview with him, and 
therefore sought the retirement of his 
dwelling. Jesus said unto them, "Come 
and see. They went and saw where he 
dwelt and abode with him that day." 

We find the same principle governing 
the actions of the Apostles. As 
the work generally required them to be 
traveling, they not only gave up the 
comforts, but bravely endured the hardships, 
dangers and fierce persecutions 
that everywhere awaited them. At 
times now it might be expedient for the 
truths sake that the disciple have a 
home, as Paul found it expedient for 
the work, to abide in his own hired 
house for two years, where he received 
all that came unto him, preaching the 
kingdom of God, etc. Acts 28:3(T). 
It should likewise, be our meat and 
drink to do our Fathers will, as the 
necessities of the work may require it, 
homeless and friendless, to follow Jesus; 
or, if expedient to have a dwelling 
place, to use it in his service, having it 
entirely consecrated to his work. 

Another desiring to follow Jesus, even 
though, as he had just explained, it 
would be at the expense of great self-denial, 
said, "But suffer me first to go 
and bury my father." And "Jesus said 
unto him, Let the dead bury their dead, 
but go thou and preach the kingdom 
of God." Doubtless this young disciple 
dreaded to realize what was so generally 
the result with those who left all 
to follow Jesus, that their foes were they 
of their own household. He dreaded 



to incur his fathers displeasure and 

R541 : page 5 

thought to wait till his father was dead. 
Possibly his otherwise praiseworthy 
ambition was to add to the comfort and 
perhaps to the support and luxury of 
his declining years. 

Such an ambition would seem plausible 
and has proved a snare to many. 
They have permitted earthly ties to 
fetter and hinder them, saying, my 
family or my parents-those dear to me 
by human ties-shall have all the comfort, 
ease and luxury that my time and 
labor can supply. This has been my 
ambition in the past, and should I now 
withhold any part of that which they 
have come to expect at my hand, in 
order that I might follow the Master, 
my motive, my love would be 
misinterpreted. 

Under this pressure, many come to 
the conclusion that they will wait until 
these hindrances are removed, until 
such no longer need their care; but this 
is only a device of the adversary, who 
well knows that procrastination is not 
only the thief of time, but also of interest 
and inclination to heavenly 
things. Now, while our Lord would 
not have us ignore our natural responsibilities, 
and teaches that he who does 
not provide for those naturally dependent 
upon him is worse than an infidel, 
an unbeliever, he does teach that our 
consecration should be to God, and 
whatever of human responsibility devolves 
upon us should be discharged 
as unto him. 

Thus, in all we do, whether it be in 
"providing things honest in the sight 
of all men" for those of necessity depending 
upon us, and thus honoring 
our Master, and improving every available 



opportunity which, by economy of 

time and means, may be gained for 

spreading the good news-the Gospel 

of the Kingdom; or whether it be possible, 

by self-denial, to gain all our time, 

and utilize all our efforts in directly 

and widely proclaiming the Gospel, if 

we would follow our Lord it will be our 

meat and drink to do our Fathers will. 

"Let the dead bury their dead." All 

the world is reckoned of God as dead, 

being still under condemnation. Let 

them attend to their own affairs, work 

out their own ideas and think what 

they will of our peculiar ways. We 

must expect to be misunderstood, misrepresented, 

and to bear the reproach 

of Christ. But dont let that hinder 

us; it is our business to preach the 

gospel by every talent and opportunity 

we can command. 

"Another also said, Lord, I will 
follow thee, but let me first go and bid 
them farewell which are at home at my 
house. But Jesus said, No man having 
put his hand to the plough and 
looking back is fit for the kingdom of 
God." This one, though also desiring 
to follow Jesus, cast a lingering look 
behind to the things and friends once 
dearest. He thought he was willing to 
sacrifice earthly comforts and endure 
hardness as a good soldier; he did not 
desire to procrastinate and not begin to 
follow Jesus until his Father was dead, 
or the prejudices of his earthly friends 
were overcome. No; he only wanted 
to bid them farewell, to confer with 
them, and to gain their approval of his 
course. To follow Jesus was not yet 
the chief and all-absorbing thought. 

Jesus does not say it will be impossible 
for such a one to reach the kingdom, 
but that in that condition of mind 
he is unfit. And the strong probabilities 
are, that unless such a one takes a 



prompt, firm and decided stand, turning 
his back entirely to present allurements, 
and setting his face resolutely 
towards the prize of the high calling, he 
will soon become permanently unfit for 
the kingdom. 

May those who have consecrated all, 
and thus put their hand to the plough, 
be enabled to keep their eye on the 
heavenly prize, that its glory may keep 
them from looking back, and that the 
fascination of former human ties may 
not hold them in bondage. Like our 
Lord, may it be our meat and drink to 
do Jehovahs will. MRS. C. T. R. 



R541 : page 5 

"SALVATION UNTO THE END OF THE 
EARTH." 

Before leaving his disciples our Lord 
said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but you cannot bear them 
now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of 
truth, is come, he will guide you into 
all truth". ..and will show you 
things to come;. ..he shall receive 
of mine, and shall show it unto 
you." CJohn 16:12-14\) 

After his death and resurrection, when 
the waiting Church were baptized with 
the Spirit, at once the things which the 
prophets had written and which they 
had hitherto been unable to understand, 
began to be made plain to them. 

Peter did the opening work and 
called attention to the glad tidings as 
shown by the Prophets. He first 
quoted the prophecy of Joel fchap. 2:28,29 v ) 
concerning the promise of the 
outpouring of the Spirit upon Gods 
servants and handmaids and upon all 
flesh. His next reference was to 



Davids prophecy of our Lords exaltation. 
And the Spirit calling to mind 
the glowing language of the various 
Prophets, he boldly proclaimed the 
restitution of all things, declaring that 
it was "spoken by all the holy prophets 
since the world began" fActs 3:2T). 

This was the work of the Spirit as 
the comforter, bringing to their remembrance 
the statements of the prophets, 
and revealing the significance of those 
statements, thus instructing and comforting 
them by showing them things 
to come. We would naturally expect 
that joy would fill all hearts at the 
sound of such blessed tidings; but it 
was not so. The religious teachers of that 
day were grieved at this teaching and 
sought to silence them, but Peter and 
John, being filled with the Spirit, replied: 
"Whether it be right in the sight 
of God to hearken unto you more than 
unto God, judge ye: for we cannot but 
speak the things which we have seen 
and heard"-what we know of Gods 
plan. 

We find exactly the same condition 
of things to-day. While those who are 
filled with the Spirit rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory, the lukewarm 
professors turn a deaf ear to the 
truth and are grieved that the people 
are being taught these things. 

Since Peter has called our attention 
to all the prophets as heralds of the 
good news, we have been noticing particularly 
some of those uttered by 
Isaiah. Some will reluctantly admit 
that some time in the distant future 
there will be a restoration of Israel to 
their own land-that is, of all those living 
in that day; but for what purpose 
or advantage, either to themselves or 

R542 : page 5 



others, they seem to have no idea. But 

Isaiah makes it very plain that the 

great restitution refers to nothing so insignificant. 

In the v following texf Jehovah 

is addressing our Lord Jesus, 

saying, that to raise up or restore Israel 

is "a light thing," only a small part of 

the work. The restitution spoken by 

the mouth of all the prophets since the 

world began, means "salvation unto the 

end of the earth." "And now, said Jehovah, 

it hath been a light thing that 

thou art to me for a servant, to raise up 

the tribes of Jacob, and the preserved of 

Israel to bring back; and I have given 

thee for a light of nations, to be my salvation 

unto the end of the earth" flsa. 49:6'-- 

Young). 

This implies a resurrection-restitution 
-of all the living and dead ones as 
Peter preached. In the light of this 
declaration from the mouth of Jehovah 
himself-that Christ shall be for salvation 
to the end of the earth- we read in 
v Isa. 35" the glowing description of that 
time, now near at hand, when "The 
wilderness and the solitary place shall 
be glad for them." "They (earths redeemed 
millions) shall see the glory of 
the Lord and the excellency of our 
God," then made so manifest to all. 
In "chap. 26, verse 19\ God emphatically 
declares: "Thy dead men shall 
live... Awake and sing ye that 
dwell in dust.. .and the earth 
shall cast out the dead." And Jeremiah 
adds his testimony, saying: "They shall 
come again from the land of the enemy" 
-death fJer. 31:16"). Such tidings 
seem almost too good to believe, but 
the Lord reminds us that it is He who 
has declared this, saying: "For my 
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. 
For as the heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are my ways higher than your 



ways, and my thoughts [plans] than 
your thoughts [plans].... For ye 
shall go out [of the prison of death] 
with joy, and be led forth with 
peace: the mountains and the hills 
shall break forth before you into singing, 
and all the trees of the field shall 
clap their hands" flsa. 55:8-12^). 

Those whose faith staggers not at the 
promises of God, are commissioned to 
encourage those of weaker faith flsa. 35:3,4"): 
"Strengthen ye the weak 
hands and confirm the feeble knees. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart, 
Be strong, fear not: behold your God 
will come with vengeance (to bind the 
adversary- Satan- and destroy his 
works-" Rev. 20:2"; "1 John 3:8"), even 
God with a recompence; he will come 
and save you." "Verse 5": "Then the eyes 
of the blind shall be opened, and the 
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped," 
for "The knowledge of the Lord shall 
fill the whole earth as the waters cover 
the sea" flsa. 1 1:9"), and all will be able 
to see and hear the truth. Streams of 
water (truth) shall break forth in 
the desert, "And the parched ground 
shall become a pool, and the thirsty 
land springs of water. In the habitation 
of dragons where each lay, shall be 
grass with reeds and rushes." When, 
under the reign of Christ, truth shall 
thus refresh the earth, error and vice 
(symbolized by dragons) shall give 
place to the rapid and healthy growth 
of virtue. 

"Verses 8 to 10" show the particularly 
favorable circumstances under which 
the world, during the next age, will be 
disciplined and restored. The way by 
which they will be led back to human 
perfection, is here called a high way, not 
a narrow way, such as that in which the 
consecrated of this age walk to gain the 
prize of the high calling to immortality, 



the Divine nature. We who are running 
for this prize find ourselves hedged 
about continually and sorely pressed by 
the adversary who, during the next age, 
will be bound. The easy and gradual 
ascent of the high way will be clear and 
plain to all, so that "the wayfaring 
man, though a fool, shall not err therein," 
for all the stones-stumbling blocks- 
shall be gathered out ("Isa. 62:10"). 
Present temptations to evil will be 
removed when Satan is bound and 
men will be saying, Come, let us 
go up to the mountain of the Lord, and 
he will teach us of his ways, and we 
will walk in his paths flsa. 2:3"). 

The work of restitution will be a 
gradual work, the awakening from 
death being only the beginning of it; 
it will require the whole thousand years 
to fully complete it. Those years are 
therefore called "the times (years) of 
restitution" ("Acts 3:21"). Only those 
who flee from the defilements of sin 
shall go on this high way of everlasting 
continuance of life. "Verse 9": 
"No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous 
beast shall go up thereon; it shall 
not be found there." All obstacles to 
growth and development of perfect 
manhood shall be removed, but the redeemed 
-all mankind ransomed from 
death by the precious blood of Christ- 
shall walk up to perfection if willing to 
forsake their sins. 

"Verse 10": "And the ransomed of 
the Lord shall return, and come to 
Zion with songs and everlasting joy 
upon their heads: they shall obtain joy 
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing 
shall flee away." When we realize that 
this salvation extends to all the families 
of the earth, we see the force of Jehovahs 
statement: "It hath been a light 
thing that thou art to me for a servant, 
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and the 



preserved of Israel to bring back." 

Not only shall that work be accomplished, 

but, in addition to that, Christ 

is also given for a light to all nations, 

and for "salvation to the end of the 

earth." R. W. 



R542 : page 5 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 

A correspondent writes: I understand 
you teach obedience to the commandments 
of God. Do you wish us to understand 
the Ten Commandments written 
on stone, delivered to Moses at Horeb? 

We reply, No; we are not under the 
law of commandments written on 
stone, in the sense of hoping to justify 
ourselves before God in keeping them. 
Israels experience when they were put 
under that Law is sufficient to prove to 
us, as Paul expresses, that, "By the 
deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in Gods sight." fRom. 3:20\) 
Hence we are very glad that we are 
"not under the Law, but under Grace" 
-favor. fRom. 6:14V11:6 V ; 'Gal. 5:4 V ; 
v Rom. 3:19-26\) We are glad that the 
Gentiles were never put under that Law 
as the Israelites were, for in mans present 
imperfect condition it must and does 
condemn every one under it and justifies 
none. We are glad for Israel too, 
that when Christ Jesus died and thus 
fulfilled the claims of the Law against 
all under it, that he thus became "the 
end of the Law for righteousness (or 
rightly terminated its dominion) to 
every one that believeth." fRom. 10:4\ 
and v Gal. 3:23,24\) 

But lest some should claim that these 
scriptures quoted, refer to what some 
designate the "ceremonial" law, we 



will give Scripture proof that it included 
the laws written on tables of stone-the 
Ten Commandments. These were 
given at Horeb or Mt. Sinai. (See 
v Exod. 19:20 and 34 v ) and are termed 
the "covenant" of the Law. (See v Deut. 5\) 
Paul tells us that that covenant 
justified only Jesus, who, by his sacrifice, 
justified believers, bringing them 
under a new covenant, not of law, but 
of favor, by his blood, and, being thus 
justified, enables us [the Gospel Church] 
to inherit the first covenant-the one 
made to Abrahams seed- which Paul 
declares the Law (covenant), made four 
hundred and thirty years after (at 
Sinai), did not disannul, but merely 
hindered until removed and fulfilled by 
Jesus. (See v Gal. 3:17- 19\) 

"Romans 1:T proves that the Ten 
Commandments were part of the Law, 
which Paul in the v preceding verse" and 
the entire chapter shows that we are 
delivered from. There can be no question 
that THE LAW which said, "Thou 
shalt not covet," is that contained in 
the Ten Commandments, and this is 
the very law which Christ made Paul 
free from-by fulfilling its claims for 
him. (See v Rom. 8:l-4\) 

"Do we then make the Law of God 
of none effect [useless] through [the 
doctrine of] faith, [which we are now 
preaching]? Nay, "we establish the 
Law." fRom. 3:31\) First, we are 
proving that Gods law is nothing short 

R542 : page 6 

of perfection, and that none but a perfect 

person could keep it, and that it 

was given to prove to Israel their imperfection, 

and thus as pedagogue to lead 

them to Christ, from whom to receive 

as a gift, by faith in his blood, that life 

and perfection which they found they 



could not claim or obtain under the 
LAW. OGal. 3:24-29\) 

Secondly, our Head Christ Jesus who 
made us free from that Law under 
which Israel was placed, gave us 
another instead, saying, "A new commandment 
I give unto you that ye 
LOVE one another." fJohn 13:34\) 
This law of LOVE under which we are 
placed, contains the spirit of the Law to 
Israel-the Ten Commandments, and 
even more. This, the Apostle James 
terms the "royal law." fChap. 2:8\) 
And the same apostle who wrote that 
we are "delivered from the Law," 
CRom. 1:6"), and called it "Moses 
Law," OHeb. 10:28"), and that "Christ 
is the end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth," fRom. 10:4"), 
and that now "we are not under 
the Law," fRom. 6:15"), said also that 
he was not without law to God, BUT 
UNDER THE LAW to Christ, fl Cor. 9:21") 
[i.e., our responsibility is transferred 
from the Father to our Lord 
Jesus who bought us, hence we are no 
longer under Jehovahs Law given at 
Sinai, but under a new law or arrangement 
-"under Law TO CHRIST." Yet, 
since Christ is Jehovahs agent in 
making the new arrangement, and since 
his law is in harmony with and built on 
our Fathers law, as a temporary help 
for us, until we are restored to perfection; 
therefore, we may say with Paul, 
that we are not without law to God, 
even though "the Father judgeth no 
man but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son."] 

R543 : page 6 

The Law under which we come 
through Christ differs from "Moses 
Law" in this-that the latter judges 
men by the deeds of the flesh, while the 



former (Christs Law) judges by the intents 
of the mind or will. Under 
Moses law, all men being imperfect 
through Adamic sin, none could DO 
perfectly, however much they might 
desire; hence, by deeds, no flesh was 
ever justified by that Law-all were 
condemned. fRom. 3 :20\) But now, 
under the new law of love, we walk by 
spirit or mind after this new law. We 
may not always succeed perfectly in 
doing all which we wish or will to do, 
but under this law the will is judged 
and not the deed. Hence all believers 
consecrated to God can fulfill this 
"Royal law," even though the new 
mind is in an imperfect "earthen 
vessel." 

And while thus excused from the letter 
of the law, all "believers "-united 
to and one with Jesus-have fulfilled it, 
i.e., so long as we in heart observe 
Jesus law, so long we may abide in 
him; and abiding in him, we have share 
in the actual fulfillment of the LETTER 
OF THE LAW as accomplished by him. 
Thus the righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the 
flesh, but after the spirit. 

It can readily be seen that two laws 
would be useless. And, since all in 
Christ are under the law of Love, they 
cannot also be under the Law of Moses. 
The law under which we are makes 
allowance for all the imperfections of 
each, whereas "Moses Law" required 
actual obedience and made no allowance; 
for it does not read, he that 
willeth and trieth to do, but "The man 
that doeth these things shall live," and 
"cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the 
book of the Law to DO them." 
CGal. 3:10,12\) 

Where LOVE is the law of the mind, it 
influences and, to a great extent, controls 



the imperfect and weak body. 
None thus actuated by love have any 
desire to violate the law of commandments. 
It is useless to say to such a 
one, "Thou shalt not steal"; "thou 
shalt not kill"; "thou shalt not bear 
false witness against thy neighbor." 
He has no desire to do those things, for 
love prompts to an opposite course. 
And if, through weakness of the flesh, 
such a one realizes that on some occasion 
he has failed to exemplify the law 
of love, no one is more grieved than 
himself. 

But some man will say: What is there 
in the "Ten Commandments" which any 
one cannot keep perfectly? That you so 
regard them proves that you, like the 
Pharisees, look not at the full measure or 
spirit of those commandments. If we 
will take the Masters teaching on the 
subject, we find that these Ten Commandments 
demand absolute perfection 
of thought and deed for their fulfillment. 
Jesus summarized their teaching, saying: 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy mind. This is 
the first and great commandment, and 
the second is like unto it, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself. On these 
two commandments hang all the Law. 
OMatt. 22:37-40\) Now let us see, is 
this a hard commandment? Yea, 
verily; none but perfect men could 
keep it. To love God thus is to subject 
every other thing and interest to his 
pleasure. To love a neighbor thus 
would insure that you would neither 
kill him, nor steal from him, nor covet 
his goods. Besides, look at Jesus definition 
of the sixth and seventh commandments. 
CMatt. 5:22,28\) 

Viewed from this standpoint, we see 
why none of the Jews ever could keep 
the Law and why we need to get into 



Christ, in order that the righteousness 
of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT. 

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. 
Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work: 
but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord 
thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work, etc. 
OExod. 20:8-1 1\) 

If this is a part of the Law whose 
control over us was removed by Jesus 
death, and which never was given 
to the gospel church, but whose righteousness 
(or right-meaning) is fulfilled 
in us, then all may see that, to any 
recognizing the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free, there can be 
no bondage to the observance of any 
day. And in harmony with this 
thought is Pauls statement that "one 
man esteemeth one day above another; 
another esteemeth every day alike: 
Let every man be fully persuaded in his 
own mind." fRom. 14:5\) And if he 
shall make up his mind on this subject, 
from the foregoing statements of the 
Apostle relative to the Law, he will, 
doubtless, be persuaded with Paul and 
with us, that since Jesus has blotted out 
the handwriting of ordinances which 
was against us, which was contrary to 
us, and took it out of the way nailing it 
to his cross; therefore, henceforth, no 
man should judge us in meat, or in 
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or 
of the new moon, or of the Sabbath 
days, which are a shadow of things to 
come. Wherefore, if we are dead with 
Christ from the rudiments of the world, 
why, as though living in the world, are 
ye subject to ordinances? fCol. 2:14,16,17,20\) 
To those in Christ there is 
no law on the subject except that of 
LOVE. They may celebrate any or no 



day as their love to God and man, and 
their judgment of what would glorify 
God and bless men may direct. 

The fact that the Law compelled a 
rest every seven days, and that mankind 
seemed to require it, is an excellent 
reason why such a day should be 
observed. And love to God and a 
desire to worship him and to commune 
with his children is one of the best 
reasons for observing such a day. As 
to which of the seven days should be 
the best to observe, the church very 
early in its history decided that the first 
day of the week would be very appropriate, 
since on it Jesus arose from the 
dead and met with them and caused 
their hearts to burn as he expounded 
unto them the Scriptures. fLuke 24:27, 32\) 
Accordingly, we find that to 
meet on that day was very common 
among them, even before they came to 
appreciate fully their liberty, and while 
they still, to a great extent, observed 
the seventh day also. fActs 2:1\ 
Pentecost came on the first day of the 
week. v Acts 20:7 V and v l Cor. 16:2\) 
Paul was the Lords special agency in 
leading the other apostles and the 
Church in general into true liberty, and 
as he taught that every day was alike, 
so he practiced; and we find that sometimes 
he met with the Church on the 
first day, and sometimes went into the 
synagogues on the Sabbath, or seventh 
day. 

The question of Sabbath-keeping, 
like that of circumcision, is one that 
depends on the spirit or intent of the 
observer. As Paul testified to those 
who practiced circumcision in his day, 
so we testify to Sabbath (or seventh 
day) keepers now, viz.: If they keep the 
seventh day or any other day as under 
"Mosess Law," and in hope of keeping 
that Law and gaining its promised blessings, 



they are fallen from grace, and at 
present Christ is profiting them nothing, 
for the Jew did just so before Christ 
came. CGal. 5:2-4\) 

We cannot gain life by keeping the 
Law, for none can keep it perfectly, and 
to keep the third commandment and to 
fail in any other point, deprives of life 
and condemns to death under the Law 
covenant just as surely as though the 
whole law were violated, for "whosoever 
shall keep the whole law, and yet 
offend in one point, he is guilty of all." 
C James 2:10\) Hence that entire covenant 
was set aside on account of human 
imperfection, and the "new covenant," 
written and sealed with the blood of 
Christ, takes its place-the covenant 
which speaks of favor, life and peace 
through the righteousness of him who 
bought us with his own precious blood. 

Let us remember that under the Law 
the seventh day was commanded for 
rest only, and Paul gives us the key 
when he declares that "WE WHICH 
HAVE BELIEVED do enter into REST"; 
for he who trusts in Jesus as his justifier 
RESTS from attempting to do the 
work for himself and accepts it as a 
finished work-a gift of God through 
Jesus Christ our Lord. Those who 
thus rest in Jesus, do as God the 
Father did; for having created man, 
whose sin and fall he foresaw, Jehovah 
rested the entire matter in the hands of 
Christ to redeem men and destroy sin 
and death during the seventh day. 
(Seven thousand years from Adam till 
the end of the Millennium.) [See article 
"Creative Week" in back issue-of 
which we have no more on hand.] 
fHeb. 4:3- 10\) Whosoever thus believes 
in Jesus, as the propitiation for 
his sins, has "joy and peace (rest) in 
believing" fRom. 15:13 v )-a rest not 
transitory but permanent; not partial, 



but complete; not of one day, but of 
all, and which was well illustrated in 
the seventh day which typified it; for 
seven is the symbol of completeness. 
Since this REST is the gift of Gods 
love, and since we enter it when we 
come under the "royal law," is it not, 
therefore, fulfilled in love? for love is 
the fulfilling of the Law-to all in 
Christ Jesus who appreciate their standing 
and walk as becometh saints. 

page 6 

CRom. 8:1\) 



R544 : page 6 

THE OBJECT OF OUR LORDS RETURN. 



DISCOURSE NO. 2. 

We continue to-day our subject of 
last Sunday-"The object of our 
Lords return." To briefly review: 
We found that past ages and the present 
Gospel age have been but steps 
which God is taking toward the conversion 
of the world; that although He 
has not sought directly to bring all 
men to a knowledge of Himself (which 
is essential to salvation) but has confined 
that knowledge to a small proportion 
of His creatures who were thus 
elect, or chosen; as for instance the 
patriarchs of early ages, fleshly Israel 
of the last or law dispensation, and 
until the present century to but a small 
number of earths millions, even during 
this Gospel age. Yet, all of this was 
but a means toward the desired end- 
"The reconciling of the world unto 



Himself." 

We see that all Gods promises center 
in this Church, now being selected; 
that she is now as "the body of Christ" 
filling up the measure of His sufferings, 
and that when all the members have 
been selected from the world, and have 
been "made perfect through suffering," 
the Church will be joined to Christ 
Jesus, "whom God gave to be head over 
the Church, which is His body," or, as 
expressed in another simile, the "chaste 
virgin," will be united to the heavenly 
Bridegroom, and they twain become 
one, and this one-the Christ complete 
--is to be the heir of all things. 

This new creation (the Christ) we 
found to be the promised seed which is 
to "bruise the serpents head"-crush 
and destroy evil. So we read, "The 
very God of peace shall bruise Satan 
under your feet [under Jesus and his 
church] shortly. This same "seed of 
Abraham" (which seed is Christ) is the 
seed "in whom all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed." "And if ye be 
Christs, then are YE Abrahams seed 
and heirs." CGal. 3:29 v ). We found 
that the end of this age does not close 
the Churchs mission; that though now, 
while wheat and tares grow together 
until the harvest, the end of the world 
(age), her light shines but feebly, yet, 
when separated from the tares, and exalted 
with her Lord, then, with him she 
shall "shine forth as the Sun in the 
kingdom." This is the "Sun of Righteousness" 
which "shall arise with 
healing in his wings." 

We glanced at the glory of that 
Millennial day, wherein "there shall be 
no more curse," and "the knowledge of 
the Lord shall fill the whole earth," 
scattering the darkness of sin and ignorance 
and causing "wars to cease 
unto the ends of the earth." These are 



the "times of restitution," of which 
Peter speaks fActs 3:17,19"), which are 
due to begin when Christ comes. "For 
this, the whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now, 
waiting for the manifestation of the 
sons of God." fRom. 8:22,19") 

But let us leave this bright and 
pleasant picture of the coming day, of 
which, with the poet, we could say: 
"Haste thee along, ages of glory, 
Haste the glad time when Christ appears," 
and turning look at a dark picture. 
While it will be so favorable to those 
who may live in the "Millennial Age," 
what about those who have died before 
the plan of God has thus reached its 
fulness? During the 6,000 years since 
creation, there have lived on the earth 
about 143 billions of human beings. 
Of these the very broadest estimate 
that could be made with reason, would 
be that less than one billion were Saints 
of God. What of the 142 billions who 
died out of Christ- what is their 
condition? 

The Atheist answers: They are eternally 
dead. There is no hereafter; 
they will never live again. 

Calvinism answers: They were not 
elected to be saved. God foreordained 
and predestinated them to be lost, to 
go to hell, and they are there now, 
writhing in agony, where they will ever 
remain without hope. 

Arminianism answers: We believe 
that God excuses them on account of 
ignorance, and that if they did the best 
they knew how, they are as sure of 
being a part of the "church of the first 
born" as is Paul himself. 

To this last view the great majority 
of Christians of all denominations hold 
from a feeling that any other view 
would be irreconcilable with justice on 
Gods part. 



But, we inquire, What do the Scriptures 
teach on this last point?-that ignorance 
is a ground of salvation? No; 
the only condition known in Scripture 
is FAITH. "By grace are ye saved 
through FAITH." Justification by faith 
is the ground-rock of the whole system 
of Christianity. When, on the day of 
Pentecost, Peter was asked, "What 
must we do to be saved?" He answered: 
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and be baptized, and thou shalt be 
saved." 

Again, he says ("Acts 4:12"): "There 
is none other name under heaven, given 
among men, whereby we must be 
saved," than the name of Jesus. 

Paul reasons that a man must hear 
the Gospel before he can believe: "How 
shall they believe on Him of whom 
they have not heard?" This, Gods 
plan-that men shall be saved on account 
of faith-Paul says was to the 
Jew a stumbling block (because they 
expected salvation as a reward of keeping 

R544 : page 7 

the law), and to the Greeks (the 

worldly wise) foolishness; but, nevertheless, 

it has "pleased God by the 

foolishness (in the eyes of men) of 

preaching to save them WHICH 

BELIEVE." 

We want to scripturally close you in 
to the thought, that all who have not 
heard could not believe, and not believing, 
could not be a part of the 
Bride of Christ. And this is not out of 
harmony with those first two chapters 
of Romans where Paul teaches that the 
heathen, having not the law, are a law 
unto themselves, etc. Many seem to 
misunderstand Paul, and represent him 
as teaching that the law which their 
conscience furnishes is sufficient in some 



cases to justify them. But this is a 
great mistake and far from Pauls 
meaning. Pauls argument everywhere 
is that "all the world is guilty before 
God," and that had he not known the 
law, he had not known sin. For by the 
law is the knowledge of sin." The law 
given to the Jew revealed his weakness, 
and was intended to show him that he 
was unable to justify himself before 
God. "For by the deeds of the law 
shall no flesh be justified in his (Gods) 
sight." As the written law thus condemned 
the Jews, so Paul says it is 
with the Gentiles also. Though ignorant 
of The Law they had light 
enough of conscience to condemn 
them-not to justify them-and 
so every mouth is stopped and all 
the world is proved guilty before God. 
("Romans 3:19"). And when this is realized, 
eternal life is seen to be "the 
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord," to every one that believeth. 

Well, say some, the Bible to the contrary, 
I believe and insist that God 
wont damn the world for ignorance. 
Now, let us see. Do you practice what 
you declare? Why do you assist in 
sending missionaries to the heathen at 
a cost of thousands of valuable lives 
and millions of money? If they will 
all be saved, or even half of them, 
through ignorance, you do them a positive 
injury in sending a preacher to tell 
them of Christ when you know that 
only about one in a thousand believe 
when the missionary does go to them. 
If your idea be correct, it were far 
better that no missionaries should ever 
be sent. Before, as you believe, nearly 
all would have been saved on account 
of ignorance, but now because of 
knowledge nearly all will be lost. In 
the same way we might reason, that if 
God had left all in ignorance ALL 



would have been saved. Then, instead 
of the gospel being good news, it would 
be more properly named bad news. 

But when this theory is carried to its 
legitimate consequences, you do not 
believe it. No, my brethren, you do 
believe that there is no other name 
given whereby we must be saved. Your 
actions speak the loudest-and speak 
rightly. 

Now, suppose we look at things just 
as God tells us of them and leave the 
clearing of His character to Himself. 

WHAT HAS BECOME OF THE 142 
BILLIONS. 

First, we answer that you may be 
sure they are not now in hell suffering, 
because the Scriptures teach that full 
and complete reward is not given to 
any until Christ comes, and He shall 
reward every man, and the unjust are to 
receive their deserts then also. Whatever 
may be their present condition, it 
cannot be their full reward, for Peter 
says: "The Lord knoweth how to reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment 
to be punished," and He is doing 
so. But the thought of so many of our 
fellow creatures at any time, being lost, 
without having had the knowledge 
which is necessary to salvation, seems 
terrible indeed to all who have a spark 
of love or pity. Then, too, there are a 
number of Scriptures which seem hard 
to harmonize with all this. Let us see. 
In the light of his dealings, How shall 
we understand the statement, "God is 
Love," or "God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever belie veth in Him might 
not perish?" 

Ah, Lord, it seems to poor, frail 
humanity that if you loved the 
world so much, you might have made 



provision not only that unbelievers 
might be saved, but also that all might 
hear and thus have a chance to believe. 

Again, we read: "This is the true 
light, that lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world." fJohn 1:9 V ). 
Lord, all our reason seems to say, not 
so, we cannot see how Jesus lighted 
more than a few of earths billions. 
Yonder Hottentot gives no evidence of 
having been so enlightened, neither did 
the Sodomites and myriads of others. 

Once more we read that Jesus, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man. 
CHeb. 2:9 V ) How, Lord, we ask? If 
he tasted death for the one hundred 
and forty-three billions; and from other 
causes it becomes efficacious to only 
one billion, is not his death comparatively 
a failure? 

Again: "Behold I bring you good 
tidings of great joy which shall be to 
ALL people." fLuke 2:1(T). Surely it 
is to but few that it has been glad 
tidings and not to all people. 

Another is: "There is one God and 
one Mediator between God and men, 

R545 : page 7 

the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself 
a ransom for all." fl Tim. 2S). A 
ransom, then why should not all have 
some benefit from Christs death? 

Oh, how dark, how inconsistent do 
these statements appear, when we remember 
that the Gospel church is a 
"little flock." Oh, how we wish it 
would please God to open our eyes 
that we might understand the Scriptures, 
for we feel sure that did we but 
understand, it must all seem clear. It 
must all declare in thunder tone "God 
is Love." Oh, that we had the key! 
Do you want it?-are you sure you do? 
It is in the last text we quoted, "Who 



gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified 
in due time." fl Tim. 2:6 V ). Due 
time, ah, now we see; God has a due 
time for everything. He could have 
testified it to this 142 billions in their 
life time; then that would have been 
their due time; but as it was not so, 
their due time must be future. We 
know that now is your due time and 
mine, because it is testified to us now. 
Christ was a ransom for you before you 
were born, but it was not due time for 
you to hear it until years after; so with 
the Hottentot; Christ was his ransom 
at the same time that he was yours. 
He has not heard it yet and may not in 
this life; but in Gods due time he will. 

But does not death end probation? 
one inquires. We answer there is no 
Scripture which says so, and all the 
above and many more Scriptures would 
be meaningless or worse, if death ends 
all hope to the ignorant masses of the 
world. A Scripture often quoted to 
prove this generally entertained view, 
is: "Where the tree falleth, there it 
shall be." fEccl. 11:3 V ). If this has 
any relation to man and his future it indicates 
that in whatever condition of 
knowledge or ignorance he enters 
death, he remains the same, until he is 
raised up again. 

But, how can knowledge ever reach 
these billions in their graves? It never 
will, "for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave 
whither thou goest." fEccl. 9:10\) 
"For in death there is no remembrance 
of thee (God): in the grave who shall 
give thee thanks." fPsa. 6:5\) 
God has provided for the resurrection 
of them all. For "as in 
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall 
all be made alive." fl Cor. 15:22\) 
As death came by the first Adam, so 
life comes by the second Adam. Everything 



that mankind lost in the first 

Adam is to be restored in the second: 

hence the age following Christs second 

coming is spoken of as "The times of 

restitution." 

Life is one of the things lost, and is 
to be one of the things restored. Mark, 
I do not say eternal life is given them; 
no, Adam never had eternal life to lose. 
The continuance of his life was conditioned 
on his obedience. Life as a human 
being was lost and this will be restored 
by the second Adam, and with it 
the ability to render obedience. This 
is the general salvation that Christ accomplishes 
for all, but the "great salvation" 
which believers receive is entirely 
different. This enables us to use another 
text, which is little used except by Universalists, 
and although we are not Universalists, 
yet we claim the right to use 
all Scripture. It reads: "We trust in 
the living God, who is the Saviour of 
all men, especially of those that believe." 
fl Tim. 4:10\) All men are saved or 
rescued from the loss entailed on us 
through Adam, by having all those lost 
things, including natural life, restored to 
them. He is also the "especial Saviour 
of them that believe now-during this 
age-for they are privileged to become 
sons of God on a higher than human 
plane, even to be partakers of the divine 
nature. 

Now we see that "the testimony in 
due time" explains all of those hitherto 
troublesome texts. In due time it shall 
be "good tidings of great joy to all 
people." In due time that "True Light 
shall lighten every man that cometh 
into the world." And in no other way 
can these Scriptures be used without 
wresting; we take them to mean just 
what they say. Paul carries out the 
line of argument with emphasis in 
"Romans 5:18,19". He reasons that as 



all men were condemned to death and 
suffered it, because of Adams transgression, 
so also Christs righteousness 
justifies all to life again. All lost life, 
not of our own will or choice, in the 
first Adam, and all receive life at the 
hands of the second Adam equally 
without their will or choice, with the 
privilege of forever retaining it on 
specified conditions. 

When thus brought to life, and having 
the love of God testified to them, 
their probation, their first chance begins, 
for we do not preach a second chance 
for any. 

But Peter tells us that the restitution 
is spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy Prophets. They do all teach 
it. Ezekiel tells us of the valley of 
dry bones, "These bones are the 
whole house of Israel," and God says 
to them: "I will open your graves and 
cause you to come up out of your 
graves and bring you into the land of 
Israel," ("Ezek. 37:11,12".) This agrees 
with Pauls statement, "Rom. 11:25,26". 
"Blindness in part is happened to Israel 
until the fulness of the Gentiles, (the 
Gospel Church, the elect company 
"taken out of the Gentiles") be come 
in, and so all Israel shall be saved," or 
brought back from their cast-off condition. 
For "God hath not cast away 
His people which he foreknew." ("Rom. 1 1:2"). 
They were cut off from His 
favor while the bride of Christ was 
being selected, but will return to favor 
when that work is accomplished--" vs. 28 to 33". 
The prophets are full of 
statements of how God will plant them 
again, and they shall be no more 
plucked up. This does not refer to 
restorations from former captivities in 
Babylon, Syria, &c, for the Lord 
says: In those days they shall say no 
more, The fathers have eaten a sour 



grape and the childrens teeth are 
set on edge; but every man shall die 
for his own iniquity; every man that 
eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be 
set on edge." fJer. 31:29,30\) This 
is not the case now. You do not die 
for your own sin but for Adams. "In 
Adam all die." He ate the sour grape 
and our fathers continued to eat them, 
entailing more sickness and misery 
upon us all. The day in which "every 
man shall die for his own iniquity," is 
this Millennial or Restitution day. But, 
when restored to the same conditions 
as Adam, will they not be as liable to 
sin and fall again as he was? No, they 
will have learned the lesson which God 
designed to teach to all during the first 
6,000 years, viz: "The exceeding sinfulness 
of sin." They will be prepared 
to appreciate the good and shun the 
evil; and the Gospel church then glorified 
will be "The kings (rulers) and 
priests" (teachers) of that new age, for 
"Unto the angels hath he not put in 
subjection the world to come; whereof 
we speak." fHeb. 2:5\) 

But are we sure that God intends 
these blessings for any but the "people 
whom he foreknew"-the Jews? Yes. 
He mentions other nations also by name 
and speaks of their restitution. Let 
me give you an illustration that will be 
forcible-the Sodomites. Surely, if I 
find their restitution mentioned you 
will be satisfied. But why should they 
not have an opportunity as well as you, 
or the Jew, to obtain eternal life? True, 
they were not righteous, but neither 
were you when God gave you your 
opportunity. Christs own words tell 
us that they are not as guilty in His 
sight as the Jews who had more knowledge: 
"Woe unto thee... Capernaum, 
for if the mighty works which 
have been done in thee, had been done 



in Sodom, it would have remained unto 

this day." fMatt. 11:21,23\) Thus 

Christs own words teach us that they 

had not had their full opportunity. 

Remember Christ says of the Sodomites 

that "it rained fire and brimstone from 

heaven and destroyed them all." fLuke 17:29\) 

So, if their restoration is spoken 

of, it implies their resurrection. Let us 

look at the prophecy of v Ezek. 16:48" 

to close. Read it carefully. God here 

speaks to Israel and compares her with 

her neighbor Samaria, and also with 

the Sodomites, whom he says, "I took 

away as I saw good." fEzek. 16:50\) 

Why did God see good to take away 

these people without giving them a 

chance of eternal life through the 

knowledge of "the only name"? Because 

it was not their due time; they 

will come to a knowledge of the truth 

when restored. He will save them from 

deaths bondage first, and then give 

them knowledge, as it is written: "God 

will have all men to be saved, and to 

come unto the knowledge of the truth." 

C 1 Tim. 2:4\) When brought to the 

knowledge, then, and not until then, are 

the preparations for Eternal life. With 

this thought, and with no other, I can 

understand the dealings of the God of 

love with those Amalekites and other 

nations, whom he not only permitted, 

but commanded Israel to destroy utterly, 

and leave neither man, woman or 

child, sparing not even the little ones. 

How often my heart has ached and 

yours too, as we sought to reconcile 

this seeming wantonness on Gods part, 

with the teachings of the new dispensation 

--"God is love," "Love your enemies," 

&c. Now we see that the entire 

Jewish age was a type of the higher 

Gospel age; Israels victories and conquests 

merely pictures of the Christians 

battles with sin, etc. These Amalekites 



and Sodomites and others might 
just as well die so, as of disease and 
plague, and it mattered little to them, as 
they were merely learning to know evil, 
that when on trial "in due time" they 
might learn good and be able to discriminate 
and choose good. 

But let us read the prophecy further. 
After comparing Israel with Sodom 
and Samaria, and pronouncing them 
worse, >. 53\ says, "When I bring again 
the captivity (In death all are captives; 
and Christ came to set at liberty the 
captives and to open the prison doors 
of the grave) of Sodom and Samaria, 
then will I bring thy captives in the 
midst of them." These will be raised 
together. In Verse 55 v this is called a 
"return to their former estate"-restitution. 
But some one, who cannot imagine 
that God really could be so good 
or just, suggests: God must be speaking 
ironically to Israel, and saying, He 
would just as soon bring back the 
Sodomites as them; but has no notion 
of either. Let us see; read v vs. 60-63": 
"Nevertheless I will remember my 
covenant with thee; I will establish it 

R546 : page 7 

to thee." Yes; says Paul, "This is 
Gods covenant unto them-they are 
beloved for the fathers sake. For the 
gifts and callings of God are without 
repentance." fRomans ll:27-29\) The 
v 63d verse" concludes the argument, 
showing that the promised restitution 
is not based on the merits of either 
Israel, the Samaritans, or the Sodomites 
--"That thou mayest remember and 
be confounded, and never open thy 
mouth any more because of thy shame, 
when I am pacified toward thee, for all 
that thou hast done, SAITH THE LORD 
GOD." When God signs his name to a 



statement in this way, I must believe it. 
And no wonder if they are confounded, 
when "In the ages to come He shows 
forth the exceeding riches of his grace." 
fEph. 2:7\) And many of Gods 
children will be confounded, and 
amazed also, when they see how "God 

R546 : page 8 

so loved THE WORLD." They will be 
ready to exclaim with brother Paul: 
"Oh the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! How 
unsearchable are his judgments, and his 
ways past finding out!" 
f Romans 11:33".) 

But some will inquire, how comes it 
that this has not been seen long ago? 
We answer, God gives light and knowledge 
to his people just as it is due. 
The world was left in almost entire 
ignorance of Gods plan until the 
Gospel age, when Christ came, bringing 
life and immortality TO LIGHT 
through the Gospel. The Jews up to 
that time supposed that all the promises 
of God were to and for them alone, but 
in due time God showed favor to the 
Gentiles also. Christians, generally, 
have supposed that Gods blessings are 
to the church, but we begin to see that 
God is better than all our fears, and 
though he has given us the "exceeding 
great and precious promises," He has 
made some to the world also. 

"The path of the just is as a shining 
light that shineth more and more unto 
the perfect day," and the fact that it 
now shines so brightly; and that we are 
able to see more of the beauty and 
harmony of Gods word, is to me a 
strong presumptive evidence that we are 
nearing that glorious Millennial Day 
when we shall know even as we are 
known, fl Cor. 13:12\) 



But we promised to harmonize those 
doctrines of the Church generally supposed 
to be opposed to each other, 

viz: CALVINISM, or Election; and ARMINIANISM, 
or Free Grace. Perhaps 
you already see how they harmonize 
themselves, by simply recognizing the 
order of the ages, and applying each 
text to the place and time to which it 
belongs. Let me then point out to you 

THE INCONSISTENCY OF EITHER CALVINISM 
OR ARMINIANISM. 

when separated from each other. In 
doing so, I do not wish to reflect on 
those who hold these doctrines. I shall 
merely call your attention to features 
which their warmest advocates must confess 
to be their weak points. 

First-Calvinism says: God is all-wise; 
He knew the end from the beginning; 
and as "all his purposes shall be 
accomplished," He never could have intended 
to save any but a few-the true 
Church, the little flock. These He 
elected, and predestinated to be eternally 
saved; all others were equally predestined 
and elected to go to hell, for, 
"known unto the Lord are all His 
works from the foundation of the world." 

This has its good features; it shows, 
and properly, Gods Omniscience. This 
would be our idea of a GREAT God 
were it not that the three great essential 
qualities of greatness, viz., MERCY, 
LOVE and JUSTICE are lacking, for 
none of these qualities find place in 
bringing into the world 142 billions of 
creatures damned before they were born, 
and mocked by protestations of love. 
No, no; "God is Love," "God is Just," 
"God is Merciful." 

Second-Arminianism says: Yes, 
God is love, and in bringing humanity 
into the world He meant them no harm; 



only good. But Satan succeeded in 
tempting Adam; thus "Sin entered 
into the world and death by sin." And 
ever since, God has been doing all he 
can to deliver man from his enemy, 
even to the giving of His Son. And 
though now, six thousand years after, 
the gospel has only reached a very 
small portion of those creatures, yet, we 
do hope and trust, that within six thousand 
years more, through the energy 
and liberality of the Church, God will 
have so far remedied the evil introduced 
by Satan, that all may at least know of 
his love, and the knowledge of God be 
co-extensive with the knowledge of evil. 

The commendable feature of this view 
is, that it accepts the statement that 
"God is Love." But, while full of loving 
and benevolent designs for His 
creatures, He lacks ability and foreknowledge 
adequate to the accomplishment 
of those designs. 

While God was busy arranging and 
devising for the good of his newly 
created children, Satan slipped in, and 
by one stroke, upset all Gods plans, 
and in one moment brought sin and 
evil among men to such an extent that 
even by exhausting all his power, God 
must spend twelve thousand years to 
even reinstate righteousness to such a 
degree that man will have an opportunity 
to choose good as readily as 
evil; and the one hundred and forty-two 
billions of the past six thousand 
years, and as many more of the next, 
are lost to all eternity, in spite of Gods 
love for them, because Satan interfered 
with his plans as God had not foreseen. 
Thus Satan gets, in spite of God, one 
hundred into hell to one God gets to 
glory. This view must exalt mens 
ideas of Satan, and lower their estimation 
of Him who "spake and it was 
done; commanded and it stood fast." 



But how refreshing it is for us to turn 
from these fragments of truth, as separately 
considered, and see how harmonious 
and beautiful they are when 
united; how, during the present and 
past ages, God is electing, or gathering, 
by the preaching of His word the Gospel 
church; how he wisely permitted 
evil to come into the world in order 
that He might develop His church, 
which, thus being made perfect through 
suffering, might be prepared for her 
gracious work in the future; and how 
the mass of mankind, though not now 
on probation, are nevertheless getting a 
knowledge and experience, by contact 
with sin, which he foresaw they would 
be the better of. And, furthermore, 
how he took occasion, in connection 
with this, His plan, to show us His 
great love, by so arranging that the 
death of Christ was necessary to our recovery 
from sin, and then freely giving 
Him to be "the propitiation for our 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world," and then 
in the next dispensation-- "The new 
heavens and earth," fRev. 21:l-9-l(T 
and v 22:17\) "The spirit and the 
bride say come, and whosoever will 
may come and take of the water of life 
freely." Then "Free Grace" will be 
shown in the fullest measure. This is 
the teaching of Gods word. Men 
would not have thought of such a glorious 
plan of salvation. Truly God has 
said: "My thoughts are not your 
thoughts, neither are your ways my 
ways: For as the heavens are higher 
than the earth, so are my ways higher 
than your ways, and my thoughts than 
your thoughts." flsa. 55:8,9\) Hereafter 
when we address "Our Father," 
may it call to our mind that His love 
and compassion are far greater than the 
pity of earthly parents; and while we 



study His word more and more, and 
seek to "grow in grace and in the 
knowledge and love of God, let us ever 
remember that 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err, 

And scan His work in vain; 
God is His own interpreter 

And He will make it plain." 
Having seen how much of the great 
plan of God awaits the coming of Christ 
for its accomplishment, and having, we 
trust, found why Christ comes, we will 
next Sunday take up another branch of 
truth connected therewith, and inquire 
the teaching of Scripture as to the 
judgment of the Church, and of the 
World, the reward of Faith and that of 
Works. 



R543 : page 8 
OUR INFLUENCE. 

Why has Christian influence so little 
effect upon the unconverted? Can it be 
for want of knowledge of Christian duties, 
or why is it such a barren and fruitless 
thing to be a Christian? Truly we need 
not expect that the whole world will be 
converted because they see beauty in the 
confession of Christians, for Christ himself 
has said, "If they will not hear my 
words, they will not hear you." Yet 
the Spirit of God is fruitful, and will 
multiply when it has free access into the 
hearts of his Spirit-born people. 

There is, indeed, a great fault in Christian 
professors in our day. The motive 
is not pure. Either from love of 
the world, or from lack of true repentance, 
the heart is not wholly given to 
God, and for this reason God cannot use 
it for his purpose, namely, for his temple; 
therefore old things remain, and 



the creature is not renewed in spirit 

and mind, and knows not how to adorn 

his profession, and remains only a 

stumbling block in the eyes of the world, 

because he professes to have the spirit 

of God, and has it not, or walks not according 

to it. Oh, Christians! let us be 

careful how we profess Christ, lest not 

only the sin of hypocrisy be required at 

our hands, but also the blood of our fellow 

creatures, who turn away from Christians, 

and say there is no reality in religion. 

It is truly good to be a Christian, 

to enjoy the Spirit of God, the love 

of Christ, and the many blessings that 

are manifested through the Spirit as 

well as the promised glory and blessings. 

--Selected. 



R546 : page 8 
QUESTION COLUMN. 

Ques. Are there any other papers 
than the TOWER which teach as it does 
that Jesus is now present? 

Ans. We know of none other which 
teaches the personal presence of Christ 
Jesus. Most of those whose attention 
has been given to the subject of the 
second advent, fail to see the distinction 
between the human nature which Jesus 
laid down in death as our ransom, and 
the new nature given him by the Father 
as a reward for so doing. fPhil. 2:9\) 
Therefore, such generally expect that 
Jesus will be a human or fleshly being 
at his second coming. But though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet 
now, henceforth, know we him no more 
after the flesh but as a spiritual being- 
the express image of the Fathers person, 
and consequently as invisible to human 
eyes (without a miracle) as the angels, 



and as the Father "whom no man hath 
seen nor can see." f2 Cor. 5:16"; v Heb. 1:3 V ; 
v lTim. 6:16\) 

The fact is, that to be consistent with 
their theories, none could teach Christ 
Jesus presence who do not recognize 
the distinction and total difference between 
the perfect human and the divine 
natures. (Study very carefully the Chart 
and its explanation in "Food," p. 105.) 
If Jesus is now merely a glorified man, 
then when he comes he would be seen 
by the natural eye, and there would be 
no special necessity for taking heed to 
the sure word of prophecy; nor would 
those Scriptures be true, which represent 
his presence to be "as a thief," 
discernable only by those watching. If 
he is now merely a perfect, glorified 
man, then those who claim this, to be 
consistent, should also claim that at his 
first advent, before he was "highly exalted," 

R547 : page 8 

he was an imperfect man. But, 

on the contrary, Scripture teaches that 

at the first advent, Jesus was undefiled, 

sinless, perfect-a man FIT to be a ransom 

for other men-and at his resurrection 

perfected as a new creature and 

again a spiritual being. 

If change of nature is impossible, as 
some seem to claim, how did Jesus 
change from a form of God (a spiritual 
form) and become a form of flesh, or a 
human being? And if he changed thus 
to take our lower nature fPhil. 2:T), 
why should any deny that he could be 
given a nature, not only higher than 
men (the human), but higher than that 
he laid aside to become a man. If 
any have theories that would compel 
Jesus forever to be a man, we think 
such theories had better be sacrificed 
than the Scriptures which teach 



that human and spiritual beings are dissimilar, 
though on certain conditions 
some during this age are offered a 
change of nature. 

From the standpoint of those who 
recognize the distinction between human 
and spiritual beings, the invisible, 
personal presence of Christ is not unreasonable. 
Such realize that, "Though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him no 
more" after the flesh. The human 
being, restored, will be a glorious and 
perfect man; while the "new creature," 
perfected, will be entirely different-a 
perfect spiritual being-and it doth not 
yet appear what such shall be like. Of 
Jesus we read that he is now "the express 
image of the Fathers person, 
whom no MAN hath seen NOR CAN SEE. 
He was put to death in the flesh (as a 
man) and quickened in spirit (as a new 
creature). 

It is this Jesus, raised in glory and 
power, a spiritual body and not an animal 
or human body-perfect as a new 
creature-that we teach is present, and 
whose power and presence is now exercising 
so marked an effect upon the 
affairs of both the Church and the 
world. It is his glorious presence as a 
reaper ("Rev. 14:14") of his ripening 
harvest, whose sharp sickle of truth is 
now separating the true from the false, 
and the matured from the immature 
wheat. Yes, the Lord has come to 
make up his chosen and polished 
jewels. We are living even now in the 
presence of the invisible Lord, whose 
lightning flashes of truth are even now 
enlightening the world ("Matt. 24:27"; 
"Psa. 97:4"). The first flashes are bringing 
terror and dismay to the world, disclosing 
also the gigantic proportions of 
evil and oppression; but shortly the 
full glory, the bright shining of his presence, 



will be recognized by all (seen by 

the eye of their understanding) and will 

bring healing and blessing. 

The present, invisible, spiritual prince 
of this world (Satan--* John 14:30*) 
will then be fully cast out, when the 
new, invisible, spiritual Prince (Christ) 
shall fully take to himself his great 
power and dominion. 



R547 : page 8 

MAKING US WHITE. 

"What have I done that I must suffer 
so?" "Must I always bear such 
humiliation?" We answer that God 
puts a high estimate upon "the riches 
of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints." A proprietor pulls down his 
old house and tears up the lilacs and 
cherry trees, and plows and seeds his 
ground anew, to make a fitting place 
for a better home. But how would the 
green grass sob, and the shrubbery 
shriek, could its story be heard. Suffering 
is not always a penalty. It is often 
corrective. It is educative. Purifying, 
training and glorifying, in its nature, it 
must go forward until the end. An old 
captain on an ocean steamer says, "A 
little head wind is good; it makes the 
furnace draw." Patience is beautiful 
and useful, but it means something to 
be patient about. It is like the night 
blooming cereus; it comes only to 
perfection in darkness, and when midnight 
is densest. At one end of yonder 
paper machine is a pile of beautiful 
white paper. How the rags would 
scream at their scouring, and grinding, 
and pressing, and crushing. But see 
the result! So, Christian, see what 
blessed things are intended to reward 



your trials. --American Wesleyan. 


