Fanning the Fire in Caprivi
By “Awake!” correspondent in South Africa
“LIGHT the fire.” That is the meaning of Katima Mulilo​—the name of a small, primitive town in one of the most remote areas of southern Africa, the Caprivi Strip.
As a traveling overseer for Jehovah’s Witnesses in South-West Africa/​Namibia the question in my mind was: To what extent has the fire of truth spread to Katima Mulilo​—the remotest corner of the area that I serve? The Watch Tower Society had received various calls for help from that region: “We are interested to hear about Jehovah’s Word.” “When can we be baptized?” Due to floods, two previous attempts to go there had failed, but at this time the roads were open and a friend from Windhoek was prepared to take me in his Land Rover.
West Caprivi is a controlled zone under South African military authority. Would we obtain a permit to cross it? We did. So with extra petrol, water and food, we set off from Kavango (in the north of South-West Africa/​Namibia) on a 580-km (360-mile) drive to Katima Mulilo.
Through a Wild Area
For about 200 km (120 miles) the rough dirt road followed the windings of the Okavango River​—the border between South-West Africa/​Namibia and Angola. Neatly thatched huts and mealie (corn) patches of the Kavango people lined the river on our side. But on the northern or Angolan side there was no sign of life.
Before long we reached the eastern border of Kavango, where the Okavango River turns south to Botswana. The guard at the security checkpoint let us through. From there on we were driving through a wild, remote area​—no more huts, cultivated land or other signs of human habitation. Instead, elephant droppings on the road reminded us that we were in one of the few areas of Africa where wildlife still roams freely.
The road became muddy and the Land Rover got stuck​—so off with our shoes and out with the shovel. Half an hour later our vehicle was freed. Spoor (animal tracks) at first interested us, then alarmed us​—lions! We made a hasty departure.
At dusk we met an entire family of Bushmen​—one of the most primitive tribes of Africa. They were carrying all their belongings: a tortoise shell for water, blankets, one chicken and an old tin filled with animal intestines, which caused us to move upwind a little.
A little farther on we came to another security checkpoint and were told that we could not travel farther that night​—too risky because of terrorists. So we spent the night in an old fort, where we were attacked only by mosquitoes.
A “Fire” in Katima Mulilo
The next morning we reached our destination, the little town of Katima Mulilo on the border of Zambia. What kind of reception would we get? A broad, beaming smile from a local Witness welcomed us. That evening a group of 21 people were present at the Kingdom Hall, a building made of mud and thatch that had been built the previous weekend especially for our visit!
After a question-and-answer session, it was obvious that the local Witnesses could express their faith clearly on basic doctrines and principles. The fire of God’s Word was indeed burning brightly in Katima Mulilo. How had Bible truth reached this dark corner?
The Witness who had met us on our arrival had obtained Bible knowledge in Zambia but had moved to Katima Mulilo before being baptized. He immediately began talking to other people about God’s kingdom and soon had a group organized for Bible study. Later, they were joined by more from Zambia, and they met regularly under a large tree for their studies of God’s Word.
During our short visit we personally visited the homes of interested persons to talk to them about God’s loving purpose for mankind. We will never forget the sight of a gray-headed old man sitting under a tree in a nearby village reading his well-worn Bible. The entire family expressed appreciation for the Bible truths that we discussed with them. Another family, after we had answered their Bible questions, insisted that we stay for a meal. Sitting on mats made from reeds and using our hands as cutlery, we enjoyed the mealie-meal (corn-flour) porridge and fish that they shared with us.
African Marriage Problems
None of the group there in Katima Mulilo had as yet been baptized. Why? “We are all living under common-law marriage arrangement. Our marriages must be registered before we can be baptized,” they told us. They had come to appreciate the importance of honorable marriage, in harmony with what the Bible teaches. (Heb. 13:4) The civil authorities had no objection to this. They would register their marriages immediately.
“But, brother, there is the problem of lobola,” they explained humbly. “Lobola,” or bride price, must be paid to the father of every bride. If the bridegroom does not have the funds when getting married, the father of the bride in this part of the world allows the couple to live together under common-law marriage, but no legal marriage is allowed until the bride price has been paid in full. Some of these sincere persons still owed considerable sums for their wives. After we reviewed with them the importance of Christian water baptism, it was heartwarming to hear their sincere expressions: “We will be ready for baptism when you come again in six months.”
After encouragement from Jehovah’s Word to stand firm in the faith, we said good-bye to this little group who had become so close to our hearts in just a few days.
Jehovah’s Word is likened in the Bible to a fire. (Jer. 20:8, 9) A few sparks of this fire kindled some of the dry tinder at Katima Mulilo. It was a great privilege to visit the group there and fan those flames. May Jehovah keep the fire of truth burning brightly in the Caprivi.

