Have You Ever Wondered—
Is It Right to Talk to Others About Religion?
RELIGION is front-page news today. Pope John Paul’s journeys, theological dissent in Europe, the rise of Islam and the daily focus on the ayatollahs of Iran, all regularly hit the headlines. So, many people​—including those who used to avoid the subject—​are now talking about religion.
MUST TALKING ABOUT RELIGION ALWAYS LEAD TO ARGUMENT?
Well, it shouldn’t. It ought to help people to understand why others think and act the way they do. Especially is that true when the Bible is discussed, because it encourages us to love our neighbors.
Don’t you agree that there is a need for better understanding among neighbors? To get to know one another the logical thing is to talk personally to one another. But this is not always easy, especially when religion is involved.
For instance, recently many Asians from India, Pakistan and East African countries emigrated to the British Isles. Naturally they brought with them their colorful cultures, along with their religions. Communicating with this Gujarati-speaking population of close to a half million is no simple task for the Christian! The easiest course: simply don’t bother about it. Most churches in the British Isles don’t. They are quite satisfied with simply coexisting.
On the other hand, many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have undertaken to study the language of their new neighbors so as to speak to them about faith in God. Interestingly, the newspaper “Garavi Gujarat” recently commented: “And now Bible lectures are being given in Gujarati” by Jehovah’s Witnesses on a regular basis. This has generated many friendships because of the increased warmth and understanding shown. In addition to understanding your neighbors better, are there other benefits to these interchanges? In other words . . .
ARE THERE REAL BENEFITS FROM SUCH CONVERSATIONS?
Yes, because all involved can broaden their knowledge of religion and its role in life today. Though religion is a personal matter, there is truth in the wise Bible proverb: “People learn from one another, just as iron sharpens iron.”​—Prov. 27:17, “Good News Bible.”
No one has complete spiritual knowledge. We can all “learn from one another,” just as the proverb states. Friendly discussions about religion can uplift as well as provide meaningful answers to vital questions. “Today each person has deep questions inside,” reports one young girl who bemoans: “You don’t find the answers in religion, in the church. Although I have faith, there’s something missing in the church.”
Many agree. They still have faith in God, but have been frustrated trying to find answers to deep questions in the church. For instance, What happens after death? Why has God permitted wickedness? Will he ever do anything about it? What is the purpose of life? How can I keep my family together? Most churches have not given persons satisfying answers. As a result, many have slowly stopped going to church. But this brings us to another thought-provoking question:
DO YOU HAVE TO GO TO CHURCH TO DISCUSS RELIGION?
The example of the Founder of Christianity suggests No. One unusual aspect of Jesus’ preaching activity was that he needed no special building in which to talk with people about religion. He was happy talking about God anywhere at any time. On a hillside, in a marketplace, at the seashore, or just walking along a dusty road. They were natural settings and people were, therefore, relaxed when conversing with him.
Jesus visited people in their homes to talk about religion. In fact, the Bible reveals that some of his most profound teachings were expounded in private homes. To his disciples, he specifically said: “Into whatever city or village you enter, search out who in it is deserving, and stay there until you leave. When you are entering into the house, greet the household; and if the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it.” Very clearly they were to visit people at home and share what they had learned from Jesus.​—Matt. 10:11-13; 13:36.
As the Christian faith grew, the home became the focal point of assembly. Though they eventually had meeting places where the whole congregation came together for Bible study, much of their actual conversing about God occurred in homes. It was this willingness to talk to others on every occasion that contributed to the rapid expansion of Christianity. The zealous disciples set a fine example for Christians today.
Today Jehovah’s Witnesses are willing to do the same thing. They know that the Bible has satisfying answers to the deep questions raised earlier, as well as many more. They will be glad to share such information with you. Each week they visit well over a million homes world wide to conduct regular Bible discussions. You only have to ask to be included in this free public service. Discover for yourself how helpful it can be to talk to Jehovah’s Witnesses about the answers that the Bible gives to the problems of life.

