Announcements
● Literature offer for November: Offer the tract and endeavor to start a Bible study. Use and offer The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life or Good News​—to Make You Happy, either one for 35c. December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and any pocket-size book for $1.85, or offer My Book of Bible Stories alone for $2.00. January: Watchtower subscription for one year, together with any 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers, for $2.00. If such larger books are not available, use God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good.
● Thanksgiving Day witnessing: It is suggested that each congregation arrange a meeting for field service appropriate to the local territory.
● Meetings for field service: At each meeting for field service in November, please remind the group that our objective this month is not merely to distribute tracts, but also to start home Bible studies if at all possible.
● Please note the following rates for the book My Book of Bible Stories (my). Pioneer: $ .85; Congregation: $1.90; Public: $2.00.
● New Publications Available:
Life Does Have a Purpose​—French
Our Incoming World Government​—God’s Kingdom—​Japanese
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Punjabi
● The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century may be placed with those with whom home Bible studies are conducted. The brochure features information that will aid such persons to become better acquainted with the organization and the work that we are doing. Copies may also be provided to other interested persons and groups who request such information. Congregations may order a small supply of this publication for such purposes.
● During the month of January there will be a series of four special public talks in the congregations based on the recently released book Making Your Family Life Happy. Outlines for these talks will be sent to congregations in the near future and the elders can make assignments of such talks to those who will be asked to give them. If your congregation is scheduled to have a circuit overseer’s visit or a circuit assembly during January, then these special talks may run over into the month of February.
● It will not be possible to hold an international convention in Montevideo, Uruguay. However, those taking the South American tour may visit the country and arrangements will be made for an English session. Assistance will be given with any sight-seeing tours.
● The dates for the Kumasi, Ghana international convention have been changed from December 20-24 to December 27-31, 1978. The dates for the Accra, Ghana convention, namely, December 20-24, 1978, remain unchanged.
● The international convention scheduled for January 3-7, 1979, in Lesotho (Africa) has been canceled.

