Did You Get the Sense of It?
1 “Of what?” you may ask. The need for all of us to examine ourselves to determine if we have been taking the truth for granted and to see if our circumstances will allow us to do more in the field service.
2 On Thursday at the international convention, these points were forcefully brought to our attention. Do you recall the theme for that day? “A Unique Privilege​—Faithfully Working with God.” And it was on that day that we were all encouraged to take a look at ourselves to see what we are doing as far as the preaching work is concerned.
3 Starting off the day, in the talk “Pioneering in the Steps of the Master,” we were encouraged to take up the pioneer service if we could adjust our circumstances to do so. Jesus set a fine example for us. He was motivated by love; he was self-sacrificing; he spent much time in the preaching activity. Have you given serious thought to the invitation to take up the pioneer service? If your circumstances permit, by all means enjoy the many blessings and pleasures that come with the pioneer service.​—Mal. 3:10.
4 It may be that your circumstances will not permit you to pioneer right now. But on Thursday afternoon we were encouraged to consider Paul’s words at Romans 10:10-17, which highlight our obligation to exercise faith and to make public declaration. To what extent? Do you recall the talk “Working Hard and Exerting Ourselves”? Working hard is not for a lazy person. Jehovah God and Jesus Christ are hard workers. Have you been working hard and exerting yourself? If so, you have seen Jehovah’s reward for your hard work since the convention.​—1 Tim. 4:10.
5 One of the highlights of the afternoon came with the talk “The Whole World Is Jehovah’s Field.” It pointed out that Jehovah is deeply interested in people and wants them to get life. (Ezek. 33:11) We too can share Jehovah’s view of other people. One way we can do this is by sharing in the preaching activity each month. Have you been doing so since the convention?
6 To climax the day’s program, the “Declaration of Our Faith” was read. The main points of our Christian faith were concisely expressed. Were you one of those who said “Yes” to indicate that these were expressions of your faith? If so, then you no doubt have been sharing these faith-strengthening truths with others as often as you can. How active is your faith?
7 Did you get the sense of it? Are you following the suggestions received at the convention? If so, you appreciate the unique privilege of working together with Jehovah in his work. (1 Cor. 3:9) By our prayers, our speech and our activity in God’s service we can show that we DID get the sense of it!

