Have You Tried It?
1 What? Using a number of the suggestions made in Our Kingdom Service a few months ago.
2 Do you remember the article that asked: “How many people do you pass in a day’s time? . . . Have you ever wondered how many of these have ever heard the good news from one of our brothers? And how many have not?” What are we doing to help these people? To illustrate a possibility, when you are going from house to house​—and we find so many are not at home these days—​do you endeavor to talk to those who are doing things outside the home and those who are passing by? This was one of the suggestions that was made. Have you tried it?
3 The article went on to ask: “How many people are there in your territory who have never had opportunity to hear the good news? Look at the people you pass when you are away from home. Some of them are standing and waiting. Some of them are sitting on a bench or in a car. Some are walking and looking. Could you approach them?” Have you tried to do so?
4 One sister wrote the Society and said: “After reading the article ‘How Many Can You Reach?’ in the December 1977 issue of Our Kingdom Service, four other pioneers and I tried the suggestions given in the article. We approached people on the street and engaged them in conversation concerning better government. We had one fine conversation after another. In just over an hour, five of us placed 27 books. One girl even came up to us and asked for the books. We thoroughly enjoyed the entire experience. Since none of us had done anything like this before, we thank Jehovah that he helped us to overcome our initial nervousness. You can be sure that we plan to do this again.”
5 Another wrote and said: “We approached people who did not seem to be rushed. Generally, the conversations were brief and to the point, but we also enjoyed lengthy discussions with several who showed considerable interest. We appreciated the suggestion that we choose the people we talk to. We found the best success with teen-agers and also older men, persons who rarely get the chance to speak to us at the doors. One brother said that he had the best success approaching people who were resting and waiting on benches in public places. Generally, we had the undivided attention of those with whom we spoke, since there were no babies in the bathtub or phones ringing or food on the stove. Once we were over our initial nervousness we all had a most enjoyable time. We have also had some good results in calling back on people we met.”
6 All of us know that a person does not have to be behind a closed door before we show interest in him. But how often do you approach people who are away from home? Have you ever tried it? It will be your love for people and your desire to share the truth with them that will move you to do so.
7 Would you like to try it? A review of the suggestions given in the article “How Many Can You Reach?” in the December 1977 issue of Our Kingdom Service will help you.

