Presenting the Good News​—Do You Help Young Ones to Have a Part?
1 We appreciate that there are many young persons associated with us. Some of these may be your children. Do you study with them? Are you helping to mold their hearts so that they love Jehovah and find delight in sharing in his service? Do you share with your children in the field service? We encourage you to do so in the spirit of what is written in Deuteronomy 6:6, 7.
2 When you are sharing in the preaching work with your children or if other young ones are accompanying you, do you see that they have a part? Often young ones just tag along, have little or nothing to say and get restless. What can you do to see that they have a part? They, too, want to serve Jehovah and so need to have a share in the public preaching work.
3 Often very young ones can have a part not only by handing householders the handbill, but also by telling them where the Kingdom Hall is and when the meetings are held and then letting them know that they are welcome to come. Could the young ones who work with you in the field do this?
4 Many include the young ones by having them read a scripture during the presentation. One brother tells the householder: “I am training John in this work of Bible education and, if I may, I would like to ask him to read the verse at . . . John, would you read it for us please?” As the young publisher progresses, the older brother asks him a question or two about the verse he has read in order to isolate the main point(s). Then he turns back to the householder and continues the conversation. In this way the brother involves young ones in the conversations at the doors. As you can appreciate, it makes the work much more enjoyable for them as they are having a part. Householders are often prompted to comment on how well such young ones express themselves.
5 Often young brothers and sisters who go in the field service have prepared and practiced an effective presentation but have difficulty in getting the conversation started. Perhaps you could help in this. One brother handles the introduction by greeting the householder and saying: “We have something encouraging to share with you from the Bible, but Bill and I are taking turns and this is his turn to explain what we are doing. If you have just a minute, I believe you will enjoy this. Bill . . .” Another brother says: “Hello. My name is Mr. . . . and I am training this young man in Christian service. He would like to explain why we have called.” And, of course, if the householder is too busy to talk you could always say: “Since it is not convenient to talk right now, Bill has something he would like to give you before we leave.” This will often allow for a brief explanation of the handbill, a tract or other small publication.
6 One householder in Louisiana said: “I truly admire you people for training and involving your young ones the way you do. I enjoy their visits to my home.” Are you training your children in the field service? And when you work in the field service with your children or others, do you see that they have a part? We encourage you to do so. They, too, must be ‘making a public declaration of their faith for salvation.’ (Rom. 10:10) And how fine it would be if, as they grow older, they could say as the psalmist did, “O God, you have taught me from my youth on, and until now I keep telling about your wonderful works.”​—Ps. 71:17.

