Relief from Pressure
1 Most of us have fond memories of pleasures and successes we have enjoyed in discussing subjects that have been featured in the tracts. And we have a fine one this time, too. It is “Relief from Pressure​—Is It Possible?”
2 It is an accepted fact that pressures of life are increasing daily. And it is apparent that we need relief from these pressures. What a marvelous Father we have, to provide relief even now for those who love him, while at the same time he provides direction for all mankind so that they, too, may enjoy relief from the pressures of a corrupt system of things and from human imperfection if they will only receive it. Our appreciation for what God has done for us and our love for our neighbors will move us to speak to them from our hearts and endeavor to help them.​—Matt. 22:37-39.
HOW WILL WE DO IT?
3 In fulfilling our commission to preach the good news it is good to be adaptable. Since pressure is commonly experienced, our conversing with others on this subject shows understanding and fellow feeling. Because the subject concerns them, many may be inclined to express themselves.
4 As you hand people the tract, we suggest that you draw them into the conversation whenever possible. You will find many opportunities to do so. For instance, as they look at the cover you might ask: “Do you think it is possible for people to find relief from pressure?” Listen to what they have to say. Show understanding for their feelings. You may formerly have felt the same way yourself.
5 As you point to page two, which illustrates the many things that cause pressure, you might ask the householder what sort of things he feels causes pressure on people in his neighborhood. Then, why not ask him if he feels that the Bible could help? Again, listen to what he has to say. Only when you know his thinking will you be in a position to be of assistance to him. If you have opportunity, you can point to some of the illustrations on page three and draw attention to the Scriptural encouragement on page four. We also encourage you to explain the home Bible study arrangement if at all possible.
6 One brother wrote the Society after our last tract distribution and said: “The conversational approach with the tracts is excellent and we have found that it often opens the way for Scriptural discussions and further literature placements more easily than when we are working with the regular offer.” Others found that use of the tracts opened the way to start new Bible studies, and keep in mind that this month, that is our objective. Another said: “This approach has made it possible to have conversations with persons that we normally do not get a chance to talk with. It has made service more interesting. And those we talk to seem to warm up to us a lot more because we are showing more interest in them as individuals.”
7 Look for opportunities to demonstrate our method of studying the Bible. You may choose to use the Truth book starting in chapter 12 because it shows how the Kingdom rule will provide relief from the problems we face, such as crime, food shortages, pollution, corruption in government, as well as sickness and death. (Any other chapter in the book may be used, if you wish.) Demonstrate the study using the Bible itself or any publication that you wish. If you find interest and feel that you need the assistance of another publisher in caring for it or in starting a study, do not hesitate to ask for his assistance.
8 During November, is it possible that you could have a fuller share in the work than you normally do? Share in the work as a family whenever possible, and as you do so, keep in mind that you want to start studies with other families. We encourage you also to include new ones in your plans for service as often as possible. Take the initiative in inviting them to work along with you. If they would like to make just a brief offer of the tract, encourage them to do so. If you could help someone else to have a share in the service this month, it would be a wonderful thing. And while we are busy in Jehovah’s work, remember that it is his will that we be ‘happy in doing it.’​—Jas. 1:25.

