Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 5
18 min: Song 40 and local announcements. Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century. (Pp. 3-5) (It is requested that each week the brochure is considered, a capable reader be assigned in advance so that he can prepare to read well.) Have brother read with feeling and good emphasis the material under the heading “Who Are They?” Then ask audience: What kind of people are Jehovah’s Witnesses? What can be said about our beliefs and the Bible?
Have assigned brother read the material under the heading “Their Name.” Then ask audience: How many Hebrew letters are there in Jehovah’s name? How is Jehovah’s name presented in the Roman Catholic Jerusalem Bible? How many times does Jehovah’s name appear in the original Hebrew Scriptures? What verses would you use to show that our name is Scriptural? (1) In the Hebrew Scriptures? (2) In the Greek Scriptures? How many Witnesses are there world wide? (Encourage all to bring their copy of the brochure to the meetings in following weeks.)
18 min: “Relief from Pressure.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Demonstrate how capable publisher has been offering tracts and drawing householder into conversation in a simple and uncomplicated way.
Encourage young publishers to make a simple offer of the tract if they desire. Have a young person demonstrate how he might do it. As a suggestion he might say: “Good morning. This tract discusses something that most people face and that is pressure. [Show p. 2.] It shows a remedy that millions of persons have found. Please be sure to read it. Also, if you wish, Jehovah’s Witnesses will be glad to come to your home to study the Bible with you. There will be no charge for this service.” If the householder asks the youngster if he will be conducting the study, he can reply that he will be glad to bring his father or mother, if this would be best. Encourage all to share in the work this week.
17 min: Learn from Jeremiah’s Experience. Jeremiah was a man of faith and loyalty, though he experienced difficult times. As you cover the following material, have the scriptures read by someone in the audience before you ask the questions.
1. Read Jeremiah 1:6-8. Then ask: Despite feelings of inadequacy that we may have, how may we be encouraged by these verses?
2. Read Jeremiah 1:17-19. What assurances and confidence do these verses give us as we do a work like that of Jeremiah?
3. Read Jeremiah 20:9, 11, 13. If we become temporarily discouraged, what encouragement do we have in these verses?
4. Read Jeremiah 26:12, 15. Of what are we reminded by these verses?
5. Read Jeremiah 31:3, 4. How do these verses tell of Jehovah’s love and mercy to those who repent and turn to doing his will? Can people today change and still have Jehovah’s favor? What does Isaiah 1:18, 19 say?
In conclusion, ask audience: What assurance and encouragement did this discussion give you?
 7 min: Review field service arrangements for the weekend. Ask audience how many shared in the special field service activity on Friday morning at the international convention. Encourage all to have a full share in the tract work during November. Could you put forth a special effort to share in the work just as you did during the convention? Could you work together as a family this weekend? Endeavor to start home Bible studies. Song 39 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 12
10 min: Song 66. Local announcements and accounts report.
12 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century. (Pp. 6-8) Have assigned brother read with good feeling and clarity the material on page 6 of the brochure. Then ask audience: What impressed you from this material? How many pioneers are there world wide today?
Read the material under the heading “The Year 1914.” Ask audience to comment on anything that impressed them. Which quotation do you believe would impress an interested person the most?
13 min: “Did You Get the Sense of It?” Have a capable brother read the article to the audience. The review material by asking audience a few questions on main points of article.
In conclusion allow at least three minutes to entertain expressions or experiences from those who have already endeavored to follow through on some of the things brought to our attention at the convention on Thursday. If expressions are few, present concrete suggestions as to what can be done now to follow through on some of the main points.
12 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Do You Help Young Ones to Have a Part?” Question-and-answer consideration of article.
13 min: How Do You Do It? Without making introductory remarks, invite expressions from individuals who include young publishers in their conversation when they go from house to house. How do they get them to have a part? What do they say? How do they introduce them? and so forth. Also entertain expressions on how they have included young ones in the tract work.
Have two or three young ones present the tract as they have been doing in the house-to-house work. Also have an older publisher demonstrate how he or she introduces a young person at the door.
Encourage families to work together in the tract work this weekend, if at all possible. Encourage all to endeavor to start home Bible studies. Or, if interest is found, and you do not feel you can handle it, return with a brother or sister who could start a study. Song 103 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 19
 8 min: Song 62. Local announcements.
12 min: Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century. (Pp. 8-11) Have assigned brother read with good clarity the material under “Court Victories” and “Special Training Programs.” Ask: How many remember these days? What do you remember about them? Were you involved in these events? How?
Read paragraphs under “Printing Facilities Expand” and “International Conventions.” Ask: How many have ever served at Bethel or the Society’s farms? How many have attended international conventions? What experiences and memories do you treasure from these events? Invite brief expressions so that the greatest number can comment.
20 min: Continue to Grow in Humility. Humility is defined as “lowliness of mind.” While the idea was foreign to Greek thought, a word was coined to express this idea about which Paul wrote in Philippians 2:3. (Read.) As you cover the following points, have someone in the audience read the scripture before you ask the question.
1. After reading Psalm 113:5-7, ask: How is Jehovah an example of humility?
2. Read 2 Samuel 22:1, 36. Why did David speak of Jehovah as being humble when he delivered David out of the hand of his enemies? Does this quality make you love Jehovah? Why?
3. Read 1 Corinthians 4:7. How do Paul’s words help us to be humble and patient when faced with the imperfections of others?
4. Read Romans 12:10, 16. How will following the counsel in these verses help us to stay humble?
5. Read 1 Corinthians 9:19, 22, 23. How will our taking the view expressed by Paul help us to be humble in presenting the good news to others?
6. What opportunities do we have to show humility toward members of our own family? Toward other members of the congregation?
20 min: Local experiences in the tract work. Perhaps one or two could be arranged ahead of time so that participation will not lag. However, a generous portion of the time should be allowed for a spontaneous expression of experiences that the brothers have had in the tract work.
Outline local arrangements for field service with the tract during the rest of the week. Encourage audience: Could you put forth a special effort in the tract work this weekend? Or next weekend? Could you spend a little more time than usual because of you neighbor love and love for God? Encourage family members to enjoy the pleasure of working together if this is possible. Endeavor to start home Bible studies with other families. Song 31 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 26
10 min: Song 11. Appropriate local announcements. Also comment on article “Help from Jehovah at the Right Time.” Encourage all to bring their copy of the booklet Unseen Spirits with them to the book study next week when we will begin to study it.
15 min: Use as needed locally.
15 min: “Have You Tried It?” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Read selected paragraphs. Call for expressions of publishers who have successfully approached people outside their homes.
15 min: The offer for December: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and any pocket-size book for $1.85. Or as an alternate offer the new publication My Book of Bible Stories can be offered for a contribution of $2.00.
Ask audience for comments on the following: (1) How they present the New World Translation. (2) What features they point to in the New World Translation so the householder can see the value of obtaining a copy for himself. (3) How many have ever tried to start a study right after placing the offer. (4) How they started the study and in what publication. (5) How they would present the new publication My Book of Bible Stories.
Suggested Topic for Conversation during December will be: “How to Make Your Way Successful.” (Josh. 1:8) Demonstrate it with presentation of New World Translation and pocket-size book. Have another publisher demonstrate brief presentation of My Book of Bible Stories.
 5 min: Song 100 and prayer.

