





COVER SUBJECT | WOULD YOU LIKE TO STUDY THE BIBLE?
A Bible Study Program for All




Jehovah’s Witnesses are well-known for their public preaching. But did you know that we also conduct a global Bible study program?





In 2014, over 8,000,000 Witnesses in 240 lands conducted nearly 9,500,000 Bible studies each month.a Indeed, the number of people studying the Bible with us exceeds the individual population of some 140 countries!
To carry out this educational work, Jehovah’s Witnesses publish nearly one and a half billion Bibles, books, magazines, and other Bible study aids each year—in some 700 languages! This unequaled publishing effort allows people to study the Bible in the language of their choice.
“I never liked studying in school, but this study was fun. And the things I learned were so comforting!”—Katlego, South Africa.

“The course covered all my questions and many more.”—Bertha, Mexico.

“The Bible study was held at my home at a time that I found suitable. What more could I want!”—Eziquiel, Brazil.

“The lessons were sometimes 15 to 30 minutes long—other times longer—whatever was convenient for me.”—Viniana, Australia.

“The course was free—it was amazing!”—Aimé, Benin.

“My Bible teacher was so patient and kind. We developed a close bond.”—Karen, Northern Ireland.

“Many people study the Bible without becoming Witnesses.”—Denton, England.






ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS FREQUENTLY ASKED ABOUT OUR BIBLE STUDY PROGRAM

What is the format of the study course?
We take various Bible topics and examine Bible verses that relate to those subjects. For example, the Bible answers such questions as these: Who is God? What is he like? Does he have a name? Where does he live? Can we draw close to him? The challenge is knowing where to look in the Bible for the answers.
To help people find the answers, we normally use the 224-page book What Does the Bible Really Teach?b This book was specially designed to help people understand the basic teachings of the Bible. It includes lessons on God, Jesus Christ, human suffering, the resurrection, prayer, and many more subjects.
When and where can the study be held?
The study can be held at a time and place convenient for you.
How long are the study sessions?
Many people set aside an hour or so each week to study the Bible. But the length of the study is flexible. We will adapt it to fit your schedule. Some study for just 10 or 15 minutes each week.
How much does the course cost?
The course and the study materials are free. This is in line with Jesus’ direction to his disciples: “You received free, give free.”—Matthew 10:8.
How long does the course last?
The length of the study course depends on you. The book What Does the Bible Really Teach? contains 19 lessons. You can cover any or all of the lessons at a pace that suits you.
Do I have to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses?
No. We respectfully recognize that each person has the right to choose what he or she will believe. People who gain a basic knowledge of the Bible, however, can make an informed choice.
Where can I get more information?
The Web site jw.org provides accurate information about the beliefs and activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
How can I request a Bible study?





            Submit a request online at www.jw.org.

            Write to the nearest address listed on page two of this magazine.

            Contact Jehovah’s Witnesses near you. You can look for “Jehovah’s Witnesses” in a listing of local telephone numbers.





Bible studies are generally conducted with individuals or small groups of people.
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses. More than 230 million copies of this book have been printed in over 260 languages.

HELP FOR FAMILIES





“When my wife started studying the Bible, I noticed significant changes in her. Our family life improved. Curious to see what she was learning, I began to study too. What I learned made me a better person. Studying the Bible brought our family together.”—Eziquiel.






“After I began studying the Bible, I kicked my drug habit, stopped abusing alcohol, and learned to control my anger. My house is cleaner and tidier. I appreciate my family more and enjoy doing things to make them happy. I am so much happier.”—Karen.






“Some people criticized me for studying the Bible. But my husband supported my decision, saying: ‘I don’t care what people say. Seeing you change for the good—that is what matters to me. Keep doing what you are doing.’ Our family life has never been better!”—Viniana.



