Encourage Others to Read The Watchtower
1 During April and May, we will want to encourage lovers of truth to read The Watchtower regularly. Our own experience has convinced us that of all the magazines published today, it alone supplies the vital spiritual food needed by those who are sighing and groaning over the deplorable conditions on earth.​—Ezek. 9:4.
2 The Watchtower has helped us understand Bible prophecy that proves we are living in the time of the end and that God’s Kingdom will soon bring peace to the earth. Our genuine concern for the lives of others moves us to share this marvelous hope with them. And we are encouraged by seeing that many honesthearted ones are being gathered for salvation.​—John 10:16.
3 “Is It Later Than You Think?” is the thought-provoking title of one of the articles in the April 1, 1991, issue of The Watchtower. The April 15 issue features an article entitled “When Will Lasting Peace Really Come?” These articles can be tied in nicely with the current Topic for Conversation, “World Peace, Is It Near?” To determine whether the householder is genuinely interested in the good news, draw him into a warm and friendly Bible discussion. This requires advance preparation and readiness to show how articles in the current magazine will help the householder to widen his understanding of the subject under discussion.
4 We are not interested in sending the magazines to just anyone who will give us his address for mailing. Remember that our commission is to preach the good news and make disciples. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) If the person is one who enjoys reading just certain articles occasionally, it may be best to keep his name on your magazine route and make regular personal visits. Your regular contact with the individual will allow you to cultivate the interest and eventually determine when it is appropriate to arrange for him to receive The Watchtower through the mail.
5 April and May will offer many opportunities to spread the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom from house to house as well as in informal conversations with people we meet. We can be confident that Jehovah will continue to bless our diligent efforts to find and provide needed spiritual nourishment for the meek ones in our territory.

