Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry in the Congregation
1 Through Jesus Christ, the Head of the Christian congregation, Jehovah has delegated responsibility to a “faithful steward,” or house manager. (Luke 12:42, 43) This arrangement has made it possible for us to receive printed direction on how ‘we ought to conduct ourselves in God’s household.’ (1 Tim. 3:15) Our principal tool for finding what has been printed is the Watch Tower Publications Index. How can it assist you?
2 Are you an elder? There are two general headings that deal with your responsibilities: “Elders” and “Overseers.” The section “Elders” has most of the references leading to information on assisting various ones in the congregation, how to give counsel, the relationships within the body of elders, elders’ responsibilities, and so forth. References to qualifications are found under “Overseers,” since that heading is the term the Bible uses when discussing these. Also under “Overseers” are official assignments, such as “presiding overseer,” “service overseer,” and “secretary.” The main heading “Congregations” will also yield helpful information.
3 You who are ministerial servants also perform a vital role in the congregation. The heading “Ministerial Servants” lists information on your qualifications and responsibilities. You will also find references to material on the importance of service privileges that are open to you and on how to reach out for further responsibility.
4 Both elders and ministerial servants have privileges in connection with meetings in the congregation. The heading “Meetings” offers references for every aspect of the subject, including thrilling examples under “efforts to attend.” Of course, there are main headings for each of the meetings as well.
5 Psalm 68:11 says: “The women telling the good news are a large army.” Like male members of the congregation, sisters also must adhere to proper conduct for them in God’s household. At times questions arise about subjects such as when a sister must wear a head covering or what should be done when no brother capable of conducting a meeting or representing the congregation in prayer is present. The heading “Women” can direct you to information on these subjects. Also helpful are the headings “Sisters,” “Head Covering,” and “Prayer.”
6 The concluding part of 1 Timothy 3:15 refers to the Christian congregation as “a pillar and support of the truth.” It is our privilege to support the truth as we conduct ourselves properly in God’s household, fulfilling our Kingdom ministry within the congregation.

