Make Good Use of Our Publications
1 Jehovah’s visible organization has supplied us with a great variety of publications to assist us in our preaching and teaching work. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Our appreciation for the Society’s publications should move us to make good use of them in our ministry.
2 In carrying out our ministry, we want to help sheeplike ones get on the road to life. The literature can help us do that. When discussing the Scriptures with an interested person, we may find that a particular subject appeals to him. If we are well acquainted with the valuable information in the various publications, we will be able to adjust our presentation and offer a publication that specifically relates to the interests of the person with whom we are speaking. This may require making a return visit with the appropriate publication.
OFFER WHAT IS NEEDED
3 By thoroughly working our territory, we will find people who are sincerely interested in the Bible and would like to learn more about it. Any one of our publications can help them gain an understanding of the Bible. But if we are talking to a person who lacks faith in the Bible and believes that it is contradictory or unscientific, it may be appropriate to present The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? That publication thoroughly refutes man’s criticism of the Bible and gives clear explanations as to why the Bible should be accepted as God’s Word. Or you could present the book Mankind’s Search for God, using chapters 15 and 16.
4 Many people are faced with problems in their own homelife. They may have little knowledge of Bible counsel or of how to apply it. To help them face up to problems of life and find workable solutions, we may offer the Family Life book or perhaps we can focus on chapters 5 through 8 in the Happiness book. Changes may not always come quickly, but we can point out that Bible counsel really does work.
5 When calling on people who have children, consider offering publications prepared specifically with youngsters in mind. Perhaps you could use the Young People Ask publication. Many publishers have helped parents and youths alike by presenting My Book of Bible Stories or Listening to the Great Teacher.
6 The tracts are convenient to carry, and they can be used to start conversations when working from house to house as well as when witnessing informally. What Hope for Dead Loved Ones? is a very comforting tract, with valuable information. Do you carry several different tracts with you? Do you have prepared comments for introducing them?
7 As we share the good news with others, we want to make good use of the numerous Bible study aids provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47) Such an abundance of spiritual food reflects the generosity of Jehovah and his concern for all mankind.

