Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 1
Song 191
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss Memorial highlights, number of new ones present, and what can be done this week to encourage attendance at special talk, “The Messiah’s Presence and His Rule,” on April 7. Review field service arrangements for the week. Review briefly with congregation the instructions in How to Handle Subscriptions Properly (S(d)-11).
15 min: “Fulfilling Our Kingdom Ministry in the Congregation.” A talk followed by a well-prepared demonstration with book study conductor explaining to a married couple how the Index may be used to find information on why and when head coverings are worn by sisters.
20 min: New Topic for Conversation. Discuss new Topic with audience. Also, consider various talking points from current issue of The Watchtower. Encourage brothers to give thoughtful consideration to persons who have shown genuine interest in the literature and who may enjoy receiving a subscription. Have a well-prepared publisher make the following presentation. “Hello. My name is ______. I’m making a brief call because I would like to ask you a question. Do you think that lasting peace will come in our lifetime? [Allow for a reply.] If we are to judge by the past, there is not much basis for hope. But notice what was prophesied for our time in Luke 21. [Read Luke 21 verses 10, 11, 26.] These conditions have prevailed since World War I. However, we are not left without hope. The very conditions that are so disturbing to mankind give evidence that God’s Kingdom will soon cleanse the earth and bring in lasting peace. This is what Jesus goes on to say in Luke 21 verses 28 and 31. [Read texts.] So these woeful and discouraging conditions are actually evidence that a wonderful change will soon take place. Isn’t that good news? [Allow for a reply.] This article in The Watchtower [select appropriate paragraph or illustration] shows some of the changes that will soon come and how you and your family may live to enjoy them. If you would like to read this information, I would be pleased to leave the Watchtower and Awake! magazines with you.” Depending on the interest shown, publisher can determine if subscription should be offered. Generally, this is best done on a return visit after determining whether the householder has read the initial copies that were placed with him. Also, publisher may mention the number of languages in which magazines are published and the global extent of our activity. Our voluntary efforts serve to promote Bible education. As opportunity permits and it is appropriate, briefly explain to householder how worldwide work is carried on and that it is supported by voluntary donations. Conclude this part by encouraging all to use the new Topic for Conversation.
Song 60 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 8
Song 43
 5 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—More Effectively by Listening.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. When considering paragraph 4, demonstrate how publisher misses a good opportunity to have a fine conversation by not being alert to householder’s comments on matters of personal concern. Ask audience how it could have been handled. Thereafter, have same publisher repeat demonstration, but this time show how it should properly be done by developing a good conversation with householder.
25 min: “Reaping in Proportion to Our Personal Effort.” Talk and discussion based on insert article. To be handled by an elder. Make local application of material. Paragraphs and cited scriptures may be read as time permits.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 15
Song 28
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Include Society’s expression of appreciation for financial support of worldwide work. Commend brothers for generous support of local congregation needs.
15 min: “Encourage Others to Read The Watchtower.” Enthusiastic talk followed by two or three prepared brief expressions from publishers stating why they appreciate The Watchtower and how they have benefited from reading it regularly.
20 min: “Start and Conclude Meetings on Time.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read all paragraphs.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 22
Song 118
10 min: Local announcements. Review cleaning arrangements for the Kingdom Hall. Help brothers appreciate the need for cooperation in keeping Jehovah’s place of worship clean.​—For additional information see article “Do You Respect Your Kingdom Hall?” on page 7 of the August 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “Make Good Use of Our Publications.” Coverage by questions and answers. Have two demonstrations showing how to determine whether householder has sincere interest before offering literature at the door.
10 min: The Work of Attendants. Interview brother who oversees attendants. Discuss their duties and how the congregation can cooperate with the attendants. (See Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 63-4, and Our Kingdom Ministry, December 1989, page 7.) Mention that at times attendants may make parents aware of the need to keep down disturbances made by their children. Attendants also see to the comfort and orderliness at our meetings, take the count of those present, help older and infirm ones to seats, and so forth.
10 min: Using Tracts in the Ministry. Show brothers the different tracts that are available, and discuss different ways in which they can be used. Have audience comment on how they make use of tracts and perhaps relate some experiences they have had. In January we discussed how tracts could be used to start studies. Have experiences related as to results with this approach. See also Index heading “Tracts” for locating other experiences in using them.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 29
Song 221
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Balanced Use of Leisure Time. Interview several youths about leisure time. Use material from the Young People Ask book, chapters 35 through 37. Brother handling interview may ask: Why do you need to be selective in what you read? How can you choose appropriate reading material? What are some potentially damaging effects of TV viewing, and how can it be controlled? Why are you not missing out on anything by not copying worldly youths? Why could copying them be dangerous? What are some ways you have found to enjoy wholesome recreation? Why do we need to be balanced in this area?
15 min: Preach From House to House. Enthusiastic and encouraging talk based on Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, pages 84-7. Make local application, calling attention to arrangements congregation has for group witnessing from house to house. Point out importance of training new publishers to be effective in house-to-house ministry.
10 min: Local needs or talk on “Perfect Government at Last!” on pages 20-4 of December 22, 1990, Awake!
Song 12 and concluding prayer.

