Presenting the Good News​—More Effectively by Listening
1 To be effective in our ministry, we must recognize that no two persons are alike. Each one has different experiences in life as well as different personal concerns and desires. The challenge is to personalize the Kingdom message, that is, show the person we speak to what it means for him as an individual. To do this effectively, we must also listen attentively.
2 Many publishers tactfully use questions in their introductions, and this helps involve the householder in a conversation. Viewpoint questions that do not embarrass the householder are most effective. But when a householder speaks, it is vital that we listen to what he is saying. Listening manifests neighbor love and respect, and by so doing we gain insight into the person’s thinking. Knowing a person’s circumstances enables us to empathize, putting ourselves in his place. We can then share with him the comfort and hope from the Bible.
BE ADAPTABLE
3 The apostle Paul admonished: “Study how best to talk with each person you meet.” (Col. 4:6, New English Bible) Though we do not know in advance precisely what an individual may say, we are familiar with the problems that many people face today. Thus, we can “study” and be mentally prepared to respond to a variety of situations.
4 For example, we may have prepared to converse on the subject of world peace, but the householder mentions that he has lost his job. Should we ignore this comment? Undoubtedly, the matter of providing for his household weighs on his mind and heart. How could you respond to his needs? You could empathize with him, showing genuine concern for his situation. Then kindly direct his attention to scriptures that show how God’s government will provide satisfying employment and all our needs.​—Isa. 65:17, 21, 22, 24.
5 Perhaps we learn that the individual or a member of his family was recently the victim of a crime or has suffered some injustice. Our sympathetic concern and personal interest in these circumstances may soften the person’s heart, making it possible to show him that Jehovah God is very much aware of these painful problems and will soon take action to remove all wickedness.​—See Reasoning From the Scriptures, pages 10, 12, 229-31.
6 A poor relationship between individuals often results because they have not communicated well. When one talks, the other party may not truly pay attention with his mind and heart. Such poor listening habits can result in misunderstandings or missed opportunities to help someone. By cultivating the good habit of listening respectfully, we can more effectively present the good news, reflect Jehovah’s unselfish interest in others, and help others develop a good relationship with our loving Creator and his people.​—Jas. 1:19; g74 11/22 pp. 21-3.

