Reaping in Proportion to Our Personal Effort
1 Jehovah God has demonstrated his love for humankind in many ways. Jesus highlighted God’s surpassing love, pointing out to an assembled crowd that God “makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.” (Matt. 5:43-48) On another occasion, Jesus identified his Father’s most outstanding expression of love​—the sacrifice of his only-begotten Son, whom God gave for our salvation. (John 3:16) Jesus admonished his listeners to respond appreciatively to Jehovah’s love. Are we endeavoring to do that?
2 In order for us to express full appreciation and gain lasting benefits from Jehovah’s love, we must come to know him. (John 17:3) We need counsel and direction as to how we can serve him acceptably. Jehovah has demonstrated his loving concern by giving us his inspired Word, the Bible, and by raising up his marvelous organization, through which we receive counsel and instruction. (Matt. 24:45-47; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17) As Jehovah’s dedicated people, we have been taught in his way. But are we showing by our personal effort that we are appreciative of Jehovah’s love? Are we heeding his counsel so as to be pleasing to him and thereby benefiting ourselves? (Isa. 48:17; Jas. 1:22) The apostle Paul wrote at 1 Corinthians 3:8: “Now he that plants and he that waters are one, but each person will receive his own reward according to his own labor.”
3 Yes, we must work at doing what God wants us to do. Not everyone progresses spiritually at the same pace. There are many factors that can have a bearing on our progress, and it would be unwise to make discouraging comparisons. However, of vital importance is the individual effort we make. What can we do to draw closer to the organization? Are there areas where we can improve in accepting our personal responsibilities as Christians? What effort will it take to give better support to congregation activities? Are there points that we need to apply in the way of instructions that the organization gives us?​—1 Tim. 4:16.
IMITATE FAITHFUL ONES
4 The good news of the Kingdom has been preached for decades by faithful brothers and sisters. These faithful ones, like Paul, are worthy of imitation. (1 Cor. 11:1) They have responded to God’s love and have reaped many benefits because of their hard work and their personal efforts to follow Bible counsel. They compose a solid core of active workers in the congregation, not shirking their personal responsibility. We can see the fruitage of their individual labors.​—Rom. 1:13; 2 Cor. 3:1-3.
5 Now, tens of thousands of new ones are flocking to the organization each year. (Isa. 60:8) They too are serious about laboring to become full-grown spiritual persons, and their zeal in the preaching work is worthy of commendation. They benefit from seeing how Jehovah blesses those who work hard in his service. The example of mature brothers and sisters helps new ones appreciate that this is no time to slack the hand or let up in our service to God. Whether new ones or experienced publishers, are we continuing to grow spiritually, accepting our personal Christian responsibilities and taking advantage of all theocratic provisions?
APPLYING WHAT WE LEARN
6 Long before James wrote that we should be ‘doers of the work,’ Moses said to the Jews: “You must apply these words.” (Jas. 1:25; Deut. 11:18) So knowledge in itself was not enough. The Jews needed to apply the words of the Law in obedience to Jehovah. This basic principle remains the same. Jesus, the Son of God, surely knew the importance of obedience. (John 8:28) He said at Matthew 7:24: “Everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man.”
7 Are we applying what we learn at circuit assemblies? Do we appreciate why it is so vital at this time to stay awake and keep our senses? Are we alert to the subtle attacks and snares laid by the Devil? Do we appreciate the counsel and warnings given us repeatedly by the organization concerning the need for moral and spiritual cleanness in the congregation? To what degree are we individually applying what we hear?​—Jas. 1:23-25.
8 The current special assembly day program emphasizes our need to be holy, as Jehovah is holy. (1 Pet. 1:14-16) Holiness means religious cleanness or purity, sacredness. It denotes a state of being set aside to the service of God. We have been entrusted with the ministry of the good news. Hence, we must be clean spiritually, morally, and physically so as to be worthy of carrying the holy Word of truth. This requires that we pay more than the usual attention to ourselves. (Heb. 2:1) As we do so, we will reap blessings in proportion to our personal effort.
BENEFIT FROM PERSONAL STUDY
9 Personal study helps us to build a strong faith, and it deepens our appreciation for the truth. It gives us confidence and equips us to speak with authority. It gives us insight and discernment and helps us to put on the new personality. (Col. 1:9-11) However, productive study takes time and effort, and there is no shortcut to acquiring accurate knowledge and spiritual depth. What we put into study is what we will get out of it.​—2 Cor. 9:6, 7; Gal. 6:7.
10 Do we set aside sufficient time each week to prepare for congregation meetings? This is one way we can show appreciation for the spiritual diet Jehovah provides through the faithful and discreet slave. Proper preparation for the meetings helps us stick to the schedule for reading and studying God’s Word. Do we set aside time each week to do our Bible reading as set forth in the program for the Theocratic Ministry School? It takes just a few minutes each day to read and meditate on the material. The Service Meeting helps keep us alert to ways in which we can make our public ministry effective. Do we prepare, giving special thought to how we can use this material in the ministry? And do we make an effort to use it right away? Specific arrangements should be made to prepare for the Watchtower Study and for the Congregation Book Study. Are we doing that?
PARTICIPATE IN MEETINGS
11 We can benefit more from the meetings when we participate in them. Preparation for the meetings and then making the effort to participate keeps us attentive during the meetings and makes it easier for us to benefit from the comments of others. Many still remember the hard work they put into their first comment at a meeting or their first student talk in the Theocratic Ministry School. Although a great measure of nervousness should have subsided, do we continue to work hard at making our spiritual growth manifest to all? (1 Tim. 4:15) Others benefit and are encouraged by our comments. If we are well prepared, having studied the material that will be considered at the meetings, our meaningful share in them will incite others to love and fine works.​—Heb. 10:23-25.
12 Our comments should not be long and complicated. Usually it is best to make brief comments that directly answer the questions that are posed or help clarify the application of a scripture. If we have prepared well, we will be able to comment in our own words. When we do that, the benefits to ourselves and to others are far greater. Why? Because it requires us to think about what we are saying and explain the point as we understand it. This may make it easier for others to understand the material. Also, it will help us to remember the information for use on another occasion.
SOW GENEROUSLY IN THE FIELD
13 Our Christian ministry is a treasure of service. (2 Cor. 4:7) Do you view it that way? Through the ministry, we have the privilege of expressing our faith to others. Jesus said that out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. (Luke 6:45) The personal effort we put forth to have a full share in the field ministry allows us to reap many benefits. Our understanding of the truth is sharpened, and we develop greater ability to use the Bible. We have the joy of bringing the truth to others and helping them to learn of their Grand Creator. We stand as witnesses to the rightness of God’s rule and his sovereignty. We are happy because we know that we are pleasing Jehovah, being made over into his likeness and doing his will.​—Matt. 5:48.
14 If we continually measure our personal effort, our worship of Jehovah will never become token service. What does that mean? It means that we will not become halfhearted in complying with God’s will, rendering only an appearance of service to him or a minimum amount without genuine heartfelt devotion and effort. Our service to Jehovah must be wholehearted. We have a Scriptural obligation to give our all in his service. (Col. 3:23, 24) True, circumstances vary, and Jehovah does not require more of us than we are able to do. However, what we can do, he expects us to do! (Matt. 22:37) Since fallen human nature is inclined to be self-sparing, it is good to examine ourselves from time to time and see where we can make improvements in our service to God. Are we accustomed to doing that?
15 Vigilance must be exercised if we are to avoid allowing personal pursuits and desires to prevent us from giving our best in Jehovah’s service. Pleasures, hobbies, and recreational activities must be kept in their place. Also, we must guard against the tendency to become overly involved in secular activities. Heeding Jesus’ counsel at Matthew 6:22, 23, we will no doubt be able to put forth more effort in pursuing spiritual interests and reap accordingly.
16 As we continue to work hard at putting on the new personality, we will accept our own responsibility in applying counsel and suggestions that we receive at congregation meetings, assemblies, conventions, and through the publications. May each one of us study diligently, actively participate in meetings, and share in this great disciple-making work to the extent our personal circumstances will allow. By thus responding appreciatively to God’s love, we can be assured of reaping bountiful spiritual rewards now and maintain the solid hope of life eternal in Jehovah’s new world.

