Start and Conclude Meetings on Time
1 All congregation meetings, including meetings for field service, should start and conclude on time. Why? Being on time reflects order and shows consideration for all who attend and participate in meetings. (Eccl. 3:17b; 1 Cor. 14:33) We can show our concern by adhering to the following guidelines to ensure that meetings start and end on time.
2 We should always endeavor to arrive at the meeting early enough to visit with others, take care of necessary matters, and share in the opening song and prayer. Generally, five minutes are allowed for song and prayer. Those representing the congregation in prayer should keep in mind the purpose of the meeting and let that be reflected in their expressions in the opening and concluding prayers. Such prayers need not be long.
3 Public Meeting: Public talks are limited to 45 minutes. Exceeding the time allowed will affect the Watchtower Study that follows. The two meetings, including songs and prayers, are to be concluded in two hours. Public speakers should adhere to the timing indicated on the Society’s outline and not include in the talk extraneous matters, such as greetings. If a speaker is unacquainted with the location of the Kingdom Hall, he should inquire of the host congregation for directions and approximate travel time.
4 “Watchtower” Study: One hour is allotted for the Watchtower Study, with all the paragraphs being read and the review questions considered. The conductor’s brief, pointed introductory comments should arouse interest and lead into the lesson. His comments and observations during the study should be limited. Apportioning the material timewise will help the conductor avoid spending excessive time on the first half of the lesson and then rushing through the last half.
5 Theocratic Ministry School: This is a 45-minute meeting. Although the instruction talk and highlights from the Bible reading are not stopped when the time is up, the brothers assigned these parts must stay within their allowed time. If this is not done, private counsel should be given. Also, counsel and remarks by the school overseer should stay within the prescribed time. Time can be saved if all the students are seated near the platform and if each one promptly concludes his talk when the allotted time is up.​—See Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1991.
6 Service Meeting: This is also a 45-minute meeting. Together with the Theocratic Ministry School and songs and prayers, the entire program should not exceed one hour and forty-five minutes. Brothers with parts on the Service Meeting should adhere to the time allotted. Parts to be covered by questions and answers need only a brief introduction. There is no need to add extensive introductory information. Demonstrations should be well rehearsed, and the participants should be ready and in place so as to make good use of the time allotted for the part.
7 Congregation Book Study: This is a one-hour meeting, including the opening and concluding prayers. All the paragraphs are to be read. To ensure ending the meeting on time, the conductor will apportion the material so as to avoid rushing through the last part of the lesson or finishing too early. The conductor needs to be discerning as to how much time is spent on each paragraph. The main points should be clearly understood. The conductor’s art of teaching will enable him to meet any challenge in this regard.​—Titus 1:9.
8 Meetings for Field Service: These should not exceed 15 minutes, including making territory assignments and concluding with prayer. Those going out in service want to start their field service activity as soon as possible. The conductor will start the meeting on time, not delaying until a larger group is present. Also, once territory assignments are made and the meeting is concluded with prayer, the group can depart promptly to the field. This is especially important for pioneers who may be present.
9 All of us can benefit from meetings that start and end on time. This is especially appreciated by those who have unbelieving mates who expect them to be home at a certain time. When arranging for transportation to and from meetings or when stating the time they will return home, those from divided families would do well to take into account the time they need before and after meetings for fellowship, picking up literature, and so forth. Unquestionably, starting and ending meetings on time contributes to doing things “decently and by arrangement.”​—1 Cor. 14:40.

