From Our Readers
Young People Ask
Thank you, oh, so much for the articles on “Young People Ask.” My daughter, 14 years old, has been cutting them out and making a booklet with these articles. Many times as I have tried to talk to her she would ‘turn me off’ as ‘there-she-goes-again.’ But when she reads your articles I can see the progress. As parents, we need all the help we can get with our young people.
C. H., California
Thank you so much for the article “Young People Ask . . . What if It’s More Than Just the Blues?” (December 8, 1982) Even those of us not considered young people need help in coping with major depression. The article gave an excellent summary of the symptoms. It is encouraging to know that others have successfully combated that horrible hopelessness. I especially appreciated the suggestion to “visualize alternatives or the possibility of a favorable outcome.” Thank you for this sensitive article.
R. M., Texas
I enjoy your articles on “Young People Ask.” Could you please write an article about working in school, because I find difficulty in trying to concentrate because of all the noise the children make in class. The teachers allow the children to make this noise, and this annoys me very much and I can’t do my lessons.
G. A., eight years old, England
We will be happy to consider this matter.​—ED.
Sugar​—How Sweet?
“Sugar​—How Sweet?” (November 22, 1982) An excellent article on a history of the past that the schools I attended left out. I was so impressed by it that I wrote seven prominent news broadcasters in California, telling of the basic merits of this outstanding article.
H. B., California
I really enjoyed the article “Sugar’s Past​—How Sweet Was It?” I would also like to compliment you on your pictures, but I noticed on pages 4 and 5 that the setting took place in the 1800’s, but the slave owners were dressed in clothing of the 1900’s. Why?
B. G., Massachusetts
It seems we forgot to set the clock back.​—ED.
Illustrations
I just wanted to express my appreciation for the illustrations in recent issues of your magazine. They seem to arouse my curiosity about what’s inside each magazine. They are very informative. I find it easier to remember the article in the magazines if I can recall the illustrations that go with them. Your illustrations have proved true the saying: “A picture is worth a thousand words.” I really appreciate your efforts in making the magazines enjoyable!
S. T., Missouri

