Advance Preparation Brings Joy
1 Sharing in the field ministry brings us great joy. (Ps. 89:15, 16) Of course, preparation is a key element in being able to experience that joy to the full. The better we prepare, the more we accomplish, and the more we accomplish, the greater our joy.
2 Use the Tools That Are Provided: Begin your preparation by reading and analyzing the material in Our Kingdom Ministry. It often provides well-thought-out presentations that are designed to help you present the Kingdom message easily and effectively. You will find examples of how to absorb common objections. Specific ideas are offered on how to make an effective return visit, with the goal of starting a Bible study. You have freedom to adapt these suggestions to the point where you feel comfortable using them. Added to this, you have the Reasoning book, which supplies a wide variety of introductions as well as responses to conversation stoppers, thus helping you to become more effective in many of the situations that you encounter.
3 Look over the publication you will be offering, and pick one or two striking points of interest that you can show to the householder. A thought-provoking news item that you heard or read about might give you an opening to start a conversation. Anticipate common objections that you are likely to encounter, and get a few thoughts in mind as to how you might respond. Then take a few minutes to practice what you are going to say at the door.
4 Attend Every Service Meeting: Listen carefully during the Service Meeting when the suggestions presented in Our Kingdom Ministry are discussed, reviewed, and demonstrated. Take note of ideas that you feel can be incorporated into your presentation. Recall some of the common situations that you have encountered in the ministry, and think about ways in which you can witness more effectively. Talk about these things with other publishers before and after the meeting.
5 You can be sure that if you are “prepared for every good work,” you will be rewarded with greater joy and success in helping others find the way to life.​—2 Tim. 2:21.

