Pray for Jehovah’s Help
1 Jesus impressed upon his disciples the need for Jehovah’s blessing on their ministry. (Matt. 9:37, 38) Our heartfelt prayers of praise and thanksgiving along with earnest petitions and supplications demonstrate our complete reliance on Jehovah for his help. (Phil. 4:6, 7) The Scriptures urge us to carry on prayer with “every form of prayer and supplication,” and this would apply to our prayers concerning the ministry.​—Eph. 6:18.
2 We praise Jehovah in prayer for his peerless qualities and accomplishments. We also praise him as the Giver of the good news that we preach. He deserves our praise because he alone makes our ministry successful.​—Ps. 127:1.
3 Our prayers of thanksgiving express appreciation for the understanding that Jehovah has given us about his will and purpose. Is it not a privilege to share Kingdom truths with others? We thank Jehovah for all that we accomplish in the ministry.​—Ps. 107:8; Eph. 5:20.
4 Very appropriately, we ask Jehovah for help in finding people who will accept our offer of a Bible study, and we ask for help in reaching their hearts with the truth. By making such petitions, we acknowledge that only God can make our work in the ministry productive.​—1 Cor. 3:5-7.
5 A sister felt that a woman on her magazine route was not reading The Watchtower and Awake! Not wanting these precious journals to go to waste, she petitioned Jehovah that if the woman was not reading them, she would refuse them. When the sister visited the next time, the woman’s husband said: “Thank you for delivering these magazines regularly. I am reading them and really like them.”
6 With humble and earnest entreaty, we can supplicate Jehovah to help us to deal with public apathy and ridicule and to overcome any fear of man in order to keep on boldly witnessing to others. (Acts 4:31) If we continue to carry on prayer with “every form of prayer and supplication” as we obediently pursue our sacred service, we can be confident of Jehovah’s help.​—1 John 3:22.

