Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 5
Song 6
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on April field service report for the country and the local congregation. Theocratic News.
20 min: “Pray for Jehovah’s Help.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Explain how sincere prayers of various kinds play a vital role in a successful ministry. Invite audience to relate experiences showing how timely prayers helped them in their ministry.​—See October 15, 1996, Watchtower, page 32.
15 min: Make Good Use of Brochures. Talk and demonstrations. Explain why brochures are valuable tools in our ministry. They deal effectively with subjects that have wide appeal, cover one basic theme concisely, and explain Scriptural teachings simply. Mention the brochures being offered this month, and show the ones that are in good supply locally. Demonstrate two or three brief presentations based on suggestions found under the heading “Presentations” in the Watch Tower Publications Index.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 12
Song 103
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “Advance Preparation Brings Joy.” Talk and interviews. Explain why preparation is essential for field service activity and how it enables us to experience greater joy in what we do. (See School Guidebook, page 39, paragraphs 1-3.) Interview two or three capable publishers who tell how they prepare before going in service and how that helps them. Relate experience from April 15, 1993, Watchtower, page 30, showing effective use of the Reasoning book in preparing for the ministry.
20 min: “Let’s ‘Get to the Point!’” Audience participation and demonstrations. Review each suggestion of what to say to get a listening ear at the door. Have experienced publishers demonstrate several introductions that are effective. Invite audience to offer additional suggestions and relate encouraging experiences that show what really works locally.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 19
Song 31
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Do I Have to Join an Organization? Audience discussion based on the Reasoning book, pages 280-4. We often encounter people who are receptive to the Kingdom message but who have an aversion to “joining” a religious organization. Review the definition of “organization” and the seven characteristics that identify Jehovah’s visible organization. Explain why it is different from others and how association with it brings real blessings.
Song 189 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 26
Song 184
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for July. Question Box.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program.” A talk. Announce date of the next circuit assembly. Encourage new ones to think about getting baptized. Urge all to attend every session.
20 min: Are We Making Disciples? Service overseer discusses with one or two ministerial servants points from February 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 19-22. Highlight Scriptural reasons why we need to search out the deserving ones in our territory and make disciples of them. (Matt. 10:11) These are the ones who are sighing because of all the wicked and ungodly conditions they see around them and who are apt to seek Jehovah before the day of his anger breaks. (Ezek. 9:4; Zeph. 2:2, 3) Among them are ‘those who are rightly disposed for everlasting life.’ (Acts 13:48) Our commission is to be disciple makers, teaching people all the things that Jesus commanded. (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) While we may stir the initial interest of those we meet in the house-to-house work, while informal witnessing, and in street work, we make disciples in the follow-up ministry​—on return visits and Bible studies. Point out practical suggestions on how this can be done.
Song 14 and concluding prayer.

