VOL. XXIX FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

The Financial Stress World-Wide 51 

Wants Permission to Preach Truth 51 

Scientist Claims He Has Talked With the Dead.. 52 

Doctors Differ— Both are Right 53 

Fragment of Gospel Valueless 54 

Failed to Keep His Appointment 54 

Cincinnati Debates and Convention 54 

He Went About Doing Good 55 

Himself Bare Our Sicknesses 56 

"Give Ye Them to Eat" 57 

Giving Thanks Always for All Things 58 

Discouragements from Error 60 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 62 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



COLPORTEURS will please address all correspondence re their 
work to the COLPORTEUR DEPT., and be sure to give full 
address and number at the top of each letter or order. 
On their Report Sheets they will please separate the names 
at different P.O.s, writing the name of P.O. very distinctly 
above its list— in colored ink, if convenient. These names 
are used in sending samples of our literature, and inaccuracy 
involves loss of literature, postage and the good that might 
be done. Denominational proclivities of purchasers need not 
be noted on Reports, except when they happen to be learned. 

THE WOMAN'S NATIONAL DAILY, ST. LOUIS, MO., 

proposes to refund subscriptions sent in by us only upon the 
request of the subscribers themselves. We request that all of 
our friends who have been receiving the WOMAN'S DAILY for 
the past month or more write to it at once a post card, saying 
that their chief interest in it was in Pastor Russell's sermons, 
and that if these will not appear regularly hereafter, they will 
please drop your name, returning their subscription money to 
you personally, or through the WATCH TOWER B. & T. Society. 

Those who have subscribed, but have received only a sample 
copy of the DAILY will understand that we have been holding 
their subscriptions pending this decision. Unless otherwise 
directed we will apply their money for some other paper 
which does publish the desired sermons. Such might, however, 
send postals to the WOMAN'S DAILY, saying that they 



had subscribed through us and were disappointed, and must 
now take a paper which does publish the sermons weekly. 



R4134:page51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE FINANCIAL STRESS WORLD-WIDE 



SO intertwined are the finances of the world that 

our recent disturbance from lack of circulating 

currency is affecting all Europe. Precipitated 

by a battle between financial giants, which obliterated 

one party and crippled the other, the panicky sentiment 

spread to every quarter of this land and its waves 

are now causing disturbances afar, whilst New York, 

the original center, has become more calm. That there 

was not sufficient money for the vast business enterprises 

of our land was seen by many financiers, and 

warning signals were given a year in advance. But 

nobody moved to produce the needed extra currency 

(which silver would have supplied had it not been demonetized). 

Unless this new blood (more currency) be 

supplied speedily no rapid recovery need be expected. 

This means further depression along some lines, notwithstanding 

the great prosperity within grasp. 

Much is being said in a partizan spirit, charging 
that the panic was deliberately brought on by the very 
rich, to show their power and to take a stronger hold. 
This is surely erroneous, as the very rich have suffered 
most. The President and Mr. Lawson are also blamed 
unjustly for precipitating the panic by exposing the 
disapproved methods of some financiers. Public distrust 
did extend to railroad bonds and some railroad 
shares and justly; but this would have produced no 
panic had there been sufficient currency (money) for 
the country's needs. Congress and the bankers are responsible, 
though they do not realize it. 

However, from our standpoint we need blame none 
of them. Rather we may say that in divine providence 

R4135 : page 51 

their eyes have been holden as respects the real seat of 
the difficulty— that the panic might come just when it 
did— at the opening of the last seven years of "Gentile 
Times." We advise the Lord's people to do nothing 
to provoke strife, discontent or panic, but that each 
"set his house in order" in financial matters, and with 
hearts full of confidence in the Lord give all the 
more attention to the promulgation of the "harvest" 
message to all who have the hearing ear. And you 



will find these ears increasing in numbers and keenness 
to hear the good tidings which alone can satisfy 
and give peace in time of storm and stress. 

THE POLITICAL EFFECT OF THE PANIC 

Undoubtedly Socialistic ideas will thrive now as 
never before. Indeed the President and several aspirants 
for the office are boldly saying what only Socialists 
would have uttered a few years ago. 

Now is a time for patience and for remembering 
that Socialism cannot do for the world what it desires 
and teaches. Now is the time for remembering that 
God has a plan that is surely working itself out. "In 
your patience possess ye your souls." (Luke 21:19.) 
"Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I 
rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour 
upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: 
for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my 
jealousy. Then will I turn to the people a pure message, 
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord 
to serve him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 

WANTS PERMISSION TO PREACH TRUTH 



New York, Feb. 3.— Staunch Church members of 
Bayonne awoke this morning after a night of restlessness 

following a strange sermon by Rev. [we omit 

the name lest the reverend gentleman should feel hurt 

by our comments], pastor of the Church, one of 

the largest in the town. The minister had made the 
statement that he would ask the authorities of his 
Church for "permission to preach the truth for two 
years as an experiment." It apparently followed from 
his statement that during at least a large part of the 
twenty years which the doctor had spent in the ministry 
he had been preaching what he believed was not 
true— in fact, the preacher himself said as much. He 
declared that had he known what he was doing 
when he entered the ministry he would not have gone 
into it.— Press Dispatch. 



We wonder if any other profession contains as 
many foolish men as does the (nominal) Christian ministry. 

R4135 : page 52 

Doubtless there are men in all the professions 
equally dishonest; but they seem to be wiser than 
to thus parade their dishonesty before the public with 
the expectation that it will be appreciated and that 



they will be esteemed ideally honest men— martyrs for 
the truth's sake! No doubt many doctors are connected 
with a popular school of medicine which they believe 
is not the best;— no doubt some let their patients 
die rather than break with their endorsed system, its 
honorable reputation and lucrative returns; but they 
are not so foolish as to tell of their chicanery and expect 
the people to applaud their "honesty." 

But ministers tell us freely that they never did believe 
the Westminster Confession of Faith which they 
confessed and promised to teach. And now this reverend 
gentleman intimates to his congregation that he 
does not believe the Bible and the messages he has 
been giving them for the past twenty years: His great, 
honest soul is tortured until he cries out for liberty to tell 
the truth. 

The Bible assures us that God desires truth in the 
inward parts— in the heart. In our opinion, if the 
Lord had some new revelation to send to the world 
(which we deny) he would not select for his channel 
the man who confesses himself to have been dishonest 
for twenty years in his most public utterances. 

And, pray, what are the bonds by which this truth-loving 
soul is held back from preaching what he believes 
is truth? They evidently are two: (1) Love of 
money, and (2) Love of the esteem of men. He has 
so much loved his salary and his title and "authority 
to preach" that as chains they have held him 
fast to the preaching of what for twenty years he believed 
to be a lie. Now these chains have finally worn 
through a callous surface until they have reached the 
quick, and he squirms and writhes in pain, crying out, 
Let me keep my salary and title while I tell the people 
what a fraud I have been. 

SCIENTIST CLAIMS HE HAS TALKED WITH THE DEAD 



(CABLE DISPATCH TO THE NEW YORK SUN) 

London.— Serious statements by Sir Oliver Lodge 
command respectful attention, even when he abandons 
science for mysticism. It was therefore with something 
like amazement rather than skepticism that a meeting 
of the Psychical Research Society heard the distinguished 
scientist practically affirm that communications 
were received from the dead in secret and exhaustive 
tests recently conducted by certain members of 
that society through spiritualistic mediums, or automatists, 
as Sir Oliver called them. Referring to what 
happened at the seances Sir Oliver said: 

"The most important set of phenomena are those 
of automatic writing and talking, and what do we find? 
We find the late Edmund Gurney, the late Richard 
Hodgson and the late F. W. H. Myers, with others less 



known, constantly purporting to communicate with us, 
with the express purpose of patiently proving their 
identity by giving us cross correspondence between 
different mediums. 

"We also find them answering specific questions in 
a manner characteristic of their known personalities 
and giving evidence of knowledge appropriate to them. 
Not easily or early do we make this admission. In 
spite of long conversations with what purports to be 
the surviving intelligence of these friends and investigators, 
we were by no means convinced of their identity 
by more general conversation, even when it was of 
a friendly and intimate character, such as in ordinary 
case would have been considered amply sufficient for 
identification of friends speaking, say, through the telephone 
or typewriter. 

"We required definite and crucial proof, a proof 
difficult even to imagine as well as difficult to supply. 
The ostensible communicators realize the need of such 
proof as fully as we do and have done their best to satisfy 
the rational demand. Some of us think they succeeded. 
Others are still doubtful. 

"Cross correspondence— that is, the reception of 
part of a message through one medium and part 
through another, neither portion separately being understood 
by either— is good evidence of one intelligence 
dominating both automatists, and if the message is 
characteristic of some particular deceased person and 
is received as such by persons to whom he was not intimately 
known, then it is fair proof of the intellectual 
activity of that person. 

"If, further, we get from him a piece of literary 
criticism which is eminently in his vein, which has not 
occurred to ordinary people, then I say the proof, already 
striking, is tending to become crucial. These 
are the kinds of proof which the society has had communicated 
to it. The phenomenon of automatic writing 
strikes some of us as if it were in the direct line of 
evolutional advance. It seems like the beginning of a 
new human faculty." 

Sir Oliver continued impressively: "I am going to 
assume in fact that our bodies can under certain exceptional 
circumstances be controlled directly or be temporarily 
possessed by another or foreign intelligence 
operating either on the whole or some limited part of 
it. The question lying behind such an hypothesis, 
and justifying or negativing it, is the root question of 
identity, the identity of the control. 

"Some control undoubtedly exists, and it is not the 
normal consciousness of the person owning the body. 
Every one who knows anything about the matter is 
quite certain that this question of identity is a fundamental 
one. The controlling spirit proves its identity 
mainly by reproducing the speech or writing facts which 
belong to his memory, not the automatist's memory." 



Well do the Scriptures declare of our day and people, 
"The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
(Isa. 29: 14.) Here we have a fresh illustration of how 
the things that are naught may and can and do confound 
those who are great and learned. "The secret 
of the Lord is with them that reverence him." Hence 
the Christian of low degree, from the standpoint of 
service, may, through the instructions of the Bible, 
know clearly things that the famous and learned in 
other wisdom cannot know. He knows that the dead 
are actually dead and cannot know or communicate 
anything until made alive by our Redeemer in the 
resurrection morning. He knows, too, that the demons, 

R4136 : page 53 

who personate the dead to deceive, are wholly unreliable, 
and that anyway the Lord's people are forbidden 
to have any communication with them under any 
pretext. 

Thus the Lord keeps his own who trust him and 
follow his instructions. The Scriptures say: "The 
wise are taken in their own craftiness." And so it will 
appear ere long to all; that the world's brightest, wisest 
men in this its wisest epoch will be found to have 
been foolish, in that they trusted to their own wisdom 
and neglected God's Word. We caution all of our 
readers against all occultism— against every revelation 
and manifestation or reputed special communion with 
their dead friends, or even with the Lord or his angel. 
These are fraudulent: attempts to entangle you. 
Look for guidance to the voice behind— the Lord's messages 
through the apostles and prophets. (Isa. 30:21.) 
Expect your guidance as it has been sent all down this 
Gospel Age by the holy Spirit's supervision and 
through the members of Christ— I Cor. 12:11-29. 

DOCTORS DIFFER-BOTH ARE RIGHT 



"The Rev. Dr. Newman Smyth, a member of the 
Yale Corporation, and for twenty-five years pastor of 
the Center Church, New Haven's largest and most conservative 
Congregational Church, electrified his congregation 
yesterday morning by declaring that the age 
of Protestantism is past, that it is no longer needed. 
He said that the churches are all split up and are becoming 
more so every day. They no longer have power 
over the people or the state. He said that the time for 
a new Catholicism is at hand and that the sooner people 
realize it the better."— Waterbury American. 

"At the Second Church yesterday morning the Rev. 



Dr. Davenport preached a second sermon on Protestantism 
and Catholicism, answering the question, "Is 
organized Protestantism to perish?" He took for his 
text Matt. 16: 18, 'And I also say unto thee that thou 
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.' 

"After discussing the bearing of this text on the 
theological controversies of the past, declaring that in 
the Church thus predicted Protestantism was included 
no less than Catholicism, and recounting the struggles 
out of which evolved Protestantism as we know it today, 
Dr. Davenport reached this conclusion: 

'"How is it with the Protestant churches in their 
relation to the life of today? Do they on the whole 
seem weak, inefficient, dying? I see nothing of this 
as I look out upon their hundreds of thousands in all 
the world; with their hundreds of millions of constituents. 
They represent in this land and in other lands 
a vast amount of cultured manhood and womanhood, 
of wealth, of learning, for they are in closest alliance 
with the advanced thought of the time, the founders of 
innumerable colleges and the patrons of great and numerous 
universities from Cambridge and Oxford to 
Harvard and Yale.'"— Waterbury American. 



The two gentlemen quoted above seem to be taking 
opposing views; but in reality they agree. Protestants 
are becoming individual thinkers, instead of class or 
sect thinkers. They are dropping all doctrine and 
merely maintaining "a form of godliness." They maintain 
the form partly as a "fire insurance" and partly as 
a protection against anarchy. Doctrinally, therefore, 
there are fewer and fewer Protestants as the days go 
by. Few know enough about doctrines to protest 
against any of the doctrines of the Church of Rome or 
any other. 

Dr. Smyth is right when he insists that all are becoming 
Catholic— if that word be taken according to its 
broad meaning, signifying general. The term Christian 
has become so general as to include all who live in civilized 
lands and act decently and cooperate with the majority 
along the lines of moral reform— without opposing 
or denouncing false theology or anything that is popular. 
In this sense the Catholic spirit is growing. 

The other man is right in claiming that Protestantism 
is established and prospering; for the Catholic 
spirit we have just described is a Protestant spirit also 
in the sense that, doctrines being ignored, the practices 
of Catholicism today are just such as Protestants 
specially cried out for four centuries ago. The 
protest of the past was doctrinal on the part of some, 
but to the masses it never meant more than liberty of 
conscience and freedom from persecution. Thus whilst 
Protestantism has failed doctrinally it has succeeded 



as respects human liberty. 

True, there are many Catholics and Protestants 
who have the old Catholic spirit— a desire to stifle conscience 
and to persecute dissenters— but they are in 
the minority; the civilized world protests against that. 

However, according to our understanding of the 
Bible, it will not be long until the Catholic spirit of coercion 
and persecution will again dominate Christendom; 
with the awful result of provoking the anarchy with 
which this age will close and the new age be 
introduced. 

THE HIPPOPOTAMUS TOOTH 



IOWA DISCOVERY MERELY CONFIRMATORY OF SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, VOLUME VI., CHAPTER I. 

"In recent newspapers there is a news item, to 
which considerable display is given, concerning 
the finding of the fossil tooth of a hippopotamus in 
Iowa. The item goes on to say that the finding of the 
tooth, coupled with the former finding of skeletons of 
elephants in that state, gives the first evidence of the 
existence of a tropical climate in North America in the 
period immediately preceding the present geological 
age of the world. 

"Allow me to suggest as modestly as possible that 
the professors are again, as usual, wrong. The evidence 
is unvarying that the climate of the earth in the 
period immediately prior to the present one was universally 
mild, and that in every zone of latitude there 
were no frosts, no rainstorms, no winter, and no torridity 
of heat. At the mouth of the Mackenzie river in 
Alaska, where now the temperature falls to 109 degrees 
below zero (F.), there was found the trunk of a cinnamon 
palm, a tree that can endure no frost. This trunk 
was rooted in the soil out of which it grew; it was 
killed by the change of climate which suddenly swept 

R4136 : page 54 

over the earth in the month of November, about 2548 
B.C., when the collapse of the ancient protecting canopy 
of water surrounding the earth first permitted the 
cold of space to reach its surface. 

"In 1884 Tolle and Bunge examined some animal remains 
on Liakoff island in the Arctic and there found 
that the remains of an incredible quantity of so-called 
tropical animals were heaped together in such a manner 
as to indicate that this island, equal in area to the 
state of Illinois, was composed in equal parts of their 
bones and of the ice and sand in which they were 
imbedded. 

"Beneath the clay, sand and carbonaceous mud, 



which our geologists take to be drift from the glaciers 

which never existed except in the imagination, there 

lies all over the world alike the remains of the lost climate 

of the golden age, when, in common with other 

creatures, human beings attained an enormous age. 

In Louisiana are found in rock-cut caves human skeletons 

(of the white race) which from the flattening of 

the tibia and the femora, and from the variation of the 

grinding surfaces of their teeth, must have attained 

the age of 1,000 years approximately."— W. V. Cooling 

in Chicago Inter-Ocean. 

HIGHER CRITICISM INFIDELITY IN NORWAY 



The Lutheran Church in Norway finds herself 
obliged to make front against the influence of "The 
New Theology." The "Lutheran Kirketid" made 
known in October of last year an appeal for the founding 
of a theological Church faculty that would stand 
fully on the foundation of the Word of God and the 
Lutheran Confession. By the term Church faculty we 
are to understand a seminary for ministers. In the appeal, 
together with other things, is said: "The time is 
urgent. A new spiritual stream presses with ever-increasing 
strength and self-consciousness and grasps 
the foundation truths of Christianity— not alone the 
Church doctrines, but it also menaces the Christian life 
at the roots, respecting both present and future. In such 
times there rests on our churches a peculiar responsibility. 
Therefore we must most decidedly come to the 
support of this movement, which seems to us fully justified, 
and this by money contributions as well as by 
encouraging the youth to whom the call of service in 
the Church appeals. To the extent of our ability we 
must stimulate and support them." The appeal was 
signed by 276 men, among them sixty-five ministers. 

FRAGMENT OF GOSPEL VALUELESS 



As "news" and to fill space, newspapers are publishing 
lengthy accounts of "a fragment of a Gospel found 
in Egypt." It is of no value, being of unknown authorship, 
and in style quite different from our Lord's 
authenticated words, and out of harmony with the 
Truth in general. 

FAILED TO KEEP HIS APPOINTMENT 



The friends who went to Elkhart, Ind., to attend 
the debates and were disappointed have our sympathy. 



A week before the date Dr. Dillon wrote that he could 
not keep his appointment because of a "quarterly meeting" 
at that time, of which he probably had forgotten 
when he suggested the date for our acceptance. Or 
possibly its importance seemed greater later on, as he 
thought of the questions for debate. We wrote and 
also telegraphed to him, urging matters, because the 
announcement had gone forth, but we received no reply. 



R4137 : page 54 

CINCINNATI DEBATES AND CONVENTION 

INTEREST grows in the Cincinnati Convention and the 
Debates between the Editor of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
and Elder L. S. White, representing the Christian denomination 
(Radical branch). The prospects now are that 
there will be a good representation of the brethren and sisters 
from every direction. Pittsburgh friends will have special 
cars on the Pennsylvania R.R. 9 a.m. and 10 p.m. Feb. 
22. The Chicago* friends have made special arrangements 
for a large party over the Monon Route and C.H.& D. 
R.R., leaving Chicago February 22, 11 p.m. Nearby friends 
or those en route will be welcomed with either excursion 
party. 

"Music Hall," Elm St., cor. 14th, Cincinnati, is one of the 
finest auditoriums in the world. It has been secured for eight 
days— Feb. 23 to Mar. 1, inclusive, except Friday afternoon and 
Saturday evening. The Debates will of course have full 
control of the hall for their six evenings— the Christian denomination 
people having equal rights with us— but during 
the remainder of the time our Society will have full possession 
for Convention purposes. 

Ministers of various denominations and attorneys have 
consented to act as chairmen of the Debate sessions. Various 
speakers will address the Convention, Brother Russell 
being on the program for both Sundays, as well as in the 
Debates. Those who cannot personally be present will have 
the privilege of remembering us all at the throne of grace, 
and we feel sure will do so. Full reports of the Debates 
have been arranged for by one of the principal papers of 
the United States. Many orders are being received on terms 
mentioned in our last issue— $1 subscriptions, representing 
several complete reports of all the Debates. We will publish 
no reports of our own, believing that the public will be 
better satisfied as to the fairness and truthfulness of a newspaper's 
stenographic report than with a specially edited report 
from interested parties. 

RAILROAD EXCURSION RATES 

The South-Eastern R.R. Association has granted excursion 
rates on Certificate plan. You pay full fare going and 
get a certificate, which, when properly signed at the Convention, 



secures you a return ticket at one-third of full fare. 

Any party of ten can secure a concessional rate, except 
where the regular fare is already reduced to 2c per mile. 
The party fare from Pittsburg will be $6.25 each way. 

Friends from considerable distances are reminded of the 
mileage books, which now are not usually restricted to the 



*Address, Dr. L. W. Jones, 2024 Washington Blvd., Chicago. 

R4137 : page 55 

use of one person. On roads charging 3c per mile quite a 
saving can be effected by the purchase of the 1,000 mile 
books. 

ACCOMMODATIONS AT CINCINNATI 

We have effected very favorable terms with two fine 
hotels— $1.50 and $2.00 per day (and upward, of course). 
And we have secured clean lodgings in private homes at 50c 
per night— two in a bed. Restaurants are numerous, and 
their terms various. However, it would be unwise to reckon 
expenses less than $1.60 per day. Notify us at once of your 
desires. 

"GOD SPEED THE TRUTH!" 

Come praying, "God speed the Truth," and as free as 
possible from a sectarian spirit of envy, hatred, strife, prejudice. 
See that the love of God is shed abroad in your heart 
and shines in your face. 



R4137 : page 55 

HE WENT ABOUT DOING GOOD 

-JOHN 5:l-9.-FEBRUARY 23- 

Golden Text:— "Himself took our infirmities, 
and bare our sicknesses."— Matt. 8:17. 

THE records show that our Lord during his ministry 

wrought thirty-six miracles, separately described, 

and beside these many others not individually reported, 

but in groups. The Apostle Peter testifies of 

this, that he "went about doing good." (Acts 10:38.) 

Some, however, gain the erroneous view that our 

Lord's chief work amongst men was to heal their sicknesses. 

Many who hold this view argue that the chief 

work of the Church, as his footstep followers, should 

be the healing of diseases through prayer, etc. This 

is a serious mistake and betokens a thorough misunderstanding 



of the Divine Plan of the Ages. Our Lord's 
mission was primarily to make the great sacrifice 
for sin, which was the redemption price, and to 
secure ultimately the release of mankind from the sentence 
of original sin. As an incidental feature connected 
with the world's salvation through his sacrifice, 
he preached the good tidings and called for followers 
to walk in his steps and to be joint-sacrificers with 
him, and thus ultimately to be joint-heirs with him in the 
work of distributing the blessings and favor of God, 
secured through his death. The miracles of healing 
which our Lord performed were incidental to his preaching 
—as a means of convincing those whom he would 
invite that he was indeed the Son of God, the Messenger 
of the Covenant, the Messiah, that they might hear 
his message, believe it, and become his followers. 
Did he heal all the sick? Did he cast out demons 
from all who were possessed? Did he awaken all the 
dead? Assuredly not. He merely gave illustrations 
of the divine power which he possessed, and which he 
declared would be manifested more fully, more completely, 
later on— at his second coming. Hearken to 
his words: "Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming 
in the which all that are in their graves shall hear 
his [the Son of man's] voice, and shall come forth." 
Again it is written respecting our Lord's miracles: 
"This beginning of miracles did Jesus. ..and manifested 
forth [in advance] his glory"— the glory and 
power which he will possess and exercise to the full in 
the time appointed of the Father. (John5:28; 2:11.) 
Of that future time, when the earth shall be filled with 
the glory of the Lord, St. Peter speaks, saying, "Times 
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord 
[Jehovah]; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before 
was preached unto you: whom the heavens must 
receive [retain] until the times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all 
his holy prophets since the world began."— 
Acts 3:19-21. 

A GREAT MULTITUDE OF IMPOTENT FOLK 

These suggestions are amply confirmed by the records 
of our present lesson. Jesus had returned to 
Jerusalem on a festival occasion, when, by reason of 
the multitudes gathered from every part, the Jewish 
leaders who sought his life would think it unwise to 
make any demonstration against him for fear of a riotous 
disturbance. Near the city was a pool of water 
possessed of certain peculiarities, and bathing in this 
was reputed to be curative for some ailments. Our 
common version declares that an angel troubled the 
waters at certain times, and that it was immediately 
thereafter that the sick bathed to advantage. This portion, 
however, is not accurate, is not found in the oldest 
manuscripts, and is appropriately omitted from 



the Revised Version. It is presumed that the spring 
which supplied the pool was connected with a reservoir 
of gas, which really imparted to the water some 
curative property. Or possibly it was connected with 
a siphoning spring which overflowed at times. And the 
mental impressions upon the bather may have been helpful 
in many cases. At all events, the record is clear 
that a great multitude of impotent folk crowded the 
five porches of this pool. Their infirmities are indicated 
to have been something akin to rheumatism, 
paralysis and other muscular or nervous ailments, 
causing lack of vital power, withering or wasting of the 
muscles. 

It is worthy of note that our Lord did not hunt up 
and cure all the diseased of Palestine, and that even 
when he came across them in his journeyings, as in 
this case, he made no effort to heal all of them. He 
singled out one individual who had in vain waited for 
an opportunity to test the virtue of the pool, and who 
had been ailing for thirty-eight years. Of him alone 
he inquired, "Wilt thou be made whole?"— Is it your 
desire to be healed? The answer was that he had the 
desire, but had not the ability to take the further steps, 
nor had he assistance. By these words the Lord awakened 
in the mind of the poor man desires, aspirations, 
which had almost died out. He was almost heartsick 
from deferred hope. Here was a stranger manifesting 
some interest in his case— a thoroughly new experience. 
We can imagine the brightening of his eyes, the 

R4137 : page 56 

general alertness in connection with his conversation. 
Thus he was prepared for our Lord's words, "Rise, 
take up thy bed and walk." Immediately he realized 
in his muscles and nerves the surging of strength and 
vitality, and forthwith, almost mechanically, he obeyed 
and went his way— too much dazed, astounded, to think 
of inquiring the name of his benefactor, or to offer 
him his thanks. 

We may be inclined to think of his cure as accidental 
—to suppose that he was thus blessed merely 
because our Lord happened to pass that way and happened 
to see him and happened to take compassion 
upon him. Or we might surmise an arbitrary election 
in his case. However, we may assume that a still 
more reasonable view presents itself, viz., that this man 
in his affliction had been led to a repentance of sin and 
to a desire for harmony with God, and that as a consequence 
of this attitude of his heart he was specially 
favored of God. As corroborating this view, we find it 
recorded that, shortly after, Jesus found him in the 
Temple, praying, thanking God for his recovery— 

R4138 : page 56 



probably also offering a gift to the Lord as an evidence 
of his confession and devotion and thankfulness. 

"GO AND SIN NO MORE" 

We do well to take note of the broad kindness and 
generosity of the Master, as exemplified in this case. 
He did not first discuss the man's sins and inquire respecting 
his repentance and his turning over of a new 
leaf. He did not give him the blessing of healing on 
condition that he would become a servant of God. 
He healed him and permitted him to go his way, 
to take his own course. It was when he had gone 
voluntarily to the Temple to prayer or to sacrifice, 
that the Lord came to him, and without chiding 
for the past, counselled him for the future, saying, 
"Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." (v. 14). 
Would that all of those who are "followers of the 
Lamb" might learn of the great Teacher how to forgive 
nobly, with generosity, and when and how to inculcate 
lessons of reform and admonition for the future. 

"HIMSELF TOOK OUR INFIRMITIES" 

In these words, the prophet foretold a part of our 
Lord's mission. We believe that we are justified in 
supposing that all of our Lord's miracles caused him 
a measure of self-sacrifice, loss of vitality— that he 
thus daily, little by little, laid down his life. We could 
suppose divine power granted to him in such measure 
that by the mere speaking of the word, at no cost 
to himself, any miracle could have been performed; 
but our Lord came not into the world merely to exhibit 
the divine power amongst men, it was also a part of 
his mission to taste of human sorrows, to learn to sympathize 
with the afflicted, and to lay down his life on 
man's behalf. Our supposition is well borne out by 
the above prophecy— that he would bear our infirmities. 
(Matt. 8:17; Isa. 53:4.) Additionally, it is confirmed 
by St. Luke's statement that "Virtue [vitality, 
strength] went out of him and healed them all."— 
Luke 6: 19. 

Our Lord's miracles are much more precious to us 
from this standpoint than from any other. The gift 
which costs nothing cannot be so highly esteemed as 
that which costs much; and since life is our most valuable 
possession, the giving of it in any sense of the 
word is the giving of the greatest of gifts. That the 
three and a half years of our Lord's ministry did impoverish 
his strength is abundantly testified to: for 
instance, when at Jacob's well he was wearied, but his 
disciples were not; and again at the close of his ministry, 
on the way to Calvary, when he was unable to bear 
his own cross, while the two thieves apparently were able 
to bear theirs. (John 4:6; Luke 23:26.) His weakness 
was not the result of inherited blemish or sin, nor the 



weakness of imperfection, but of sacrifice. From the 
beginning of his ministry he kept pouring out his life 
in the interest of those who had an ear to hear, and 
taking upon himself of the infirmities, the weaknesses, 
of those he healed. 

HIMSELF BARE OUR SICKNESSES 

We do not know that our Lord was sick with any 
of the ordinary maladies. His perfect organism would 
apparently be proof against the intrusions of special 
diseases. Rather it would appear that his healing of 
diseases merely exhausted his vitality, and thus left 
upon him the weight of our sicknesses. All of the 
sick, the afflicted of the Lord's followers, can look up 
to him with a realization of his sympathy, for it is 
written, "In all their affliction he was afflicted." (Isa. 63:9.) 
"Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried 
our sorrows"; but we are not to receive the mistaken 
view entertained by some that our Lord bore the sicknesses 
of all those who would ever be his disciples, so 
that it would never be necessary for them to be sick or 
feel any pain. Quite to the contrary of this, the sicknesses 
which our Lord bore were those of the world, 
and not those of his special friends and disciples. We 
have no record that he healed any of his followers. 
The lesson therefore is to the contrary, that as he bore 
the infirmities and cares and griefs of others, his followers 
are to emulate his example and his Spirit, and 
from similar motives of generosity and kindness are 
to be burden-bearers, helpers, self-sacrificers. As the 
Apostle suggests, "We ought [also] to lay down our 
lives for the brethren."— I John 3:16. 

The Scriptures clearly show that, so far from the 
followers of Christ being exempted from persecution, 
affliction, sorrows, trials, difficulties, they are to know 
indeed that the Father "scourgeth every son whom he 
receiveth." (Heb. 12:6.) We are to understand that 
as it was expedient that the Master should pass through 
such experiences of self-denial and self-sacrifice, it is 
expedient also that all who would be acceptable to God 
as members of the Bride should be similarly touched 
with a feeling of the world's infirmities, and have 
sufficient sympathy to voluntarily bear some of the 
sorrows and griefs of those about them. (Heb. 4:15.) 
Thus it is written, "If we suffer, we shall also reign 
with him." (2 Tim. 2:12.) Those who anticipate that 
the followers of the Lamb are to be borne to Paradise 

R4138 : page 57 

on flowery beds of ease, and not a wave of trouble roll 
across their peaceful breasts, are surely mistaken. 
Generally they have not read aright the Master's description 
of the experiences of those who would be his 
footstep followers, who are enjoined to take up their 



cross and follow him.— Mark 10:21. 

SPIRITUAL INFIRMITIES AND SICKNESSES 

But while we may properly enough apply the prophetic 
testimony to the infirmities and sicknesses of 
those whom Jesus healed at his first advent, we should 
not think of these as having the full import of the prophecy, 
but rather indeed as a small part thereof. What 
were all the sicknesses and infirmities that Jesus 
healed at his first advent in comparison to all the sicknesses 
of the twenty thousand millions of the world's 
population? What was the awakening of the three 
from the dead in comparison to that of the mighty host 
which shall be brought forth from the prison-house of 
death, the grave? Surely there is a deeper, a wider 
significance to this prophecy. The infirmities and 
sicknesses of the whole world are part and parcel of 
the penalty of original sin. That penalty is death, and 
it rests upon the whole human family; and the infirmities 
with which we are born and the sicknesses acquired 
are merely so much of death working in our race. Our 
Lord bore all of this for the whole world in the sense 
that he by the grace of God tasted death for every 
man. (Heb. 2:9.) As the Apostle Paul explains, 
death passed upon our race as the result of sin; and 
hence, all being sinners, all have infirmities, sicknesses 
and dying conditions.— Rom. 5:12. 

It is when we get this broad Scriptural view of the 
Divine Plan of the Ages that we find satisfaction for 
head and for heart, and a harmony which touches and 
explains every feature of the divine revelation. 
Through the first Adam sin, condemnation, was precipitated 
upon the entire human family— and his bride, 
mother Eve, was a participant with him in the entire 
matter. So in due time God provided Jesus, the Redeemer, 
who paid Adam's penalty with the sacrifice of 
his own life. He in consequence was highly exalted 
to be a Prince and a Savior, a King and Restorer, a 
Priest upon his throne, to grant forgiveness and uplifting 
influences to Adam and all involved through him. 
And now, preparatory to that general blessing of the 
world in harmony with the divine plan, a Bride for 
Christ is being selected from amongst mankind; but 
before she can share with her Lord the glories of the 
spiritual plane, the divine nature— glory, honor and 
immortality— she must be tested, and the test is that 
she must manifest the same spirit that actuated, that 
controlled her Lord, the Redeemer. For this reason 
it is that her call is during this present evil age- 
that the trials, the difficulties, the sorrows, the pains 
attendant upon sin shall serve to test her loyalty to 
righteousness and her spirit of devotion and of love. 
Under her Redeemer's guidance she is being taught 
the necessary lessons to fit and prepare her for the glorious 
joint-heirship. Yet nothing connected with her 



call is compulsory— and hence, many have been called 

in comparison with the few that will be chosen. Therefore, 

all who would make their calling and election 

sure must be faithful in following in the footsteps of 

the Redeemer, heeding carefully his counsel, and availing 

themselves of his assistances by the way.— Matt. 22:14; 

2 Pet. 1:10. 



R4138 : page 57 

"GIVE YE THEM TO EAT" 

-JOHN6:l-21.-MARCH 1- 

Golden Text:— "He shall feed his 
flock like a shepherd."— Isa. 40:11. 

THE incidents of this lesson are accredited to the 
early part of the third year of our Lord's ministry, 
in the spring, nearing the time of the Passover. 
John the Baptist had been in the prison at Macherus 
for about a year and had just been beheaded 
by King Herod. The ministry of John, followed by the 
ministry of Jesus, had greatly awakened the Jewish 
mind on the subject of the imminence of the Kingdom 
of Messiah. The imprisonment of John had more or 
less surprised and stunned the people. John himself, 
after being imprisoned nearly a year, had sent some of 
his disciples to inquire whether or not Jesus was the 
Messiah, whether or not he was merely the forerunner 
of some greater one. This was the truth: Jesus in 
the flesh, the Lamb of God to take away the sin of the 
world, was merely the forerunner of the heavenly Lord, 

R4139 : page 57 

who, after gathering from amongst mankind his Elect 
Bride, will come in power and great glory and assume 
the reins of the world's government for their blessing 
and uplifting out of sin-and-death conditions. But 
Jesus did not enter into an explanation of these things, 
because they were not meat in due season then. He 
contented himself with sending the message that the 
sick were being healed, the devils were being cast out. 
The good message of the Gospel was being freely 
preached— all that could then be done, all that was 
possible to do up to the time of the finishing of the 
sacrifice at Calvary and its acceptance on the part of 
Jehovah when our Lord ascended up on high to appear 
in the presence of God on behalf of believers— to make 
atonement for their sins, to effect a reconciliation for 
them with the Father, and to secure for them the begetting 
of the holy Spirit, which began at Pentecost. 
Subsequently the beheading of John the Baptist 



spread a measure of consternation amongst those who 
had appreciated his ministries, including those who 
recognized the Lord as the Messiah. The religious 
sentiment of the most religious people was greatly 
shocked, and considerable excitement prevailed. What 
might not Herod do next? Would our Lord be safe? 
Would his apostles, those who trusted in him to save? 
The matter aroused greater interest and drew larger 

R4139 : page 58 

crowds to the preaching of Jesus, for, according to the 

Jewish custom, hundreds of thousands were en route 

to the usual Passover festival at Jerusalem. Business 

was practically suspended by a considerable proportion 

of the population, and as some departed others were 

coming, and thus our Lord and his apostles were 

kept for a time extremely busy. It should be remembered, 

too, that during the year of John's imprisonment our Lord 

sent forth his disciples and afterward the seventy 

also, two by two, into various cities of Judea and Galilee, 

and that they preached repentance and the 

Kingdom of heaven at hand, and incidentally referred 

to their Master Jesus as the Messiah. No wonder, 

then, that hundreds hung upon the Master's words 

and queried respecting his Messiahship, Is this indeed 

the very Christ, the true Messiah? 

DEPARTED INTO A DESERT PLACE 

It was under these circumstances that our Lord 
with his disciples withdrew in their boat to a desert 
place across a portion of the Lake of Galilee. They 
went not to a sandy desert, but to a desert part of the 
coast, away from the cities and from the large multitude 
which had gathered. They landed near Bethsaida, 
the home of Philip, one of the disciples, at the north 
end of the Lake. Some of the multitude were so deeply 
interested that, noting the direction in which the 
boat was steered, they traveled afoot, a considerable 
distance, to the same place. Other multitudes coming 
along the road towards Jerusalem heard also of the 
presence of the great Teacher in that vicinity and tarried. 
Presumably our Lord discoursed to them on various 
topics not recorded. The point of our lesson, the 
incidents upon which our lesson is based, occurred toward 
nightfall. The people evidently were so engrossed 
in what they heard that they were forgetful of their 
own physical necessities, and our Lord was also apparently 
neglectful in that he continued to preach to them 
until the disciples, realizing the situation, suggested 
telling the people that he would talk to them no more, 
that it was time for him to move on to the next village, 
Bethsaida, for refreshment. Apparently the people 
supplied their simple wants from village to village 
instead of carrying provisions with them. 



"WHENCE SHALL WE BUY BREAD?" 

We note our Lord's wise method of instruction. 
He stimulated thought. Instead of sending the multitude 
away he proposed to Philip, whose home town 
was nearest and who therefore would be supposed to 
be best acquainted with the vicinity, that out of their 
common funds they would do well to purchase a free 
luncheon for the multitude, and inquired where the 
purchase could best be made. Philip was very matter-of-fact, 
and evidently had a good business head, 
replying at once, "Two hundred pennyworth [thirty-two 
dollars' worth] of bread is not sufficient for them, that 
every one of them may take a little." His suggestion 
was that this would be a considerable sum for them to 
spend, and that less would do no good. The apostles 
all joined in this sentiment, according to Luke's account, 
saying, "Send the multitudes away, that they 
may go into the towns and country round about and 
lodge, and get victuals." Pressing the point a little 
closer Jesus said, They need not go away; give ye 
them to eat. To this the apostles remonstrated according 
to Mark, "Shall we go and buy two hundred 
pennyworth of bread and give them to eat?" Is this 
what you wish us to do? We are ready to do it if you 
tell us plainly. Jesus replied, according to Mark, 
"How many loaves have you? Go and see." Andrew, 
returning from investigating and speaking for all said, 
"We have found a lad here who has five barley loaves 
and two fishes, but what are these among so many?" 
The loaves of that country and time were about the 
size of a small flat pie and very similar in shape, and the 
kind of fish described by the Greek word used implied 
very small fish like herring. 

Jesus directed that these supplies be brought to 
him, and probably they were purchased from the boy. 
The process of questioning had the effect of stimulating 
the minds of the disciples, so that by this time, 
when Jesus said, Cause the multitude to sit down in 
ranks or rows, in groups of fifties and hundreds upon 
the grassy slopes, the disciples were ready to obey, 
even though they could not as yet comprehend fully 
the purpose of the command; and the confidence of 
the people in Jesus and his apostles is clearly manifested 
in the fact that at the late hour they were willing 
thus to be directed. They had confidence in the Lord 
up to the point of credulity, and their faith had its 
reward. 

GIVING THANKS ALWAYS FOR ALL THINGS 

First of all our Lord gave thanks, lifting up his 
eyes to heaven. What a lesson he thus set for his disciples 
and for the multitudes and for all since who regard 
him as the Sent of God. If the Master himself 



thus acknowledged that every good and perfect gift 
cometh down from the Father of Lights, how much 
more should all we, who by nature were children of 
wrath but have been reconciled through the precious 
blood— how much more should we remember the message, 
"In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will 
direct thy paths." (Prov. 3:6.) Our blessing of the 
bread does not indeed increase its quantity, its bulk, 
but surely it does increase its value, its efficiency. The 
peace, the rest, the contentment which comes from a 
proper acknowledgment of divine mercy is of itself a 
good preparation for our nerves and all our energies 
as we partake of food. Proportionately the thankful 
Christian should be less troubled with nervous dyspepsia 
than are others of the same physical and nervous 
temperament. Besides this we advise that the Lord's 
consecrated little ones everywhere, so far as conditions 
will permit, should follow the custom of the Bible 
House family, and break together the spiritual manna 
and feast thereon at the same time that they partake 
of the earthly food. 

The Lord's blessing was followed by the breaking 
of the barley loaves and fishes and the distribution of the 
same to the twelve apostles, who in turn delivered them 
to the multitude, probably through chosen representatives 

R4139 : page 59 

of each company of fifty and a hundred. Thus 

the distribution was quickly accomplished and a bountiful 

luncheon enjoyed. But the lesson did not end 

there, for our Lord instructed the apostles to take their 

handbags or baskets and gather the fragments, that 

nothing be wasted, and a sufficient supply was found 

to fill the twelve baskets. The miracle astonished all 

and especially impressed, we may be sure, the apostles. 

It is not for us to explain the miracle, though miracle 

it would still be even if we were able to explain it. It 

is for us to recognize that God is the Giver of every 

good and perfect gift, and that miracles are in operation 

about us every day: the seed germinates and 

grows, we know not how; but seed sowing and harvesting 

are intimately associated, and we can trace the results, 

but the process by which the five loaves and two 

fishes were so increased in bulk we cannot trace; hence 

we speak of this as a miracle— that is, an operation of 

divine power beyond our comprehension more than are 

the average affairs of life. It is well for us to note how 

little we know at best, and how many miracles are 

happening about us all the time. We can analyze a 

grain of wheat and could construct something very 

closely corresponding, but we could give it no life, no 

germ, no power to produce. We see the corn and the 

oats and realize that they are valuable for food for 

man and for beast, but it is beyond our power to comprehend 

their transformation into human flesh and 



form, as well as into the flesh and form of swine 
and cattle of all kinds with their various peculiarities 
of skin, hair, feathers, hoofs, horns, etc. These are 
miracles, too, but so common that we overlook them. 

THE LESSON OF SUPERNATURAL POWER 

A lesson which undoubtedly came to the disciples 
and to the multitude in connection with the miracle we 
are considering was that Christ had superhuman powers 
which attested him as Messiah, the Sent of God, 
for "no man can do these miracles which thou doest 
except God be with him." Again, it was, especially to 
the apostles, a lesson of the Lord's ability to care for 
them as his followers, under all circumstances, under 
all conditions, and this lesson continues with all of his 
followers since. Our Master is still able both in temporal 
and in spiritual matters to do for us exceedingly 
abundantly more than we could ask or think— "No 
good thing will he withhold from those that walk uprightly," 
from those who are his true followers. Their 
best interests will be preserved and conserved. We may 
safely take from this matter a lesson in faith— "Greater 

R4140 : page 59 

is he that is on our part than all they that be against 

us." As the apostles learned this lesson, the very fear 

of Herod and what he might do to Jesus or to them 

gave way, and they were ready by nightfall at the command 

of our Lord to return again to the vicinity of 

Capernaum. Jesus himself appears to have retired for 

secret communion with the Father. He sent the disciples 

before, not only as a test of their obedience, but 

also that he might give them a still further demonstration 

of the divine power which attended him. The sea 

was boisterous; they were delayed in reaching port, 

and were rowing— presumably because of contrary 

winds— when behold Jesus approached the ship walking 

upon the waters. He quieted their fears by the 

declaration, "It is I, be not afraid." They received him 

into the ship and immediately they were at land. 

Was there a picture in this experience? Did it represent 
the boisterous and troubled experience of the 
Church throughout this Gospel Age? Did it represent 
that at the end of the age, in the midst of a great 
storm, the Lord would appear to his people, and that 
upon being received by them their outward troubles 
and difficulties would completely vanish, only by reason 
of their fellowship with him and the grace and 
peace which he would give through his message, "Be 
not afraid"? 

NOT A MISSIONARY LESSON 

The committee arranging these International lessons 



designed and requested that this lesson should be 
used as a missionary lesson to the intent that the 
cause of foreign missions might be brought prominently 
to the attention of the Lord's people everywhere. 
We are glad of this; we have great sympathy with 
every sentiment and effort looking toward the uplift of 
mankind out of degradation and sin into the light and 
the truth, and thus into harmony with God. 

Many have misinterpreted our views respecting 
missionary work in foreign lands. We think it much 
to the credit of missionaries that they have been willing 
to leave their homes and money-making opportunities 
to engage in the missionary work, even though 
many of them have gone with full assurances of as 
good or better comforts than they enjoyed at home, 
and even though the greater part of missionary work is 
no more religious than is the teaching of the public 
schools in their home land, or the practice of medicine 
and hospital work done by many physicians in civilized 
lands. Surely the poor heathen greatly need civilizing 
influences, medical assistance and better education. 
We are glad that they are getting them. 

What we object to in respect to these foreign missions 
is:— 

(1) That the same imperfect Gospel, or mixture of 
truth and error, is presented to the heathen that is 
presented here in the home land; and (2) because the 
idea prevails that this is God's method for fulfilling 
the item of our Lord's prayer which declares, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." We object to this view because it is thoroughly 
unscriptural, and, as we have repeatedly pointed 
out, is thoroughly irrational. Our Post-Millennial 
friends, while telling us that they are striving to convert 
the world and thus to establish the will of God on 
earth even as it is done in heaven, prepare statistics 
which show to everybody that the number of the 
heathen in the year 1800 was approximately 600,000,000, 
and that their number today is approximately 1,200,000,000 
—just double. Is it not foolishness to insist on 
mission work from this standpoint? Let the mission 
work go on, but let it be viewed from the right standpoint. 
Who is so blind as not to be able to see that if 

R4140 : page 60 

the whole heathen world were converted to the same 
measure of civilization and Christianity as is possessed 
by so-called Christendom, it would still be in a 
wretched plight, as witness our Lord's address to the 
latter in its last stage, the Laodicean period, I counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment 
that thou mayest be clothed, that thy nakedness 
do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, 
that thou mayest see, for thou art poor and miserable 
and blind and naked.— Rev. 3:17,18. 



Let us have the right Scriptural view of matters, 
namely, that God during this Gospel Age is seeking a 
"Little Flock," the "Very Elect," and is gathering them 
from every nation, people, kindred and tongue. These 
are to constitute with their Lord and Bridegroom the 
Seed of Abraham, through whom all the families of 
the earth are to be blessed. Let us see that this is what 
the Apostle says, "If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
Seed and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
Let us see that the Kingdom is to be given to 
this Seed of Abraham; that Christ and his Elect 
Church, his Bride, are to constitute the Kings and 
Priests who shall reign on the earth (Rev. 5:10), and 
through whom, as the Melchizedek order of priesthood, 
every son and daughter of Adam may have fullest opportunity 
of attaining a full salvation from sin and 
from death— a full release from the bondage of corruption 
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God! Let 
us see that those who shall ultimately prove incorrigible 
shall not be eternally tormented, but, as the Scriptures 
declare, shall be "punished with everlasting destruction," 
"destroyed from amongst the people!" 
(2 Thess. 1:9; Acts 3:23.) Those whose eyes are anointed 
with the unction from the Holy One to thus see the 
divine plan, realize well that God is not now engaged 
in the work of saving the world, but merely, as the 
Scriptures put it, "taking out of the nations a people 
for his name"— to bear his name, to be the Bride of 
Christ; and they all know that the Gospel can have no 
other meaning to the heathen than it has to the Christian 
nations. 

DISCOURAGEMENTS FROM ERROR 

No wonder thinking people who do not see the 
true plan of God in respect to the gathering of the Elect, 
and who have previously been zealous for the heathen 
under the erroneous belief that all except the converts 
of Christianity were doomed to an eternity of torture, 
are now ceasing to believe in eternal torment, 
and are going to the other extreme in supposing 
that nearly all the heathen go to heaven when they die, 
and that heaven has a vast slum district for their reception 
and education— no wonder that these are losing 
their zeal for foreign missions, that the money is 
coming proportionately more slowly, and much of it 
from those who are interested in the heathen from a 
humanitarian rather than from the religious 
standpoint! 

It is pathetic to notice how otherwise honest and 
intelligent people have deceived themselves and others 
respecting the true situation of affairs in the world. 
We reproduce a diagram, published by "The Young 
People's Missionary Movement," which shows the abject 
darkness of the heathen, enlightened only here 
and there by missionary endeavors, represented by 



stars. It is shown as a cause for further missionary 
effort. But look at the other half, represented in pure 
white:— 

Protestants 166,066,500 

Roman Catholics 272,638,500 

Easterns, Greek Catholics, etc 120,157,000 

Jews 11,000,000 

Mohammedans 216,630,000 

Total 786,492,000 

But how fair is this statement? How true is 
it? On the diagram it is represented as one-half, 
yet the total of the world's population today is recognized 
as about 1,700,000,000, so that really a much 
larger proportion of the picture should show black. 
But let us examine more carefully who are the Mohammedans. 
We regret to say that a good many Christian 
people would not know but that they were another denomination 
of Christians— like the Mormons, for instance. 
But instead they are heathen in the sense of 
not recognizing Christ, respecting whom the Apostle 
says, "There is none other name given under heaven 
and amongst men whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) 
Are they not as much unsaved as are the ones 
represented by the black portion? Are they not as 
much in the dark? Have we any reason to suppose 
that they are any more honest? And what about the 
Jews? Are they saved from the Christian standpoint? 
On the contrary both Catholics and Protestants deny 
this, and missionaries and mission stations are now in 
operation amongst both Jews and Mohammedans with 
a view to their conversion, just as with the heathen. 

Examining still more closely we find that the nearly 
400,000,000 of Roman and Greek Catholics are also 
subjects for mission work by Protestants, that Protestant 
missions are maintained even in the city of Rome 
itself and in various Catholic countries at the expense 
of the Protestants residing in Great Britain and the 
United States, with a view to counteracting, they tell 
us, the influence of "Anti-christ." How does it come 
that the good, honest people, so zealous to save others, 
have presented so misleading a picture of the state of 
the world? We answer, it is because their theology 

R4140 : page 61 

is wrong. After nearly nineteen centuries of endeavor 
they can scarcely give up their position that God 
has appointed that the truth shall in this way reach and 
convert the whole world, thus bringing about a reign of 
righteousness in which God's will shall be done on 
earth as in heaven. Their theory has been badly shattered 



and shaken by the truth on the subject. They 

want to make the picture as favorable as possible for 

their theory. They are scarcely conscious of the dishonesty 

they are thus practicing in the name of the 

Lord. 

But look still more closely at the only division of 
the diagram we have not yet considered, the section 
showing the Protestants. Surely, says some, you will 
concede that at least this portion of the diagram is 
right. Alas, we reply, we wish that we could think of 
the Protestants of the world (166,066,500) as being 
saints of God, in whom his will is done on earth as in 

R4141 : page 61 

heaven— or even to the extent of their imperfect ability. 
We cannot so think; we cannot delude ourselves thus. 
We regret the lack of conscience on the part of those 
who made the diagram, and on the part of many others, 
which hinders them from being honest with themselves 
on the subject. For the purposes of such 
enumeration not even Church membership is taken, 
although everybody of reasonable judgment would admit 
that nominal Church membership would be a 
poor proof of saintliness. The number is made up 
of everybody living in civilized lands who is neither 
a Jew nor a Roman Catholic. As Bishop Foster once 
suggested it includes not only the black but the ring-streaked 
and speckled, the number of the white, the 
saintly, being extremely small. 

AWAKE, OH ZION, PUT ON THY STRENGTH! 

"Blow ye a trumpet in Zion!" It is time that all of 
God's true people, whoever and wherever, Catholic or 
Protestant, should awake to a realization that we have 
been living under a great delusion— under a total misapprehension 
of the divine Word first started in the 
"dark ages." It is time that all the saints should come 
clearly to understand that their hope is not in the conversion 
of heathendom, but in the second coming of 
the Lord and the gathering of his saints, and their 
change to his likeness in the First Resurrection, and 
in the Kingdom, the dominion over the earth which 
will then be established through them— the Millennial 
Kingdom. Then and by that power Satan will be bound 
for the thousand years, that he may deceive the nations 
no more, that the blindness that has been upon not only 
heathendom but Christendom may pass 
away, and that the true light may shine forth— the Sun 
of Righteousness, with healing in its beams. It is for 
this Kingdom that we are to pray, with the realization 
that when it shall come the result of its rule shall be 
the complete abolition of sin and death and the establishment 
of a reign of righteousness in the world, even 
as it is in heaven. 



The present mission of the Church is, as the 
Scriptures declare, to "make herself ready." This includes 
a knowledge of Christ, and the extending of this 
knowledge as far as possible, a knowledge of our justification 
through faith in his blood, and a knowledge of 
our call to joint-heirship with him in his Kingdom, and 
a knowledge that faithfulness to this call will mean a 
full consecration on our part to serve the Truth, to 
live the Truth, to suffer for the Truth, and that to the 
called, the chosen and the faithful the Kingdom is to 
be given at the second coming of our Lord, and that 
the attainment of that position of joint-heirship in the 
throne is dependent upon our willingness to stand for 
the Truth and for the Lord, to endure hardness as good 
soldiers, and to lay down our lives for the brethren, 
thus suffering with Christ that we may also be glorified 
together. 

The Church's mission is not different from that of 
her Master, except that it is world-wide instead of being 
confined to the Jewish nation. Each one who receives 
of the holy Spirit is represented by the Lord as 
being a candle, a little light in the world, and each is 
to let his light shine before men. It is for the Lord to 
supervise the general interests of these lights, and to 
send them hither and thither as it may please him unto 
"even so many as the Lord your God shall call." (Acts 2:39.) 
It is quite proper that Christian people everywhere 
should have their attention called to the real significance 
of their justification, their sanctification, and 
the proper characters they should develop in order to 
make their calling and election sure. Whoever is thus 
engaged is about the Master's business, and is therefore 
one of his mission workers. Each should now be 
laboring in that corner of the harvest field where he has 
the best opportunity for serving the cause, and this 
would mean that after witnessing for the Truth in our 
own neighborhoods we may carry the message as much 
as possible into other neighborhoods, into other cities, 
into other states, into other lands. Thus, as the number 
of lighted candles increases under the Lord's providential 
arrangement, some would probably be lighted 
for other lands— not to convert all but, as the Scriptures 
declare, to bear witness to the Truth. 

OUR LESSON'S MISSION PICTURE 

The lesson represents well the view we have set 
forth, but does not at all represent the view of mission 
work generally entertained. It will be noticed that 
those who were fed were not heathen but Israelites, the 
people of God— then in covenant favor. It should be 
noticed secondly that Jesus dealt first with his disciples, 
who represented the Elect, his chosen ones. To 
these he gave the bread he broke, which, after the multitude 
were seated, was distributed amongst them. So 
the Lord has now called the Church to be his Elect, 



and broken for them the bread of life or Truth, and by 
and by in his own due time the whole world of mankind, 
including those who have gone down into the 
prison-house of death, shall all come forth— every man 
in his own order, in his own rank, in his own company, 
and then the multitude will be ready for the food, and 
it will be given them, and they shall have an abundance 
and to spare. 



R4141 : page 62 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I desire to make a suggestion regarding the Volunteer 
work and have little doubt but that it would add many 
opportunities for serving the Truth by some of our brethren, 
besides carrying light to some hungering souls in Babylon's 
darkness. It has often occurred to my mind that there must 
be some method whereby the scattered country folk could 
be reached by the Truth literature, and yet 'twas out of the 
question to think of sending colporteurs to them. Last 
Thursday I think the question was partly answered. On 
that day I found hundreds, it might have been thousands, of 
vehicles being driven into town, and learned that they belonged 
to country people who were going to the State Fair. 

Found but very little interest in F and no meetings arranged 

for, and having done what I could and still having 

some hours at my disposal, I took my tracts and went out to 

the fair grounds. There I found on the various adjacent 

streets hundreds of vehicles of every description, while inside 

the grounds were hundreds more. My supply of tracts 

was not sufficient to go around among all carriages outside, 

so I did not go within. I found it was quite easy to put a 

tract in each conveyance in such a way that it would not 

blow out, and yet so that the owner would not be likely to 

find it until he reached home. With the buggies one could 

readily raise the little oil cloth cover behind seat over body 

of buggy and drop tract in. Probably not one of these belonged 

to town people who would be reached by regular 

Volunteer work. In the middle west State Fairs and Chatauquas 

are becoming more numerous each year and they 

both draw large numbers from the country. Of course it is 

too late now for adoption this year, as the season is about 

over, but why not take advantage of these occasions next 

year? I think it is also better than to put the tracts in 

their hands, as in the excitement of sight-seeing many would 

drop the tracts after a glance. There are also some towns 

where the vehicles about the market place on market day 

would afford a similar opportunity. 

I have written at some length, as I was not sure the 
suggestion had been considered before, and this brings another 
thought to mind also. There is an increasing number 
of brethren who are neglecting Volunteer work, etc., with 



the idea that the work is about done and all the wheat in 
their town has been gathered. I am afraid that in many 
of these cases the brethren are not desirous of doing their 
part and are merely using this as an excuse, trying thereby 
to soothe their consciences and to deceive themselves into 
believing this neglect is pleasing to the Lord. If some of 
them are not soon quickened I fear they will have to hear 
the "slothful servant" condemnation. If they could only 
realize it, the door will not be shut until they cannot use 
such opportunities, and as long as there are such opportunities 
to be used the door is open. When we can get no more 
literature to circulate, and when our effort to speak orally 
will deprive us of our liberty, then it will be time enough 
to conclude the door is shut, the work is done. 
Yours in the most blessed bonds, 

BENJ. H. BARTON,-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Under the Lord's providence and blessing the work 
here has prospered far beyond what we had hoped. Indeed, 
as far as visible results are concerned, the past few 
months, I believe, will outweigh all of our past experience. 
We have had parlor meetings thus far at eight different 
homes, with varying attendance. At the last meeting sixteen 
were present, some of whom had been previously interested, 
but had not been meeting regularly except at Pilgrim 
services. Thinking it might be of interest to you, will 
say these meetings were conducted as a "reading circle" (or 
DAWN Circle) beginning with chapter IV. of Vol. I., and using 
the large wall chart for illustration. When a new place 
opened up for meetings we would start them on Chapter 
IV., and after three successive weekly meetings invite 
them to the general DAWN Circle meeting on Sunday. 

In making our deliveries we keep a list of names of 
those who give evidence of being "wheat" and express the 
desire to have us call again after they have read the books. 
This always insures a cordial reception when we return, and 

R4142 : page 62 

paves the way for a discussion of the Truth as far as they 
have read. We aim to devote at least one evening a week 
for such calls. The class has now progressed so that outside 
help seems quite superfluous. Among the newly interested 
ones is the superintendent of one of the local Sunday 
Schools, who is contemplating his escape from "Babylon" in 
the near future, and who has already led several of the 
meetings in our absence, with good results. 

We have thought that perhaps it would not be presumption 
on our part, since the dear Lord has already favored 
us to the extent that he has, if we should turn to 
another field in which no regular meetings are being held, 

and we have thought of S . I remember that, while doing 

Volunteer work at that place about two years ago, the 



dear friends there did not have meetings except when the 
Pilgrims came. If there is still no gathering of the Lord's 
people there, and if the territory has not been canvassed 
just recently, we would like the assignment of that territory. 
Or, if you have any suggestion to offer, we shall be 
glad to have the same. We have taken the matter to the 
Lord in prayer, and trust for his guidance in this as in all 
matters. 

With much Christian love, in which Bro. VanOrsdel joins, 
as ever, yours in the Lord, 

C. H. S. KUEHN,-Colporteur. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Inclosed find report for first half of January, 1908. 
Undoubtedly much good has been accomplished, for which I 
rejoicingly praise the Lord. 

Inclosed also is a very harmful tract, which is being 
circulated from Cincinnati. There is undoubtedly an avalanche 
of this stuff coming now and from every quarter; 
and every piece of it is aimed directly at the "Truth people." 
This in itself is very significant. The Adversary has 
beyond doubt been given more power to discomfort us, and 

R4142:page63 

he is now, in an increasing manner, turning the artillery of 
the world against us. It is also clearly to be seen that the 
Lord of the Harvest is endeavoring to remove every "root of 
bitterness," every sympathy with these various dispositions 
of the fallen nature, viz., pride, ambition, envy, revenge, 
self-aggrandizement in any form, from our hearts; 
endeavoring to bring about that perfect sympathy and love, 
that care for and cooperation with himself, the great Head, 
and each other, the fellow-members of the same Body, that 
exists between the various members of our own mortal bodies 
—thus producing that perfect harmony and oneness so 
absolutely necessary. There is no doubt that the most tremendous 
conflict is going on in every true son and daughter 
of God. All these things only emphasize to me the shortness 
of the time and the sharpness of the conflict. 

That the work is progressing sharply in my own life 
and character is clearly observed, for which I praise him. 
For the privilege of service and fellowship with his precious 
struggling little ones during this supreme moment I praise 
him! My constant prayer is for you, dear Brother Russell, 
and for all the faithful co-laborers at the Bible House, and 
for all everywhere that trust in the name of the Lord our 
God in deed and in truth— that are praying for and hastening 
unto the coming of the Kingdom. 

In very much love to yourself, to the Bible House family 
and to all, I am truly your servant in love and service of 
our Lord and King, O. L. SULLIVAN-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am glad to report the continued progress of the Truth 
in Glasgow. We have been greatly blessed by dear Brother 
A. E. Williamson's visit among us, and are looking forward 
with anticipation to your own visit, which we trust, God 
willing, will be in the near future. 

In the course of a recent newspaper correspondence it 
was stated by one writer that the Greek word "horama," 
translated "vision" in Matt. 17:9, means properly a sight or 
spectacle, and does not signify a vision but a reality. This 
caused me to enquire into the matter, with the result that 
I find that the word "horama" occurs altogether twelve times 
in the New Testament, and that on every occasion the context 
shows that the thing seen is not real, but is a vision. The 
instances are: Matt. 17:9; Acts 7:31; 9:10,12; 10:3,17,19; 
11:5; 12:9; 16:9,10; 18:9. 

To take an example, we read in Acts 9:11,12: "The 
Lord said unto him [Ananias], Arise and go into the street 
which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas 
for one called Saul of Tarsus, for behold he prayeth and 
hath seen in a vision [Greek-horama] a man named 
Ananias coming in and putting his hand on him that he 
might receive his sight." The man seen by the blind Saul was 
obviously not a reality but a vision. Again, in Acts 12:7,9, we 
read, "Behold an angel of the Lord came upon him and a 
light shined in the prison, and he smote Peter on the side 
and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly.. ..And he 
[Peter] went out and followed him, and wist not that it 
was true which was done by the angel, but thought he saw 
a vision [Greek— horama]." Peter thought that what he 
had seen was merely a vision, not a reality. 

From these examples it is abundantly evident that 
in New Testament usage the word "horama" signifies 
"vision," and is, therefore, correctly translated in both the 
common English versions, and as shown in DAWN-STUDIES II., 
p. 255, and in WATCH TOWER, '98, p. 1 1 1 . In using the expression, 
"Tell the vision to no man," Jesus apparently desired 
to reassure us that the Bible is not contradictory. To 
say that Moses appeared in reality on the holy mount would 
be to deny those Scriptures which state that Jesus was the 
first to rise from the dead (Acts 26:23; 1 Cor. 15:20), and 
that the time when the prophets and others will be rewarded 
will be at the return of our Lord Jesus (Rev. 11:18; 
Matt. 16:27). 

Trusting, dear brother, that the Lord will continue to 
use you abundantly in his service and for our spiritual 
profit, I am, your brother in the one hope of the calling and 
with much love in the Lord. JOHN EDGAR.-Scotland. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

While you do not know of me, I, through your writings, 
it seems, am well acquainted with you. I would not infringe 
on your time to have you read anything I could write 



you, but I do want to tell you of the joy I have had in reading 
your books, booklets, tracts and journal. About ten 
months ago your MILLENNIAL DAWN series with some tracts 
were given me by a sojourner, who did some Volunteer 
work. Considering them as Adventist literature, containing 
doctrines I could not believe, I began to read with much 
distrust; but I soon became interested and read with increasing 
interest, until it seemed I could read and never tire 
of it. I have often wished to express to you my gratitude 
for the pleasure and profit I have had in the reading. It 
has filled a long -felt vacancy in my heart, and inspired a 
joy unspeakable. And now words fail me with which to 
properly express my appreciation and thanks to you. I 
think of you as that faithful steward whom the Master made 
ruler over all his household to give meat in due season, and 
that you have been strictly true to your charge; for surely 
no such heaping dishes of the most wholesome food have 
been set before the Lord's servants since at the first. 
Yours in Christ, our Redeemer, 

(MRS.) S. K. STORY,-- Arkansas. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Many even of the most consecrated friends, I fear, do 
not fully appreciate their privilege of the present favorable 
times for tract distribution and the "Volunteer" work. I 
have thought, therefore, it might stir some up by suggesting 
that in addition to the regular "Volunteer" work of next 
year, each and every WATCH TOWER subscriber might find 
great delight in distributing at least 100 tracts each month 
of 1908; that is, hand out three or four every day to individuals 
sitting next to them in street cars, railroad trains, 
restaurants, or anyone they may meet on the street, or in a 
store, etc. 

May the Lord's richest blessings continue to abide with 
you. Your servant in the King's work, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN.-Pilgrim. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 