Kingdom News No. 32
A United, Happy Family—What Is the Key
DO YOU KNOW ANYONE LIKE THIS?
Jerry and Margie, a couple in the northeastern United States, had tried marriage—and failed. They had three children
“Many problems had come into Jerry’s life,” related a close friend. “He was getting a divorce that would be final in a few months and also was planning to get married again.”
So many like Jerry and Margie, when they marry, hope to enjoy . . .
Warm Intimacy
Doing Things Together
The Joy of Parenthood
Lifelong Commitment
But often, what they get is . . .
Unfaithfulness
Shouting, Angry Words
Rebellious Children
Broken Homes
DOES IT HAVE TO BE THIS WAY?
No, the Originator of the family knows better than anyone else the way to a happy family life
And He has put the key at our fingertips in the world’s most available book—the Bible
Let’s see how the Bible comes to grips with this matter . . .
THE KEY—PUTTING BIBLE GUIDELINES TO WORK IN YOUR FAMILY
Love Your Wife—Show Tenderness
“Husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies”—Ephesians 5:28, 29
“ . . . assigning them honor as to a weaker vessel”—1 Peter 3:7
Respect Your Husband—Be Easy to Love
“Have deep respect for [your] husband”—Ephesians 5:33
“ . . . [be] a helper for him, as a complement of him”—Genesis 2:18
Be Sexually Faithful to Each Other—Deserve Trust
“Find your joy with the girl you married . . . why should you give your love to another woman?”—Proverbs 5:18-20, Today’s English Version.
“ . . . each should satisfy the other’s [sexual] needs”—1 Corinthians 7:3 (TEV)
Listen to Each Other—Settle Problems Quickly
“Be swift about hearing, slow about speaking, slow about wrath”—James 1:19
“ . . . let the sun not set with you in a provoked state”—Ephesians 4:26
Give of Yourself to Your Children—Care Enough to Discipline
“[Teach your children] when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up”—Deuteronomy 11:19
“My dad works all the time,” wrote a third-grader. “He gives me money and lots of toys, but I hardly ever see him.”
“The one loving [his child] is he that does look for him with discipline”—Proverbs 13:24
“This whole discipline thing has been rough on me,” said one 16-year-old. ‘But it’s been rougher on my parents, getting me back in line. They must really love me.’
Worship God Together—Do Things His Way
“Congregate the people, the men and the women and the little ones . . . in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn”—Deuteronomy 31:12
“Trust in Jehovah [God] with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him”—Proverbs 3:5, 6
DO THESE PRINCIPLES REALLY WORK?
Yes. Do you remember the shattered family described in our opening paragraphs?
The person who helped them learn these Bible principles relates:
“At first Jerry was reluctant, but finally one Saturday morning I stopped at his apartment and was able to encourage him to have a Bible study. From then on he made rapid progress.
“Imagine my joy when one Sunday evening I received a telephone call from Jerry asking me that instead of coming to his apartment for the study, if I would come to his home where he had been to talk with his wife. They were now getting back together as a family.
“For the first couple of weeks I studied with just Jerry and his three children, as his wife Margie was reluctant. About the third week, however, she decided to sit in. But the happiest thing was the news concerning the coming divorce—now just two or three weeks from becoming final. They both had called their lawyers that day and had cancelled their divorce.”
Years later, they still remained a united, happy family
YOUR FAMILY CAN BENEFIT TOO
To learn how to put these principles to work, ask for a free home Bible study like the one that helped Jerry
You will find the beautifully-illustrated study book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth to be a real help
[ ] I would like to have a free home Bible study for about one hour each week.
[ ] Please send me, postpaid, the 256-page, full-color illustrated, hardbound book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Price subject to change.
I enclose $2.50 (U.S.) as full payment.

