Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Finding a Purpose in Life
IN THIS decadent, upside-down world a number of people are searching for a meaning and purpose in life. They ask: ‘Why are we here? From where did we come? What does the future hold?’ Many turn to God in search of answers, and he does not disappoint them. (Matthew 7:7, 8) Such was the experience of one woman in Greece. She says:
□ “I was 14 years old when I started wondering about man and his purpose in life. After a study of anthropology at school, I thought medicine would answer my questions, but I dismissed such thoughts when the origin of man could not be explained to me.” She continues: “My thoughts turned to astrology, and I studied Eastern religions, such as Islam and the religion of Tibet. I began to apply the Lama’s teaching in my life, then spiritism. When I contacted the spirits, I felt that I had found the truth.  Western religions claimed to base their beliefs on the Bible, but since my religion teacher at school could not answer my questions from the Bible, I continued my spiritistic practices, astrojourneys, and hypnosis.”
In 1982 this woman contacted Jehovah’s Witnesses, but she relates: “Their explanation of the Bible was far too simple compared with the complex teachings I had learned. But something kept urging me to try the Bible. So out of sheer egotism I accepted a Bible study to prove the Witnesses wrong.”
After studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses for about a year, she explains: “Now I thank Jehovah with all my heart for helping me to learn the real truth. At last I am free from all the false theories and superstitions. The truth is so simple and easy to find in God’s Word, the Bible. At last I have found the answers to my questions; now I know the origin of man and the purpose of life.”
□ A 27-year-old Greek man who was originally involved with communism also found a purpose in life. He studied engineering in Germany, then returned to Greece and enlisted in the army. His experiences gradually convinced him that man was no longer in a position to solve his problems and to better his life. Before this man went to Germany, a Witness neighbor had talked to him about the Bible, and now he recalled those conversations. Hence, just a few months before being discharged from the army, he told his superior officer: “I no longer consider myself a soldier!” His family felt he had mental problems and forced him to visit psychiatrists. These gave him large doses of various medications, which affected him physically and mentally until he finally stopped using them.
He was found by two Witnesses in their door-to-door ministry and started to study the Bible with them. After bringing his life into harmony with Jehovah’s requirements, he became an active proclaimer of the good news. In 1984 he attended the Memorial along with ten relatives he had invited.
Yes, he had found a purpose in life, and now he has the desire to serve Jehovah as a special pioneer. His hope is to gain eternal life in God’s New Order of righteousness.​—Isaiah 65:17, 18.

