
August
Thursday, August 1

Not as I will, but as you will.​—Matt. 26:39.



To be good teachers, we first have to be good students. (1 Tim. 4:15, 16) Likewise, those divinely authorized to give discipline must themselves continue to submit willingly to Jehovah’s guidance. Such humble submission earns them respect and gives them freeness of speech when training or correcting others. Consider Jesus’ example. Jesus always listened obediently to his Father, even when doing so was very difficult. And he gave his Father the credit for his teachings and wisdom. (John 5:19, 30) Jesus’ humility and obedience drew people of honest heart to him and helped to make him a compassionate and gracious teacher. (Matt. 11:29) His kind words heartened those who were figuratively like a bruised reed or the wick of an oil lamp about to go out. (Matt. 12:20) Even when his patience was tested, Jesus was kind and loving. This was evident when he corrected his apostles for showing a selfish, ambitious spirit.​—Mark 9:33-37; Luke 22:24-27. w18.03 26 ¶15-16




Friday, August 2

Baptism, which corresponds to this, is also now saving you.​—1 Pet. 3:21.



Peter was referring to Noah’s constructing of the ark. The ark provided undeniable visible evidence that Noah was devoted to the doing of God’s will. Noah faithfully fulfilled the work assignment that Jehovah had given him. Yes, visible acts of faith led to the preservation of Noah and his family through the Flood. Just as the ark amounted to evidence of Noah’s faith, baptism before onlookers provides visible evidence. It shows that a Christian disciple has dedicated himself to Jehovah on the basis of faith in Christ. Like Noah, dedicated disciples obediently carry on in the work that God has assigned them to do. Just as Noah was preserved through the Flood, loyal baptized ones will be preserved when the present wicked world meets its end. (Mark 13:10; Rev. 7:9, 10) This makes dedication and baptism very important. A person who needlessly delays getting baptized endangers his prospects for everlasting life. w18.03 4 ¶3-4




Saturday, August 3

Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy.​—Prov. 22:15.



Some parents may conclude, ‘As long as my child is not baptized, he cannot be disfellowshipped.’ Why is this deceptive reasoning? (Jas. 1:22) Understandably, Christian parents would not want their child to get baptized before being mature enough to make a valid dedication. However, it would be a mistake to conclude that by not being baptized, a child is not accountable to Jehovah. Why is that? Accountability to Jehovah is not founded on the act of getting baptized. Rather, a child is accountable to God when the child knows what is right and what is wrong in Jehovah’s eyes. (Jas. 4:17) Thus, rather than discourage a child from getting baptized, wise parents work hard to set the right example. They want to cultivate in their child from infancy a heartfelt appreciation for Jehovah’s elevated moral standards. (Luke 6:40) Such appreciation is the best protection, for your child will be motivated to hold to Jehovah’s righteous way.​—Isa. 35:8. w18.03 11 ¶12-13




Sunday, August 4

Noah walked with the true God.​—Gen. 6:9.



Noah continued to do so for another 350 years after the Flood. (Gen. 9:28) What a fine example of faith and obedience! We can imitate Noah’s faith and obedience by upholding God’s righteousness, by being no part of Satan’s world, and by keeping Kingdom interests in first place. (Matt. 6:33; John 15:19) To be sure, our way of life does not win us the world’s approval. Indeed, even now, our firm stand for God’s laws, such as those concerning marriage and sexual morality, has led to negative publicity in some lands. (Mal. 3:17, 18) Like Noah, however, we fear Jehovah, not men. We know that he alone gives everlasting life. (Luke 12:4, 5) But what about you personally? Will you keep ‘walking with God,’ even when others mock or criticize you or when economic pressures test your faith in your Provider? If you imitate the faith and obedience of Noah, you can be confident that Jehovah will care for you.​—Phil. 4:6, 7. w18.02 4 ¶4, 8; 5 ¶9-10




Monday, August 5

A physical man does not accept the things of the spirit of God.​—1 Cor. 2:14.



The world has a predominant attitude that centers on the flesh. Paul describes it as “the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience.” (Eph. 2:2) This spirit influences most humans to adopt a common attitude​—simply follow the crowd. As a result, the majority of them do what feels right in their own eyes and make no effort to live up to God’s standards. A physical person is often excessively concerned about prestige and material pursuits or about defending what he feels are his rights. People who engage in any of “the works of the flesh” fall into that category. (Gal. 5:19-21) A fleshly attitude includes: promoting divisions, taking sides, fostering dissensions, taking one another to court, showing a lack of appreciation for headship, and being self-indulgent in food and drink. When confronted with temptation, the fleshly-minded person weakens and gives in.​—Prov. 7:21, 22. w18.02 19 ¶3-5




Tuesday, August 6

Men will be . . . lovers of pleasures.​—2 Tim. 3:2, 4.



There is nothing wrong with a balanced view of pleasures. Jehovah does not want us to practice severe self-denial or to abstain from wholesome activities that bring enjoyment. The Bible encourages faithful ones: “Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart.” (Eccl. 9:7) Second Timothy 3:4 refers to a pursuit of pleasures that excludes God. Notice that the verse does not say that people would love pleasures more than God, implying that they would have some love for him. It says ‘rather than God.’ One scholar wrote: “This [verse] definitely does not mean that they also love God to some extent. It means that they do not love God at all.” What a sobering warning to those who are nurturing an inordinate love of pleasures! The phrase “lovers of pleasures” aptly describes those who are “carried away by . . . pleasures of this life.”​—Luke 8:14. w18.01 25 ¶14-15




Wednesday, August 7

Honor Jehovah with your valuable things.​—Prov. 3:9.



Jehovah is a generous God. Everything we have is from him. Jehovah owns all the gold and silver along with all other natural resources of the earth, and he uses them to provide what is needed to sustain life. (Ps. 104:13-15; Hag. 2:8) For 40 years, Jehovah supplied manna and water for the nation of Israel while they were in the wilderness. (Ex. 16:35; Neh. 9:20, 21) Through the prophet Elisha, Jehovah performed the miracle of multiplying the small quantity of oil for a faithful widow. God’s gift enabled her to pay off her debts and after that to have enough money for her and her sons to live on. (2 Ki. 4:1-7) With Jehovah’s support, Jesus miraculously provided food and even money when needed. (Matt. 15:35-38; 17:27) Jehovah has access to unlimited resources that can sustain his earthly creation. However, he still invites his servants to use their material things to support the work of his organization.​—Ex. 36:3-7. w18.01 17 ¶1-3




Thursday, August 8

O Jehovah, take my life away.​—1 Ki. 19:4.



The Bible reveals that faithful servants in the past often felt that they could not go on. (Job 7:7) However, rather than give up, they looked to Jehovah for strength. They were not disappointed, for our God “gives power to the tired one.” (Isa. 40:29) Sadly, some of God’s people in our day have concluded that the best way to cope with the pressures of life is to ‘take a break from the truth,’ as they say, as if our Christian activities were a burden rather than a blessing. So they stop reading God’s Word, attending congregation meetings, and engaging in the field ministry​—just as Satan hopes they will do. The Devil well knows that our being fully engaged in Christian activities can strengthen us, and he does not want us to be strong. When you feel physically and emotionally drained, then, do not cut yourself off from Jehovah. Draw ever closer to him, for “he will make you firm, he will make you strong.”​—1 Pet. 5:10; Jas. 4:8. w18.01 7-8 ¶2-3




Friday, August 9

Jehovah . . . brings down to the Grave, and he raises up.​—1 Sam. 2:6.



The second resurrection related in the Scriptures was performed by the prophet Elisha. A prominent Israelite woman in Shunem showed Elisha exceptional hospitality. Through the prophet, God rewarded this childless woman and her elderly husband with a son. Some years later, the boy died. Imagine the mother’s crushing grief. With her husband’s permission, she traveled about 19 miles (30 km) to Elisha at Mount Carmel. The prophet sent his attendant Gehazi back to Shunem ahead of them. Gehazi was not able to bring the dead boy back to life. Then the grieving mother arrived with Elisha. (2 Ki. 4:8-31) There by the body at the house in Shunem, Elisha prayed. Miraculously, the dead boy came to life and was reunited with his now elated mother! (2 Ki. 4:32-37) Clearly, God in a very literal way raised up the boy in Shunem, proving His ability to resurrect. w17.12 4 ¶7-8




Saturday, August 10

Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child.​—Prov. 22:15, ftn.



Logically, then, wisdom​—the opposite of foolishness—​would be one evidence of maturity. Spiritual maturity is not determined primarily by age but by a person’s healthy fear of Jehovah and readiness to obey his commands. (Ps. 111:10) Young ones who are reasonably mature spiritually are not “tossed about as by waves and carried here and there” by their desires or by pressure from their peers. (Eph. 4:14) Rather, they are making progress in having “their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (Heb. 5:14) They demonstrate that they are progressing toward maturity by making wise decisions. That kind of wisdom is necessary for salvation. (Prov. 24:14) Therefore, make sure that you clearly state your Bible-based values to your children. By your words and by your example, let them know that the values found in God’s Word are also your values.​—Rom. 2:21-23. w17.12 20-21 ¶12-13




Sunday, August 11

Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside . . . Know how you should answer each person.​—Col. 4:5, 6.



The idea that humans can solve their own problems may sound appealing to many people. Why? If it were true, it would mean that man does not need God’s guidance and that man can do as he pleases. Also, that idea may sound convincing because​—according to some studies—​war, crime, disease, and poverty are all decreasing. One report states: “The reason humanity is getting better is because humans have decided to make the world a better place.” If you hear a worldly idea that seems to challenge your faith, research what God’s Word says on the subject and discuss the matter with an experienced fellow believer. Consider why the idea may sound appealing, why such thinking is faulty, and how you can refute it. Indeed, all of us can protect ourselves against worldly thinking by following the admonition that Paul gave in today’s text. w17.11 24 ¶14, 17




Monday, August 12

O God, I thank you that I am not like everyone else.​—Luke 18:11.



Why were the Pharisees so unwilling to show mercy? The Bible says that they “considered others as nothing.” (Luke 18:9-14) Imitate Jehovah, not the Pharisees. Show compassion. (Col. 3:13) One way to do so is to make it easy for others to seek your forgiveness. (Luke 17:3, 4) Ask yourself: ‘Is my forgiveness within reach of people who have wronged me, even repeatedly? Am I eager to restore peace with someone who has offended me or who has hurt me?’ Forgiveness is really a test of humility. The Pharisees failed that test because they considered others to be inferior. As Christians, however, we must humbly “consider others superior” to us, as worthy of our forgiveness. (Phil. 2:3) Will you imitate Jehovah and pass the test of humility? Keep the “road” to your forgiveness open and in good repair. Be quick to extend mercy and slow to take offense.​—Eccl. 7:8, 9. w17.11 14-15 ¶6-8




Tuesday, August 13

It is good to sing praises to our God.​—Ps. 147:1.



You may feel embarrassed when comparing your voice with others. That, however, should not interfere with your responsibility to sing praises to Jehovah. Rather, hold your songbook up high, lift your head, and sing with heartfelt expression! (Ezra 3:11) Today, in many Kingdom Halls, the words of the songs are shown on screens, which helps us to sing out. It is also of interest that the singing of Kingdom songs has been made part of the Kingdom Ministry School curriculum for elders. This emphasizes the need for elders to take the lead in congregation singing. One factor that keeps many from singing with a full voice is fear. It may be fear of possibly sounding unpleasant to others. However, we should keep in mind that when we speak, “we all stumble many times.” (Jas. 3:2) Yet, that does not stop us from speaking. So why should we let our imperfect singing voices stop us from praising Jehovah in song? w17.11 4-5 ¶9-10




Wednesday, August 14

It will occur​—if you do not fail to listen to the voice of Jehovah your God.​—Zech. 6:15.



As Zechariah’s seventh vision closes, the prophet has much to think about. Jehovah had guaranteed that he would hold dishonest people accountable for their wicked deeds. This promise surely strengthened Zechariah. Yet, nothing had really changed. Dishonesty and other wicked practices were still present, and the rebuilding of Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem was far from complete. How could the Jews have abandoned their divinely appointed task so quickly? Had they returned to their homeland simply to further their own interests? Jehovah knew what his people needed. God gave Zechariah a final vision to assure the Jews of His love and appreciation for all that they had done so far and to guarantee protection for them if they would return to His work. In connection with rebuilding the temple, Jehovah made a promise​—the words of today’s text. w17.10 26 ¶1; 27 ¶5




Thursday, August 15

God . . . energizes you, giving you both the desire and the power to act.​—Phil. 2:13.



Courageous men who are willing to take on more responsibility are a blessing to a congregation. (1 Tim. 3:1) However, some may be reluctant to reach out. Perhaps a brother has made mistakes in the past, and now he feels that he is not worthy of being a ministerial servant or an elder. Another brother might have feelings of inadequacy about fulfilling an assignment. If you feel that way, Jehovah can help you develop courage. (Phil. 4:13) Remember, at one point, Moses did not feel qualified for an assignment. (Ex. 3:11) Yet, Jehovah helped him, and in time, Moses developed courage to accomplish the work. A baptized brother can develop similar courage by seeking God’s help in earnest prayer and by daily reading the Bible. Meditating on accounts of courage will also help. He can humbly ask the elders for training and make himself available to help in whatever way is needed. w17.09 32 ¶19




Friday, August 16

The word of our God endures forever.​—Isa. 40:8.



Christians today need not think that the work of translating the Septuagint, Wycliffe’s Bible, the King James Version, or any other translation was inspired by God. Nevertheless, when we review the history of these and many other translations that have been published, it gives support to this fact: Just as Jehovah promised, his Word has endured. Does that not strengthen your faith that all the other promises Jehovah has made will likewise come true? (Josh. 23:14) Besides strengthening our faith, reviewing how the Bible has endured through the ages deepens our love for Jehovah. After all, why did he provide his Word in the first place? And why did he guarantee that it would survive? Because he loves us, and he wants to teach us how to benefit ourselves. (Isa. 48:17, 18) Naturally, it is fitting that we respond to Jehovah’s love by loving him in return and by obeying his commandments.​—1 John 4:19; 5:3. w17.09 21-22 ¶13-14




Saturday, August 17

Honor your father and your mother.​—Eph. 6:2.



Training children to follow this command can be especially challenging if you have an unbelieving mate. Set the example by honoring your mate. Focus on his or her good qualities, and express appreciation for your mate. Avoid saying negative things about your mate in front of your children. Instead, explain to them that each person must choose whether to serve Jehovah. The children’s good conduct might help to draw the unbelieving parent to true worship. Some husbands may forbid the Christian wife to teach the children from the Bible or to take them with her to Christian meetings. Even so, a Christian wife does what she can to teach the children Bible truth. (Acts 16:1; 2 Tim. 3:14, 15) While respecting his decisions, she can still express her faith in the presence of her children as opportunities arise, thus giving them moral training and knowledge about Jehovah.​—Acts 4:19, 20. w17.10 14 ¶9-10




Sunday, August 18

Become imitators of God, as beloved children.​—Eph. 5:1.



Humans were made in God’s image. Accordingly, because Jehovah is compassionate, interest in others’ well-being is rooted in human nature. Even those who do not know the true God often show compassion. (Gen. 1:27) We find many accounts in the Bible where a sense of compassion shines through. Recall the account of the two prostitutes who argued before Solomon over which one of them was the actual mother of a child. When Solomon put them to the test by ordering that the baby be cut in half, the real mother’s compassion was stirred. That moved her to act, even at the cost of giving the child up to the other woman. (1 Ki. 3:23-27) Or recall Pharaoh’s daughter who saved baby Moses’ life. Though she realized that the infant she had found was a child of the Hebrews and should not be kept alive, “she felt compassion for him” and decided to raise the child as her own.​—Ex. 2:5, 6. w17.09 8-9 ¶2-3




Monday, August 19

[Jehovah] is patient with you.​—2 Pet. 3:9.



Humility is required of all true worshippers and brings great rewards. (Prov. 22:4) Being humble will help us to promote peace and unity in the congregation. Developing and strengthening humility will also make us recipients of God’s undeserved kindness. The apostle Peter stated: “All of you clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.” (1 Pet. 5:5) In today’s world, people who are mild and patient are often considered weak. How far such reasoning is from the truth! These beautiful qualities originate from the most powerful Person in the universe. Jehovah God is the best example of showing mildness and patience. Consider how he responded through his angelic representatives when Abraham and Lot questioned him. (Gen. 18:22-33; 19:18-21) Also, for over 1,500 years, Jehovah put up with the wayward nation of Israel.​—Ezek. 33:11. w17.08 25 ¶13-14




Tuesday, August 20

The peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts.​—Phil. 4:7.



Pray, and then you will receive the peace of God. But notice that “the peace of God . . . surpasses all understanding.” What does that mean? Some translators render this expression “surpasses all our dreams” or “excels all human planning.” Paul was, in effect, saying that “the peace of God” is more wonderful than can be imagined. So although from a human viewpoint we may not see a way out of our problems, Jehovah does, and he can do the unexpected. (2 Pet. 2:9) How can we face challenges and still retain “the peace of God”? It is by maintaining a good relationship with our God, Jehovah. Such a relationship is possible only “by means of Christ Jesus,” who offered his life as a ransom sacrifice. The provision of that ransom is yet another one of the amazing works of our Father. Jehovah uses the ransom to cover our sins, enabling us to have a clean conscience and draw close to him.​—John 14:6; Jas. 4:8; 1 Pet. 3:21. w17.08 10 ¶7; 12 ¶15




Wednesday, August 21

The heart knows its own bitterness, and no outsider can share in its joy.​—Prov. 14:10.



At times, only a bereaved person’s own heart grasps the full depth of the emotional pain, and it may be difficult for him to voice his innermost feelings. Even when someone does express how he feels, it is not always easy for others to understand what he is trying to say. Understandably, then, it can be difficult to know what to say to someone who is overwhelmed by grief. Often, the most helpful thing you can do is to “weep with those who weep.” (Rom. 12:15) If you find it difficult to say something in person, it may be easier to provide consolation by means of a sympathy card, an e-mail, a text message, or a letter. You could simply quote a comforting scripture, recall some memorable characteristic or quality of the deceased, or share a happy memory that you cherish. And do not underestimate the value of your prayers with and for a bereaved fellow Christian. w17.07 14-16 ¶13-16




Thursday, August 22

What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.​—Matt. 19:6.



What if married life proves to be more challenging than expected? Suppose that it even seems disappointing. Reflect on Jehovah’s dealings with Israel. He referred to himself as being like a husband to that ancient nation. (Isa. 54:5; 62:4) What a difficult “marriage” that proved to be! Yet, Jehovah was not quick to give up on it. He repeatedly showed mercy toward the nation and loyalty to his covenant with them. (Ps. 106:43-45) Are we not drawn to Jehovah by such loyal love? Accordingly, married couples who love Jehovah’s ways imitate him. They do not seek an unscriptural way out of a difficult marriage. They realize that Jehovah has yoked them together and that he wants them to “stick” to each other. The only Scriptural ground for divorce that might free one to remarry is sexual immorality. (Matt. 19:5, 9) By making the best of their situation and even seeking to improve it, they uphold Jehovah’s righteous way of ruling. w17.06 31 ¶17-18




Friday, August 23

Your eyes will be opened and you will be like God.​—Gen. 3:5.



Satan the Devil has raised the question of the rightfulness of Jehovah’s sovereignty. He contends that God’s rulership is corrupt and that Jehovah withholds the best from his creatures. According to the Devil, humans would be far happier and better off ruling themselves. (Gen. 3:1-4) Satan has also implied that under sufficient pressure, anyone will reject Jehovah’s rulership. (Job 2:4, 5) Jehovah is allowing time for human experience to reveal the unsavory truth about life outside of God’s righteous rule. Of course, Jehovah knows that the Devil’s allegations are false. So why has God chosen to allow the issue to go on, giving Satan time to try to prove his point? The answer involves all intelligent creatures. (Ps. 83:18) After all, the first human couple rejected Jehovah’s rulership, and so have many others since then. This could lead some to wonder whether there might be validity to the Devil’s claim. w17.06 22-23 ¶3-4




Saturday, August 24

Go . . . make disciples of people.​—Matt. 28:19.



Disciple-making is an educational experience that teaches you good work habits, communication skills, confidence, and tact. (Prov. 21:5; 2 Tim. 2:24, ftn.) But making disciples is especially joyful because it helps you to become more familiar with the Scriptural basis for your faith. You also learn how to work closely with Jehovah. (1 Cor. 3:9) You can enjoy making disciples even if few people in your territory respond to the good news. Making disciples is teamwork. The whole congregation searches for sincere ones. Although only one brother or sister may find the person who eventually becomes a disciple, all shared in the search and all can share in the joy. For example, Brandon spent nine years pioneering in unresponsive territory. He says: “It’s true that I have never found anyone in the territory who progressed to baptism, but others have. I’m glad I planned to share fully in the disciple-making work.”​—Eccl. 11:6. w17.07 23 ¶7; 24 ¶9-10




Sunday, August 25

Her face was no longer downcast.​—1 Sam. 1:18.



Hannah remained barren while Elkanah’s other wife, Peninnah, produced offspring. (1 Sam. 1:4-7) Hannah was taunted by Peninnah “year after year.” That caused Hannah great anguish and distress. She sought relief by taking the matter to Jehovah in prayer. (1 Sam. 1:12) She trusted that Jehovah would either put an end to her barrenness or fill the lack in some other way. Trials and tribulations will continue as long as we are imperfect and are in this system under Satan’s control. (1 John 5:19) How good it is to know, though, that Jehovah is “the God of all comfort”! (2 Cor. 1:3) One way that we can receive help to deal with our personal trials or tribulations is through prayer. Hannah poured out her heart to Jehovah. Similarly, in the face of tribulation, we need to do more than simply mention to Jehovah how we feel. We need to supplicate him, yes, to convey our feelings by praying intensely from the heart.​—Phil. 4:6, 7. w17.06 6 ¶10-11




Monday, August 26

Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?​—John 21:15.



The resurrected Jesus, knowing that his disciples had not caught anything while fishing, said to them: “‘Cast the net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.’ So they cast it, but they were not able to haul it in because of the large number of fish.” (John 21:1-6) After serving them breakfast, Jesus turned to Simon Peter and said the words of today’s text. To what was Jesus referring? Peter was quite attached to fishing. So it seems that Jesus was asking him where his true affection lay. Did he have greater affection for the fish and the fishing business than for Jesus and the things that he taught? In answer, Peter said: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” (John 21:15) Peter certainly lived up to his word. From that point forward, he proved his love for Christ by busying himself in the disciple-making work, becoming a pillar in the first-century Christian congregation. w17.05 22 ¶1-2




Tuesday, August 27

Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?​—Heb. 13:6.



That firm confidence in Jehovah’s loving care helped Paul to grapple with life’s problems. He did not allow negative circumstances to weigh him down. What gave him the strength to do so? He kept leaning on “the God of all comfort, who comforts us in all our trials.” (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Communication through prayer is the foundation of a close relationship with God. (Ps. 86:3; 1 Thess. 5:17; Rom. 12:12) When we take sufficient time to express to Jehovah our deepest thoughts and innermost feelings, we cannot help but be drawn closer to our heavenly Father, the “Hearer of prayer.” (Ps. 65:2) In addition, when we discern that Jehovah answers our prayers, our love for him grows. We come to realize ever more that “Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.” (Ps. 145:18) That confidence in Jehovah’s loving support will help us to cope with further tests of faith. w17.05 19 ¶9-10




Wednesday, August 28

Jehovah sees into the heart.​—1 Sam. 16:7.



How will you respond if the elders make a decision that you do not understand or perhaps do not agree with? Such a situation can test our faith in Jehovah and in his organizational arrangement. How will humility protect you if you face such a test? Consider two ways. First, humility will move us to acknowledge that we do not have all the facts. No matter how much we know of a situation, only Jehovah can read a person’s figurative heart. Our awareness of this undeniable truth will prompt us to be humble, to recognize our limitations, and to adjust our view of the matter. Second, humility will help us to be submissive and patient as we wait on Jehovah to correct any true injustice. It is as the wise man wrote: “It will not turn out well for the wicked one, nor will he prolong his days.” (Eccl. 8:12, 13) Certainly, a humble response is in the best spiritual interests of all concerned.​—1 Pet. 5:5. w17.04 25-26 ¶10-11




Thursday, August 29

I was, in fact, kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.​—Gen. 40:15.



Clearly, Joseph was the victim of injustice. He also stated that he was not guilty of the crime for which he was imprisoned. On that basis, he asked the cupbearer to mention him to Pharaoh. Why? He explained his goal: “In order to get me out of this place.” (Gen. 40:14) Were Joseph’s words those of a man who passively accepted his situation? Certainly not. He was keenly aware that he was the victim of many injustices. He clearly explained the facts to the cupbearer, who perhaps would be in a position to assist him. Note, however, that there is nothing in the Scriptures to indicate that Joseph ever told anyone​—not even Pharaoh—​that his brothers were his kidnappers. In fact, when his brothers came to Egypt and were reconciled with Joseph, Pharaoh welcomed them and invited them to make their home in Egypt and to enjoy “the best of all the land.”​—Gen. 45:16-20. w17.04 20-21 ¶12-13




Friday, August 30

O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments are and beyond tracing out his ways are!​—Rom. 11:33.



One reason why Jehovah is the rightful Sovereign is because he has the knowledge and wisdom needed to care for the universe. Consider, for example, the fact that God enabled his Son to heal diseases that doctors could not cure. (Matt. 4:23, 24; Mark 5:25-29) From Jehovah’s standpoint, this was no miracle. He understands the processes involved and has the ability to undo any damage. The same is true with regard to his ability to raise the dead and prevent natural disasters. The world under Satan’s influence is still searching for a way to settle national and international disputes. Jehovah alone has the wisdom to bring about world peace. (Isa. 2:3, 4; 54:13) As we learn of Jehovah’s knowledge and wisdom, we feel as did the apostle Paul, who wrote under inspiration the words of today’s text. w17.06 28 ¶6-7




Saturday, August 31

What God has yoked together, let no man put apart.​—Mark 10:9.



Many individuals in this world have a casual attitude toward marriage. When the relationship becomes strained, they just give up and walk out on their marriage mate. That, however, is not the Christian way. (1 Cor. 7:27) Breaking one’s marriage vow is equivalent to lying to God, and God hates liars! (Lev. 19:12; Prov. 6:16-19) Jehovah also hates a treacherous divorce. (Mal. 2:13-16) Jesus taught that the only Scriptural ground for dissolving a marriage vow is when an innocent mate chooses not to forgive an adulterous partner. (Matt. 19:9; Heb. 13:4) What, then, about separation? The Bible is clear on this too. (1 Cor. 7:10, 11) The Bible does not set out grounds for marital separation. However, some married Christians have viewed certain situations as a reason for separation, such as the extreme endangerment of one’s life or spirituality by an abusive or apostate spouse. w17.04 7 ¶14-16




