
December
Sunday, December 1

Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.​—1 Pet. 4:9.



In Bible times, hospitality normally included inviting someone to one’s home for a meal. (Gen. 18:1-8; Judg. 13:15; Luke 24:28-30) An invitation to share food was an invitation to friendship and peace. Who should be among our primary guests? Those who are a regular part of our lives, the brothers and sisters in our congregation. When hard times come, will we not depend on one another? We need loyal friendships and peace with all of them. Circuit overseers and students at theocratic schools may need places to stay, as may construction volunteers. Natural disasters may leave some families homeless and in need of lodging until relief efforts can restore their dwellings. We should not assume that only those who have very comfortable homes are in a position to help; they may already have done so many times. Could you share in offering accommodations even if your circumstances are modest? w18.03 15 ¶6; 16 ¶9




Monday, December 2

The righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again.​—Prov. 24:16.



What will help one who falls to succeed? Not sheer willpower, but God’s spirit. (Phil. 4:13) The fruitage of that spirit includes self-control, which is closely related to self-discipline. Also important are heartfelt prayer, Bible study, and meditation. But what if you find it hard to study God’s Word? Perhaps you do not consider yourself to be studious. Keep in mind, however, that Jehovah will help you if you let him. He can help you to “form a longing” for his Word. (1 Pet. 2:2) First, pray to Jehovah for the needed self-discipline to study his Word. Then, work in harmony with your prayers, perhaps keeping study periods rather short. Over time, study will be both easier and more pleasurable! Indeed, you will find yourself cherishing your quiet times when you are absorbed in Jehovah’s precious thoughts.​—1 Tim. 4:15. w18.03 29 ¶5-6




Tuesday, December 3

Baptism . . . is also now saving you.​—1 Pet. 3:21.



Before a student can get baptized, he must cultivate faith based on accurate knowledge of God, His purpose, and His arrangement for salvation. (1 Tim. 2:3-6) Such faith moves the student to reject conduct that is displeasing to God and to come in line with Jehovah’s righteous standards. (Acts 3:19) Understandably, an individual could not make a valid dedication to God while engaging in any conduct that would exclude him from the Kingdom. (1 Cor. 6:9, 10) But more is needed than adhering to Jehovah’s elevated moral standards. One who is pursuing righteousness would also be present at congregation meetings and have a meaningful share in the lifesaving preaching and disciple-making work. (Acts 1:8) Only after taking such steps can a new disciple make a valid dedication to Jehovah in private prayer and then publicly symbolize this dedication by getting baptized before onlookers. w18.03 6 ¶12




Wednesday, December 4

[Mary] kept all these sayings in her heart.​—Luke 2:51.



Why did Jehovah choose Mary to become Jesus’ mother? No doubt because she was a spiritually-minded person. She showed clear evidence of spirituality in her beautiful expressions of praise when she visited the home of her relatives Zechariah and Elizabeth. (Luke 1:46-55) Mary’s statements show that she had a deep love for God’s Word and was thoroughly familiar with the Hebrew Scriptures. (Gen. 30:13; 1 Sam. 2:1-10; Mal. 3:12) Note, too, that she and Joseph, although newly married, refrained from sexual relations until Jesus was born. This shows that both of them were more concerned with Jehovah’s will than with satisfying their personal desires. (Matt. 1:25) As time passed, Mary carefully noted what took place in Jesus’ life and paid attention to the words of wisdom he spoke. She was clearly interested in God’s purpose in connection with the Messiah. Does not Mary’s example help us to think of how we can put God’s will first in our life? w18.02 21 ¶11




Thursday, December 5

[Job] is an upright man of integrity.​—Job 1:8.



How can we imitate Job’s faith and obedience? No matter what our circumstances may be, let us always keep Jehovah at the center of our lives, trusting him fully and obeying him with a complete heart. Indeed, we have even more reason to do so than Job had! Consider: We know a lot about Satan and his tactics. (2 Cor. 2:11) Thanks in part to the book of Job, we know why God permits suffering. From Daniel’s prophecy, we understand that God’s Kingdom is a world government in the hands of Christ Jesus. (Dan. 7:13, 14) And we know that this Kingdom will soon bring a permanent end to all suffering. Job’s experience also highlights our need to show compassion to fellow Christians who may be enduring hardships. Like Job, some may even speak rashly at times. (Eccl. 7:7) But instead of judging them, let us show insight and compassion. In this way, we imitate our loving and merciful Father, Jehovah.​—Ps. 103:8. w18.02 6 ¶16; 7 ¶19-20




Friday, December 6

Your humility makes me great.​—Ps. 18:35.



Some people become proud because of their good looks, popularity, musical ability, physical prowess, or exalted position. David had not just one of these assets but all of them; yet, he remained humble throughout his life. After he killed Goliath and was offered the daughter of King Saul to be his wife, David said: “Who am I . . . , for me to become son-in-law to the king?” (1 Sam. 18:18) Like David, Jehovah’s people today strive to show humility. We are awed by the knowledge that Jehovah, the greatest Person in the universe, manifests the appealing quality of humility. We take to heart the inspired counsel: “Clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience.” (Col. 3:12) We also know that love “does not brag, does not get puffed up.” (1 Cor. 13:4) When we show humility, people may be drawn to Jehovah. w18.01 28 ¶6-7




Saturday, December 7

They . . . kept earnestly begging us for the privilege of kindly giving.​—2 Cor. 8:4.



We may be asked to make donations for a specific purpose. (Acts 4:34, 35; 1 Cor. 16:2) For example, are there plans to build a new Kingdom Hall that your congregation will use? We may be made aware of financial needs with regard to a convention we are attending or assistance to our brothers after a natural disaster. We also donate to support those caring for the work at world headquarters and at branch offices around the earth. Our donations support missionaries, special pioneers, and those in the circuit work. All of us can have a share in supporting the work that Jehovah is accomplishing in these last days. Most donations are anonymous. We discreetly place funds in the contribution boxes at the Kingdom Hall, or we may make donations online through jw.org. We may feel that our small donations do not mean much. Yet, the majority of donated funds today come from many small gifts rather than from a few large ones. w18.01 19 ¶10-11




Sunday, December 8

Baptism . . . is . . . now saving you.​—1 Pet. 3:21.



Baptism is a requirement for Christians, and it is an essential step to gaining salvation. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Your baptism symbolizes your dedication. It is a solemn promise that you made to Jehovah to love him and to put his will above everything else. Putting yourself in Jehovah’s hands is never a wrong move. Consider the alternative! A person who lives apart from Jehovah is under Satan’s rule. The Devil has no interest in your salvation. In fact, he would be happy if you lost out on everlasting life by siding with him in rejecting Jehovah’s sovereignty. In contrast to supporting Satan, consider the blessings you have as a dedicated and baptized Christian. Now that you have given your life to Jehovah, you can say with greater confidence than ever before: “Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?” (Ps. 118:6) You could have no greater privilege in life than being on God’s side and having him approve of you. w17.12 23-24 ¶1-3




Monday, December 9

Do not become upset and turn to doing evil.​—Ps. 37:8.



There will be times when we will be irritated by the words or actions of fellow believers​—or when they will be annoyed by ours. This can be a serious test. As with other tests, Jehovah allows us to prove our integrity by learning to work unitedly with dedicated men and women whom he loves despite their imperfections. That Jehovah does not prevent his servants from being tested is illustrated by the account of Joseph. As a young man, Joseph was sold into slavery by his jealous half brothers and taken to Egypt. (Gen. 37:28) Jehovah saw what was happening and no doubt was grieved to observe the way his friend, righteous Joseph, was being treated. Still, He did not intervene. Later, when Joseph was accused of trying to rape Potiphar’s wife and was thrown into prison, Jehovah still did not step in. But did God ever abandon Joseph? On the contrary: “Jehovah made whatever [Joseph] did successful.”​—Gen. 39:21-23. w18.01 9-10 ¶12-14




Tuesday, December 10

If, indeed, there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been raised up.​—1 Cor. 15:13.



What are the key teachings of your faith? Surely you would stress that Jehovah is the Creator and Life-Giver. You would likely mention your belief in Jesus Christ, who died as a ransom. And you would happily add that an earthly paradise is ahead, where God’s people will live forever. But would you mention the resurrection as one of your most cherished beliefs? We have good reasons to include the resurrection as a key teaching even if we personally hope to survive the great tribulation and live on earth forever. The resurrection is central to our faith. Had Christ not been resurrected, he would not be our ruling King, and our teaching about Christ’s rule would be in vain. (1 Cor. 15:12-19) However, we know that Jesus was resurrected, and we hold firm to our belief in the resurrection.​—Mark 12:18; Acts 4:2, 3; 17:32; 23:6-8. w17.12 8 ¶1-2




Wednesday, December 11

You have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy.​—Matt. 23:23.



The Pharisees focused solely on what a sinner had done rather than on who a sinner was at heart. When Pharisees saw Jesus attending a banquet at Matthew’s home, they asked his disciples: “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” Jesus replied: “Healthy people do not need a physician, but those who are ill do. Go, then, and learn what this means: ‘I want mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.” (Matt. 9:9-13) Was Jesus excusing serious wrongdoing? Not at all. In fact, Jesus’ principal message included the call to repent from sin. (Matt. 4:17) Nevertheless, Jesus insightfully noted that at least some of these “tax collectors and sinners” wanted to change. They were not at Matthew’s home simply to eat. Rather, “there were many of them who were following [Jesus].” (Mark 2:15) Sadly, most Pharisees failed to see in such ones what Jesus saw. w17.11 13 ¶2; 16 ¶15




Thursday, December 12

Clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.​—Col. 3:14.



We all agree that being part of the Christian congregation is a blessing. The study of God’s Word at our meetings and the kind and loving support that we give one another help us to keep our eyes focused on the prize. Nevertheless, at times, misunderstandings may lead to some tension among members of the congregation. If we fail to resolve such problems, they could easily lead to feelings of resentment. (1 Pet. 3:8, 9) How can we prevent resentment from depriving us of the prize? Paul urged the Colossians: “As God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, humility, mildness, and patience. Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.”​—Col. 3:12, 13. w17.11 27 ¶7-8




Friday, December 13

He must flee to one of these cities.​—Josh. 20:4.



After he accidentally killed someone, a fugitive first had to “present his case in the hearing of the elders” at the gate of the city of refuge to which he had fled. He was to be received hospitably. Some time later, he was sent back to the elders of the city where the killing had occurred, and those elders judged the case. (Num. 35:24, 25) Only after they had declared the killing accidental would the fugitive be returned to the city of refuge. Why were the elders involved? They were to keep the congregation of Israel clean and to help the unintentional manslayer to benefit from Jehovah’s mercy. One Bible scholar wrote that if the fugitive neglected to approach the elders, “it was at his peril . . . because he did not make use of the security God had provided for him.” If he did not seek refuge in one of the cities Jehovah had set aside, the closest relative of the person he had killed was free to put him to death. w17.11 9 ¶6-7




Saturday, December 14

Are they not all spirits for holy service, sent out to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation?​—Heb. 1:14.



Jehovah of armies still uses his angels to protect and strengthen his people. (Mal. 3:6; Heb. 1:7) Ever since spiritual Israel was released from symbolic captivity to Babylon the Great in 1919, the expansion of true worship has been unstoppable despite relentless opposition. (Rev. 18:4) Because we have angelic protection, we need not fear that Jehovah’s organization might go through another time of spiritual oppression. (Ps. 34:7) Instead, we can be sure that God’s servants worldwide will continue to flourish spiritually. We have a cavalry on our side. At that critical moment during the great tribulation, the angelic soldiers of Jehovah of armies will come together to protect God’s people and destroy those who oppose his sovereignty. (2 Thess. 1:7, 8) What a day that will be! w17.10 28 ¶10-11




Sunday, December 15

Build yourselves up on your most holy faith, and pray with holy spirit.​—Jude 20.



When a family member is disfellowshipped or he disassociates himself from the congregation, it can feel like the stab of a sword. How can you cope with the pain that this brings? It is important to keep up your spiritual routine. Build yourself up by regularly reading the Bible, preparing for and attending Christian meetings, sharing in the field ministry, and praying for the strength to endure. (Jude 21) But what if you feel that your heart is not in your activity, that you are just going through the motions? Do not give up! A good spiritual routine can help you to gain control of your thoughts and feelings. Consider the experience of the writer of Psalm 73. He had developed a wrong viewpoint and had become greatly troubled, but he was able to correct his thinking when he entered God’s place of worship. (Ps. 73:16, 17) Your faithfully worshipping Jehovah can help you to do the same. w17.10 16 ¶17-18




Monday, December 16

Let your love be without hypocrisy.​—Rom. 12:9.



In the garden of Eden, Satan pretended to be looking out for Eve’s best interests, but his actions were actually selfish and hypocritical. (Gen. 3:4, 5) In David’s day, Ahithophel proved that his friendship with the king was a fraud. Ahithophel turned traitor when he felt that he would gain an advantage. (2 Sam. 15:31) Likewise today, apostates and others who create divisions in the congregation use “smooth talk and flattering speech” to make themselves appear to be loving, but their true motive is selfish. (Rom. 16:17, 18) Hypocritical love is especially shameful because it is a counterfeit of the godly quality of self-sacrificing love. Such hypocrisy might fool men, but not Jehovah. In fact, Jesus said that those who are like hypocrites would be punished “with the greatest severity.” (Matt. 24:51) So we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Is my love always genuine, not tainted by selfishness or deception?’ w17.10 8 ¶6-8




Tuesday, December 17

They have a zeal for God, but not according to accurate knowledge.​—Rom. 10:2.



When we read directly from God’s Word in the ministry, we are letting Jehovah speak to the householder. A well-chosen scripture will likely be much more powerful than anything we might say. (1 Thess. 2:13) Ask yourself, ‘Do I look for every opportunity to share a portion of God’s Word with those to whom I bring the good news?’ Of course, more is needed than merely reading Bible texts to those we are conversing with. Why? Because many have little or no understanding of the Bible. That was true in the first century, and it is true today. So we should not assume that a person will grasp the point of a verse simply because we read it. We need to take time to isolate portions of the verse​—perhaps rereading key words—​and explain their meaning. Doing so can go a long way in helping the message of God’s Word to reach the mind and heart of our listeners.​—Luke 24:32. w17.09 25 ¶7-8




Wednesday, December 18

Have . . . tender compassion.​—1 Pet. 3:8.



Showing compassion for one’s neighbor and Christian brothers is a basic requirement of those who strive to imitate Jesus. (John 13:34, 35) One meaning of compassion is “to suffer together.” A person who shows compassion is moved to relieve others’ suffering, perhaps by helping them out of their difficulties. Seek opportunities to do so! The sufferings of those struck by disasters move many to manifest compassion. Jehovah’s people are known for coming forward to help in such times of need. (1 Pet. 2:17) One Japanese sister lived in an area that was seriously damaged by the earthquake and tsunami of 2011. She says that she was “very encouraged and comforted” by the efforts of the many volunteers from elsewhere in Japan and from overseas to repair property damage. She writes: “This experience helped me to realize that Jehovah cares. And fellow Witnesses care about one another. Many brothers and sisters all over the world are praying for us.” w17.09 11 ¶12-13




Thursday, December 19

The fruitage of the spirit is . . . self-control.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.



Why should you be interested in cultivating self-control? Consider two important reasons. First, it has been observed that people who are able to control their impulses generally have fewer major problems. They are more stable emotionally, they are better at forming wholesome relationships, and they are not as angry and prone to anxiety and depression as are impulsive people. Second, the ability to resist temptation and to control inappropriate impulses is fundamental to retaining God’s favor. The failure of Adam and Eve illustrates this truth. (Gen. 3:6) And think of the sad results reaped by others who since then have failed to exercise this important quality. No imperfect human can exercise perfect self-control. Jehovah is aware of his servants’ struggles in this regard, and he wants to help them dominate their sinful tendencies.​—1 Ki. 8:46-50. w17.09 3-4 ¶3-4




Friday, December 20

Clothe yourselves with the new personality.​—Col. 3:10.



At one time, Witnesses of different skin color in South Africa could not freely associate with one another. However, on Sunday, December 18, 2011, it was a wonderful sight to see over 78,000 of our brothers of different races from South Africa and neighboring countries packed into the largest stadium in the city of Johannesburg to enjoy a spiritual program. One of the managers of the stadium said: “This is the best-behaved crowd I have ever seen in this stadium. All are neatly dressed. And you people have cleaned the stadium so nicely. But most of all, you are truly multiracial.” Such comments by non-Witnesses show that our international brotherhood is truly unique. (1 Pet. 5:9, ftn.) What, though, makes us so different from any other organization? With the help of God’s Word and his holy spirit, we work hard to “strip off the old personality.” In its place, we “clothe [ourselves] with the new personality.”​—Col. 3:9. w17.08 17-18 ¶2-3




Saturday, December 21

You too exercise patience.​—Jas. 5:8.



According to the Bible, patience is a product of holy spirit; without God’s help, imperfect humans cannot be patient to the degree needed. Patience is a gift from God, and being patient is a key way to show our love for him. Patience is also an expression of our love for others. Persistent impatience weakens the bonds of love; patience strengthens them. (1 Cor. 13:4; Gal. 5:22) Patience involves a number of other vital Christian qualities. For example, it is closely connected with endurance, which enables us to put up with difficult circumstances while maintaining a positive attitude. (Col. 1:11; Jas. 1:3, 4) Patience can also involve suffering without retaliating and remaining firm and steadfast no matter what may come our way. Additionally, the Bible urges us to accept willingly the need to wait. This aspect of patience is highlighted at James 5:7, 8. w17.08 4 ¶4




Sunday, December 22

Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you.​—Isa. 41:10.



You young ones will probably agree that before starting a journey, it is wise to plan where you will go. Life is like a journey, and the time to plan where you want to go is when you are young. Of course, making plans can be challenging. But take courage. Note what Jehovah says in today’s text. Jehovah urges you to plan wisely for your future. (Eccl. 12:1; Matt. 6:20) He wants you to be happy. The delightful sights, sounds, and tastes of creation tell you that. Consider, too, how he cares for us and teaches us the best way of life. To those who reject his advice, Jehovah says: “You chose what displeased me. . . . Look! My servants will rejoice, but you will suffer shame. Look! My servants will shout joyfully because of the good condition of the heart.” (Isa. 65:12-14) Jehovah is glorified when his people make wise choices in life.​—Prov. 27:11. w17.07 22 ¶1-2




Monday, December 23

[Jehovah] calls all of [the stars] by name.​—Ps. 147:4.



The God who knows where each star is at any given time also knows you as an individual​—exactly where you are, precisely how you feel, and specifically what you need at any given moment! Not only is Jehovah interested in you as a person but he also has the power and empathy needed to help you with life’s problems. (Ps. 147:5) You may feel that your situation is too difficult and the load too heavy for you to carry. God understands your limitations, ‘remembering that you are dust.’ (Ps. 103:14) Being imperfect, we make the same mistakes again and again. Oh, how we regret that slip of the tongue, those fleshly tendencies that flare up every now and then, or those inclinations to envy what others have! Jehovah does not experience such shortcomings himself; yet, his understanding of us is immeasurable, unsearchable! (Isa. 40:28) You may already have experienced how Jehovah’s mighty hand helped you to recover from some trial.​—Isa. 41:10, 13. w17.07 18-19 ¶6-8




Tuesday, December 24

The generous person will be blessed.​—Prov. 22:9.



A brother from Sri Lanka, now living abroad, has made his property back home available for meetings and assemblies and for housing full-time servants. It is a financial sacrifice for the brother but a great help to the local publishers of little means. In a land where the work is restricted, brothers make their homes available for use as local Kingdom Halls, allowing many pioneers and others with limited funds to have a meeting place without a financial burden. A sister who contributes regularly to the Kingdom work tells of a blessing she has received: “By being materially generous, I have experienced an unusual phenomenon within myself over the years. I find that the more generous I am materially, the more generous my disposition toward others has become. I am more generous in being forgiving, in being patient with others, and in being able to accept disappointments and counsel.” w17.07 9 ¶9-10




Wednesday, December 25

Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! Everything that he has is in your hand.”​—Job 1:12.



Even if Job eventually better understood the reason for his trials, he may on occasion have thought about why it was necessary for him to suffer to such an extent. Whatever his thoughts, he could reflect on God’s counsel. Doing so would help him maintain the proper perspective and, in turn, provide comfort. (Ps. 94:19, ftn.) We too can acquire proper perspective and gain comfort from the account of Job. After all, Jehovah had it preserved “for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) What is the lesson for us? Primarily this: Let us not become so absorbed in our own lives that we lose sight of this big issue​—the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty. And let us appreciate that our role in this vital issue entails remaining faithful even under difficult circumstances, as did Job. w17.06 24 ¶9; 25 ¶13-14




Thursday, December 26

Come, you yourselves, privately into an isolated place and rest up a little.​—Mark 6:31.



Jesus recognized the need to rest on occasion. Following one particularly intense witnessing campaign, he told his disciples the words stated above. Indeed, recreation and entertainment fill an important need. However, the danger exists that having a good time could become the primary focus of our life. Back in the first century, many had the attitude “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die.” (1 Cor. 15:32) That same spirit prevails in many parts of the world today. How can we determine if we have a balanced view of recreation? We could select a week and keep a record of the number of hours we spend on spiritual activities. Then we could compare that figure to the number of hours we spent that same week on recreational activities, such as participating in sports, enjoying hobbies, watching television, or playing video games. Might there be a need to cut back on the latter?​—Eph. 5:15, 16. w17.05 24-25 ¶11-13




Friday, December 27

The Kingdom of the heavens is like a traveling merchant seeking fine pearls.​—Matt. 13:45.



In Jesus’ illustration, the merchant found a magnificent pearl. But to buy it would mean that he would have to sell everything else that he owned. Can you imagine how precious that pearl was to him? The truth of God’s Kingdom is like that priceless pearl. If we love it as much as the merchant loved that pearl, we will be willing to give up everything in order to become and to remain one of the subjects of the Kingdom. (Mark 10:28-30) Zacchaeus, for example, had become rich by extorting money. (Luke 19:1-9) Yet, when that unrighteous man heard Jesus preach about the Kingdom, he recognized the excelling value of what he was hearing and took immediate action. He exclaimed: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone, I am restoring four times over.” He gladly gave up his ill-gotten riches and abandoned his greed for material things. w17.06 10 ¶3-5




Saturday, December 28

No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.​—3 John 4.



Those whom parents choose to help their children should always build up the young ones’ respect for their parents, speaking positively about them, not taking over their responsibility. Moreover, those who help should avoid any conduct that could be misinterpreted by some inside or outside the congregation as morally questionable. (1 Pet. 2:12) Parents must not merely turn their children over to others for spiritual training. They must monitor the help given by companions and continue to teach their children themselves. Parents, pray to Jehovah for help, and try your best. (2 Chron. 15:7) Put your child’s friendship with Jehovah ahead of your own interests. Do whatever you can to ensure that God’s Word reaches your child’s heart. Never stop believing that your child can become a fine servant of Jehovah. w17.05 12 ¶19-20




Sunday, December 29

It is unthinkable, from Jehovah’s standpoint, for me to give you the inheritance of my forefathers.​—1 Ki. 21:3.



Imagine the scene. A man is falsely accused of a capital offense. To the shock and dismay of his family and friends, he is convicted on the basis of false testimony presented by witnesses who are known to be good-for-nothing men. A sick feeling overwhelms lovers of justice as they witness the execution of that innocent man and his sons. This is not an imaginary account. This was the experience of a faithful servant of Jehovah named Naboth, who lived during the reign of King Ahab of Israel. (1 Ki. 21:11-13; 2 Ki. 9:26) When King Ahab offered to purchase Naboth’s vineyard or to give him a better vineyard in its place, Naboth refused. Why? Naboth’s refusal was based on Jehovah’s law to the nation of Israel that forbade the permanent sale of one’s tribal inheritance. (Lev. 25:23; Num. 36:7) Clearly, Naboth had Jehovah’s view of matters. w17.04 23 ¶1; 24 ¶4




Monday, December 30

Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; you will look at where they were, and they will not be there.​—Ps. 37:10.



Who will remain in place of wicked people? Jehovah makes this heartwarming promise: “The meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.” Later in the same psalm, we read: “The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.” (Ps. 37:11, 29) Who are “the meek” and “the righteous”? The meek are those who humbly accept Jehovah’s teaching and guidance; the righteous are those who love doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah God. In today’s world, righteous people are greatly outnumbered by the wicked. But in the new world to come, the meek and the righteous will be neither a minority nor a majority; they will be the only people alive. Truly, a population of such people will make the earth a paradise! w17.04 10-11 ¶5-6




Tuesday, December 31

Do not withhold good . . . if it is within your power to help.​—Prov. 3:27.



“The love of God” compels us to show love to one another, especially in dire situations. (1 John 3:17, 18) When famine threatened Judean Christians in the first century, the congregation organized help for them. (Acts 11:28, 29) The apostles Paul and Peter also exhorted Christians to be hospitable to one another. (Rom. 12:13; 1 Pet. 4:9) If Christians are to welcome visiting brothers, how much more should they welcome fellow believers whose lives are in danger or who have been persecuted for their faith! Recently, thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses had to flee conflict and persecution in eastern Ukraine. Tragically, some were killed. But most of them were taken in by their spiritual brothers elsewhere in Ukraine and in Russia. In both countries, they remain politically neutral, being “no part of the world,” and continue zealously “declaring the good news of the word.”​—John 15:19; Acts 8:4. w17.05 4 ¶6-7




