
July
Monday, July 1

Humble yourselves . . . under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time.​—1 Pet. 5:6.



As the steward “in charge of the house”​—presumably that of Hezekiah—​Shebna had considerable authority. (Isa. 22:15) Sadly, though, he became proud, seeking his own glory. (Isa. 22:16-18) Because Shebna pursued glory for himself, God ‘threw him out of his office’ and replaced him with Eliakim. (Isa. 22:19-21) This change occurred when Assyrian King Sennacherib was intending to attack Jerusalem. Sometime later, that king sent high officials to Jerusalem, along with a large army, to demoralize the Jews and intimidate Hezekiah into surrendering. (2 Ki. 18:17-25) Eliakim was sent to speak to the officials, but he was not alone. He was accompanied by two others, one of whom was Shebna, now serving as secretary. Might this not suggest that Shebna did not give way to bitterness and resentment but instead humbly accepted his lesser responsibilities? w18.03 25 ¶7-8, 10




Tuesday, July 2

Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all.​—Gal. 5:16.



If we find that our mind pushes us toward materialistic thinking or fleshly desires, we should not give up. Keep asking for the spirit, and Jehovah will help you to redirect your mental attitude to focus on proper things. (Luke 11:13) Remember the apostle Peter. Several times in his life, he did not respond as a spiritual man should. (Matt. 16:22, 23; Luke 22:34, 54-62; Gal. 2:11-14) But he did not give up. Gradually, with Jehovah’s help, Peter developed Christlike thinking. We can do the same. Peter, in fact, later spelled out specific things we can work on. (2 Pet. 1:5-8) As we “put forth all earnest effort” to develop such qualities as self-control, endurance, and brotherly affection, we will be helped to continue to move ahead as spiritually-minded individuals. Each day, why not ask yourself, ‛What can I work on today to progress spiritually?’ w18.02 25-26 ¶12-13




Wednesday, July 3

I have treasured up his sayings even more than what was required of me.​—Job 23:12.



Job had outstanding insight into godly principles. He truly knew Jehovah, and he acted on that knowledge. Consider: Job knew that he could not profess to love God and at the same time be unkind to his fellow man. (Job 6:14) He did not elevate himself above others but showed brotherly concern for all, rich and poor. “Did not the One who made me in the womb also make them?” he said. (Job 31:13-22) Clearly, Job had not allowed his earlier prestige and wealth to warp his view of himself or others. What a contrast to many of the powerful and wealthy in the world! Job rejected all forms of idolatry​—even in his heart. He knew that false worship, including devotion to material riches, would be a denial of “the true God above.” (Job 31:24-28) He viewed marriage as a sacred bond between a man and a woman. He even made a covenant with his eyes not to look immorally at a virgin.​—Job 31:1. w18.02 11 ¶16; 12 ¶18-19




Thursday, July 4

[Noah] proved himself faultless among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God.​—Gen. 6:9.



Noah was not content just to lead a good life. He also became a bold “preacher of righteousness,” publicly confessing his faith in Jehovah. (2 Pet. 2:5) “Through this faith he condemned the world,” wrote the apostle Paul. (Heb. 11:7) It stands to reason, therefore, that Noah faced ridicule and opposition, perhaps even threats of violence. But he was not “trembling at men.” (Prov. 29:25) Rather, he had the courage that Jehovah gives to his faithful servants. After Noah had walked with God for more than five centuries, Jehovah told him to build an ark for the saving of human and animal life. (Gen. 5:32; 6:14) How difficult that project must have seemed​—and not just from the construction point of view! Noah surely knew that it would bring on even more ridicule and opposition. Still, he obediently went ahead in faith. “He did just so.”​—Gen. 6:22. w18.02 4 ¶4, 6-7




Friday, July 5

How good and how pleasant it is . . . to dwell together in unity!​—Ps. 133:1.



An important way to promote unity is by showing love in imitation of Jehovah, the God of love. (1 John 4:8) Never would we want to say regarding fellow worshippers, “I may have to love them, but I do not have to like them”! To think that way is contrary to Paul’s counsel that we should be “putting up with one another in love.” (Eph. 4:2) Note that he did not simply say that we should be “putting up with one another.” He added that we should do so “in love.” There is a difference. In our congregations are found all sorts of people whom Jehovah has drawn to him. (John 6:44) Since Jehovah has drawn them to him, he must find them lovable. How, then, could any of us judge a fellow worshipper as being unworthy of our love? We must not hold back the love that Jehovah commands us to display!​—1 John 4:20, 21. w18.01 16 ¶14




Saturday, July 6

Remember . . . your Grand Creator in the days of your youth.​—Eccl. 12:1.



Some parents have concluded that it would be best for their son or daughter to delay baptism in order first to obtain some advanced education and become secure in a career. Such reasoning may be well-intentioned, but will it help their child to achieve genuine success? More important, is it in harmony with the Scriptures? It is important to remember that this world and all its components are opposed to Jehovah’s interests and thinking. (Jas. 4:7, 8; 1 John 2:15-17; 5:19) A close relationship with Jehovah is a child’s best defense against Satan, his world, and its ungodly thinking. For a parent to place high priority on secular pursuits could confuse a child and jeopardize his best interests. Would loving Christian parents really want this world to shape their child’s view of success? The fact is, we find true joy and success only when we give Jehovah first place in our lives.​—Ps. 1:2, 3. w18.03 10-11 ¶10-11




Sunday, July 7

[Seek] first the Kingdom and his righteousness.​—Matt. 6:33.



Many have found that living a simple life not only makes them happier but also gives them more time to serve Jehovah. Jack sold his large home and business because he knew that doing so would make it possible for him to pioneer with his wife. He reflects: “For years, I would come home frustrated because of problems at work. My wife, a regular pioneer, was always so happy. She would say, ‘I have the greatest boss ever!’ Now that I too am pioneering, we both work for the same Person, Jehovah.” To analyze our view of money, we might honestly consider how we would answer these questions: ‘Do I really believe and live in harmony with what the Bible says about money? Does making money come first in my life? Do I value material things more than my relationship with Jehovah and with people? Do I really trust in Jehovah to care for my needs?’ We can be sure that he will never disappoint those hoping in him. w18.01 25 ¶12-13




Monday, July 8

Just as you have always obeyed, . . . keep working out your own salvation with fear and trembling.​—Phil. 2:12.



Working out your own salvation is a serious responsibility. Some of the things involved are reading God’s Word and meditating on it, praying to Jehovah, and thinking of ways that Jehovah has blessed you as an individual. Applying yourself in those aspects will boost your confidence in your privilege of having a friendship with Jehovah. That, in turn, will move you to speak up about your beliefs. (Ps. 73:28) Jesus said: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and keep following me.” (Matt. 16:24) Clearly, discipleship​—including dedication and baptism—​is an obligation for you as a Christian. Yet, it opens the door to countless blessings now and to everlasting life in God’s new world. You have every reason, then, to keep working out your own salvation! w17.12 27 ¶18-19




Tuesday, July 9

Clothe yourselves with . . . patience.​—Col. 3:12.



With patient teaching from their parents, children will be able gradually to begin to grasp “the breadth and length and height and depth” of faith. (Eph. 3:18) We can look for what is appropriate to their age and ability. As they become convinced of what they learn, they will increasingly be able to defend their beliefs before others, including schoolmates. (1 Pet. 3:15) For example, can your children explain from the Bible what happens at death? Does the Bible’s explanation make sense to them? Yes, inculcating God’s Word in your child will require patience, but it is worth the effort. (Deut. 6:6, 7) Of course, your example is also important when it comes to building conviction. Stephanie, the mother of three daughters, says: “I ask myself, ‘Do I talk to my children about why I am convinced of Jehovah’s existence, his love, and the rightness of his ways?’ I can’t expect my children to be persuaded unless I am.” w17.12 20 ¶8-10




Wednesday, July 10

Your brother will rise.​—John 11:23.



Why could Martha be certain that her brother would be resurrected? She was convinced because of miracles that she likely learned about even before Jesus’ ministry began. She had learned of these as a youth at home and at the synagogue. Three accounts recorded in the inspired Scriptures may come to mind. Consider the first resurrection. It occurred at a time when God was empowering his prophet Elijah to work miracles. Up in Zarephath, a Phoenician coastal town, a poor widow showed hospitality to the prophet. God then miraculously maintained her supply of flour and oil, so that she and her son stayed alive. (1 Ki. 17:8-16) Later, her son got sick and died. Elijah came to her aid. While touching the corpse, Elijah prayed: “God, please, let this child’s life come back into him.” And it happened! God heard Elijah, and the child came back to life. That was the first resurrection of Bible record. (1 Ki. 17:17-24) Martha had certainly learned of that remarkable event. w17.12 3 ¶1; 4 ¶3, 5-6




Thursday, July 11

You cannot slave for God and for Riches.​—Matt. 6:24.



Many people urge us to pursue a secular career as our goal in life. Such a career may promise status, authority, and wealth. Because many make pursuing a career their main goal in life, a Christian might adopt the same way of thinking. Is it true that succeeding in a secular career that offers power and prestige leads to lasting happiness? No. Remember that the craving to control others and the longing to be admired are the desires that enticed Satan, but he is angry, not happy. (Matt. 4:8, 9; Rev. 12:12) Compared to the lasting joy that comes from helping people to benefit from God’s wisdom so that they can gain everlasting life, a secular career can provide only limited satisfaction. Moreover, the spirit of this world is intensely competitive. It pushes people to outdo one another, breeds jealousy, and in the end, proves to be “a chasing after the wind.”​—Eccl. 4:4. w17.11 23 ¶11-13




Friday, July 12

After singing praises, they went out to the Mount of Olives.​—Matt. 26:30.



With the establishment of the Christian congregation, music continued to be a prominent feature of true worship. On the most important night in human history, Jesus included the singing of songs after the institution of the Lord’s Evening Meal. First-century Christians set a pattern of praising God together in song. Even though they often met in private homes, the modest surroundings for worship did not diminish their zeal for singing to Jehovah. Under inspiration, the apostle Paul directed his Christian brothers: “Keep on teaching and encouraging one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs sung with gratitude, singing in your hearts to Jehovah.” (Col. 3:16) The songs in our songbook are truly “spiritual songs [to be] sung with gratitude.” They are a part of the spiritual food provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.”​—Matt. 24:45. w17.11 4 ¶7-8




Saturday, July 13

Choose cities convenient for yourselves to serve as cities of refuge.​—Num. 35:11.



The six cities of refuge were easy to access. Jehovah commanded Israel to distribute the cities evenly on both sides of the Jordan River. Why? So that any fugitive could find refuge quickly and conveniently. (Num. 35:12-14) Roads leading to the cities of refuge were kept in good repair. (Deut. 19:3) According to Jewish tradition, guideposts were erected to direct fugitives to the cities. Since the cities of refuge were available, an unintentional manslayer was not forced to flee to a foreign land, where he might be tempted to take up false worship. Think of it: Jehovah​—the very One who had mandated capital punishment for willful murderers—​gave unintentional manslayers ample opportunity to receive compassion and protection! “Every thing was made as plain, as simple, and as easy as possible,” wrote one commentator. Jehovah is not a heartless judge who is eager to punish his servants. Rather, he is “rich in mercy.”​—Eph. 2:4. w17.11 14 ¶4-5




Sunday, July 14

Return to me, . . . and I will return to you.​—Zech. 1:3.



A flying scroll, a woman sealed inside a container, and two women soaring in the wind with wings like those of storks​—such dramatic images are found in the book of Zechariah. (Zech. 5:1, 7-9) Why did Jehovah give these striking visions to his prophet? Zechariah’s sixth and seventh visions are a sober warning to those who persist in dishonest ways, a reminder that Jehovah does not tolerate wrongdoing. On the part of his sincere worshippers, there must be a genuine hatred of wickedness. These accounts are also a loving reassurance from our heavenly Father. If we diligently work to be the sort of people who have God’s approval and protection, we will not have to face a death-dealing curse. Rather, Jehovah will gladly bless us. All our struggles to remain clean in a world full of wickedness will be worthwhile. We can be sure that we can succeed with Jehovah’s help! w17.10 21 ¶1; 25 ¶19




Monday, July 15

Let the older women be reverent in behavior, . . . so that they may advise the younger women.​—Titus 2:3, 4.



Single sisters now have many opportunities to expand their ministry by pioneering, moving to where the need is greater, working with the Local Design/​Construction program, and applying for the School for Kingdom Evangelizers. Some are even able to attend Gilead School. Older women, though unable to do many of those things, are also a blessing to the congregation. How we love these dear sisters! Some may not be able to do as much as they once did in God’s service, but they can still show courage and go to work. For example, an older sister needs courage if she is asked to talk to a younger sister about modest dress. She will not scold the sister about her choice of clothing, but she may be able to encourage the younger one to consider how her choice of clothing may affect others. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10) Such loving expressions of concern may have a positive effect. w17.09 31-32 ¶17-18




Tuesday, July 16

You will find the knowledge of God.​—Prov. 2:5.



At times, very powerful forces have tried to keep the Bible from the common people. However, sincere individuals have stood up to such opposition. For example, consider a 14th-century theologian named John Wycliffe. He strongly believed that everyone should be able to benefit from God’s Word. But in his time, the common people in England had virtually no access to the Bible. In 1382, the English translation later known as the Wycliffe Bible was produced. Desiring to get God’s Word into the mind and heart of ordinary people, itinerant preachers, known as the Lollards, traveled on foot from village to village throughout England. Often the Lollards read portions of the Wycliffe Bible to those whom they met, and they left handwritten copies behind. In the centuries that followed, many in Europe and other parts of the world began to promote translation and distribution of the Bible for the benefit of the common people. w17.09 20-21 ¶10-12




Wednesday, July 17

Those who [marry] will have tribulation in their flesh.​—1 Cor. 7:28.



An unfulfilled desire for children is in its own way a ‘tribulation in the flesh.’ (Prov. 13:12) In Bible times, barrenness often carried a stigma. Rachel, Jacob’s wife, expressed anguish at seeing her sister have children. (Gen. 30:1, 2) When referring to tribulations associated with marriage, there is one that may not readily come to mind. The death of a loved one. Yes, a distinct trial that many have faced is that of losing a beloved marriage mate in death. This is a trial that the survivor may not have expected to face in this system of things. Christians firmly believe Jesus’ promise of a coming resurrection. (John 5:28, 29) What does that prospect do for the surviving mate? It offers a considerable amount of comfort. This is another way that our loving Father, through his Word, offers support and comfort to those experiencing tribulation. w17.06 4 ¶1; 5 ¶6; 6 ¶9




Thursday, July 18

Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate.​—Ex. 34:6.



On one occasion, God revealed himself to Moses by declaring His own name and qualities. The first ones that he listed were mercy and compassion. (Ex. 34:5-7) Jehovah could have stressed his power or his wisdom. Yet, to Moses, who was seeking reassurance of God’s backing, Jehovah emphasized instead qualities that underscore his willingness to help his servants. (Ex. 33:13) While humans were created to be compassionate, our imperfection as descendants of Adam inclines us toward self-interest. Sometimes we may find that it is not easy to decide whether we will help others or concentrate on ourselves. For some, this is an ongoing conflict, or a balancing act. What can help you to develop and maintain your interest in others? First, take time to examine how Jehovah has shown compassion and how others have shown it. Second, consider how you can imitate God’s example and how your doing so is truly beneficial. w17.09 8 ¶1; 9 ¶3




Friday, July 19

With humility consider others superior to you.​—Phil. 2:3.



Our motive for clothing ourselves with the new personality must be to honor Jehovah, not to win praise from men. Remember that even a once perfect spirit creature sinned because he allowed himself to become filled with pride. (Compare Ezekiel 28:17.) How much more difficult it is for sinful humans to avoid improper pride and haughtiness! Still, it is possible to clothe ourselves with humility. What will help us to do so? To remain humble, we need to set aside time to meditate daily on what we read in God’s Word. (Deut. 17:18-20) In particular, we do well to reflect on Jesus’ teachings and his wonderful example of humble service. (Matt. 20:28) Jesus even washed the feet of his apostles. (John 13:12-17) We also need to pray frequently for God’s spirit to help us fight any tendency of feeling superior to others.​—Gal. 6:3, 4. w17.08 25 ¶11-12




Saturday, July 20

Let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers.​—Phil. 4:6, 7.



Perhaps there have been times in our life when we felt that we were following the leadings of God’s holy spirit, but then things did not turn out the way we expected. We came face-to-face with challenges or new circumstances that required massive changes in our life. (Eccl. 9:11) What can help us not to be anxious over anything and to experience “the peace of God”? Paul’s words to the Philippians show us that the antidote to worry is prayer. So when we are anxious, we need to turn our worries into prayers. (1 Pet. 5:6, 7) Pray to Jehovah in full faith, knowing that he cares for you. Pray to him “with thanksgiving,” remembering your blessings. Our confidence in him will be strengthened when we keep in mind that he can “do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive.”​—Eph. 3:20. w17.08 9 ¶4, 6; 10 ¶10




Sunday, July 21

Plans fail when there is no consultation, but there is accomplishment through many advisers.​—Prov. 15:22.



Many Christians experienced happiness in their youth by serving as pioneers. If you are young, why not discuss your plans with some of them? Such spiritual people may tell you that the full-time ministry provides an education that benefits you throughout life. After having been instructed by his Father in heaven, Jesus continued to learn during his earthly ministry. For example, he learned the joy of reaching hearts with the good news and also the joy of keeping integrity under test. (Isa. 50:4; Heb. 5:8; 12:2) Jesus said: “Go . . . make disciples of people . . . teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) If you plan to be a disciple-maker, you will be choosing a most satisfying career, one that glorifies God. As with any career, you need time to become skilled. w17.07 23 ¶6-7




Monday, July 22

I will keep comforting you.​—Isa. 66:13.



Without a doubt, the primary source of consolation is our compassionate heavenly Father, Jehovah. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Another source of comfort to grieving ones is the Christian congregation. (1 Thess. 5:11) How can you strengthen and console those who have “a crushed spirit”? (Prov. 17:22) Bear in mind that there is “a time to be silent and a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) A widow named Dalene explains: “Bereaved ones need to express their thoughts and feelings. Therefore, the most important thing you can do for a bereaved person is to listen​—without interrupting.” Junia, whose brother took his own life, adds: “Even though you may not be able to grasp their grief completely, what counts is that you want to understand how they feel.” Remember, too, that not everyone experiences and expresses grief in the same way. w17.07 13 ¶3; 14 ¶11-13




Tuesday, July 23

May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.​—Ps. 83:18.



For many people today, money is the big issue. They are focused on accumulating wealth or on holding on to what they have. Others consider their big issue to be family, health, or personal accomplishments. However, a very big issue facing all of us is the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty. We need to guard against losing sight of this vital issue. How could that happen? We could become so absorbed in the demands of our day-to-day life that we forget just how important the vindication of God’s sovereignty really is. Or we could allow the weight of our personal trials to eclipse that great issue. On the other hand, the keener our appreciation for the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty, the better equipped we are to meet challenges in our daily lives. And such appreciation will draw us closer to Jehovah. w17.06 22 ¶1-2




Wednesday, July 24

Become imitators of me, just as I am of Christ.​—1 Cor. 11:1.



Jehovah exercises authority in a loving manner. In harmony with that, family heads and elders who love his sovereignty will not be demanding, as if exercising a small sovereignty of their own. Instead, they will imitate Jehovah. Paul was just such an imitator of God and his Son. Paul did not embarrass others or pressure them into taking a desired course of action. Rather, he appealed to them. (Rom. 12:1; Eph. 4:1; Philem. 8-10) That is Jehovah’s way of handling matters. Thus, that should be the way of all who love and uphold his way of ruling. What is our response to divinely authorized headship? By our respectful cooperation, we show our support for Jehovah’s sovereignty. Even if we do not fully understand or agree with a decision, we will still want to support theocratic order. That is quite different from the way of the world, but it is the way of life under Jehovah’s rulership.​—Eph. 5:22, 23; 6:1-3; Heb. 13:17. w17.06 30 ¶14-15




Thursday, July 25

You . . . are taught by God to love one another.​—1 Thess. 4:9.



Whether young or old, brothers and sisters who are discouraged or depressed or who face other trials need our attention, encouragement, and comfort. (Prov. 12:25; Col. 4:11) We give proof that we truly love our brothers when we show by words and deeds that we have deep concern for “those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) The Bible foretold that “the last days” of this wicked system of things would be marked by a spirit of selfishness and greed. (2 Tim. 3:1, 2) As Christians, we must therefore work hard to grow in our love for God, for Bible truth, and for one another. True, we may at times have minor disagreements with fellow believers. However, what a blessing it is for all in the congregation when love motivates us to settle any differences in a loving manner! (Eph. 4:32; Col. 3:14) Therefore, may we continue to have intense love for Jehovah, his Word, and our brothers. w17.05 21 ¶17-18




Friday, July 26

If we make the statement, “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves.​—1 John 1:8.



Christians expect to experience some injustice outside the Christian congregation. However, our faith may be put to the test if we observe or experience what seems to be an injustice inside the congregation. How will you react if you believe that you have experienced some wrong in the congregation or in your dealings with a fellow Christian? Will you allow that to be a cause for stumbling? Because all of us are imperfect and subject to sin, we realize that there is a possibility that we could either experience injustice ourselves or be the cause of it for someone else in the congregation. Although such instances are rare, faithful Christians are not surprised or stumbled when injustices do occur. For good reason, Jehovah has provided practical advice in his Word to assist us to maintain our integrity, even if we experience wrongs at the hands of fellow believers.​—Ps. 55:12-14. w17.04 19 ¶4-5




Saturday, July 27

Those who [marry] will have tribulation in their flesh.​—1 Cor. 7:28.



If you have an unbelieving mate, you may experience more than the usual stress and anxiety in your marriage. Nevertheless, your mate’s present unwillingness to follow Christ is not in itself a valid reason for separation or divorce. (1 Cor. 7:12-16) Although an unbelieving husband may not take the lead in spiritual matters, he should be respected because of his position as the head of the family. Likewise, an unbelieving wife should be shown self-sacrificing love and tender affection by her Christian husband. (Eph. 5:22, 23, 28, 29) What if your spouse tries to limit your worship? For example, one sister was told by her husband to share in the field ministry only on certain days of the week. If you face a similar situation, ask yourself: ‘Is my spouse demanding that I stop worshipping my God? If not, can I yield to the request?’ Being reasonable can help you to avoid needless marital conflict.​—Phil. 4:5. w17.10 13 ¶7-8




Sunday, July 28

You must inculcate them in your sons.​—Deut. 6:7.



As foretold, people “out of all the languages of the nations” are flocking to Jehovah’s organization. (Zech. 8:23) But a language barrier can make it difficult for you to teach your children the truth. Your children are the most important Bible students you will ever have, and their “coming to know” Jehovah means their eternal life. (John 17:3) In order for your children to learn Jehovah’s teachings, you must “speak of them” on all appropriate occasions. (Deut. 6:6, 7) Your children will likely learn the local language at school and in their environment, but they learn your language primarily by frequently interacting with you in your language. Besides enabling your children to have heart-to-heart conversations with you, knowing your language gives them other advantages. Being bilingual sharpens your children’s thinking ability and enhances their social skills. w17.05 9 ¶5-6




Monday, July 29

Go and march to Mount Tabor . . . I will bring to you Sisera, . . . and I will give him into your hand.​—Judg. 4:6, 7.



The Israelites were ill-equipped, having neither offensive weapons nor defensive armor, whereas their enemies had 900 war chariots with iron scythes. (Judg. 4:1-3, 13; 5:6-8) Nevertheless, Jehovah gave Barak the command stated above. Barak wasted no time in following Jehovah’s instructions. (Judg. 4:14-16) During the main battle in Taanach, a sudden cloudburst turned the surroundings into a marsh. Barak chased Sisera’s army all the way to Harosheth​—a 15-mile (24 km) route. At some point along the way, Sisera abandoned his once frightening but now useless chariot and ran to Zaanannim, perhaps near Kedesh. He sought refuge in the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, and was welcomed by Jael. Exhausted from battle, he fell asleep. Sisera was now vulnerable to Jael’s decisive act of courage to put him to death. (Judg. 4:17-21) Israel’s enemy was defeated! w17.04 29-30 ¶6-8




Tuesday, July 30

Jehovah has a controversy with the nations. . . . He will put the wicked to the sword.​—Jer. 25:31.



After Armageddon, will there be any organization on earth? The Bible tells us: “There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Pet. 3:13) The old heavens and earth, the corrupt governments and the earthly society under their control, will be gone. They will be replaced by what? The expression “new heavens and a new earth” means that there will be a new government and a new earthly society over which that government rules. The Kingdom under Jesus Christ will perfectly reflect the personality of Jehovah God, who is a God of order. (1 Cor. 14:33) So the “new earth” will be organized. There will be good men to care for matters. (Ps. 45:16) They will be directed by Christ and his 144,000 corulers. Imagine a time when all corrupt organizations will be replaced by a single, unified, and incorruptible organization! w17.04 11 ¶8-9




Wednesday, July 31

They will become one flesh.​—Gen. 2:24.



Marriage is sacred. Before God and eyewitnesses, the bride and groom exchange their marriage vows. They usually promise that they will love, cherish, and respect each other and that they will do so “for as long as [they] both shall live together on earth according to God’s marital arrangement.” Others may not have said these exact words, but they still made a vow before God. They are then pronounced husband and wife, and their marriage is meant to be a lifelong bond. (1 Cor. 7:39) “Therefore,” to use Jesus’ words, “what God has yoked together, let no man put apart”​—neither the husband nor the wife nor anyone else. Thus, couples entering marriage must have the view that divorce is not an option. (Mark 10:9) Of course, there has never been a perfect marriage. Each marriage is made up of two imperfect people. That is why the Bible says that married people “will have tribulation” at times.​—1 Cor. 7:28. w17.04 7 ¶14-15




