
June
Saturday, June 1

God is love.​—1 John 4:16.



Motivated by love, Jehovah corrects, educates, and trains us so that we can remain in his love and on the path to life. At times, though, discipline may involve more than counsel or oral correction. If more serious sins are involved, it may include a loss of privileges in the congregation. Even when that is the case, such discipline reflects God’s love for us. A loss of privileges, for example, can help a person realize how important it is for him to focus more on personal Bible study, meditation, and prayer. He can thus be strengthened spiritually. (Ps. 19:7) In time, privileges may be restored. Even disfellowshipping reflects Jehovah’s love, for it protects the congregation from bad influences. (1 Cor. 5:6, 7, 11) And because God disciplines to the proper degree, disfellowshipping can impress on the wrongdoer the seriousness of his sin and move him to repentance.​—Acts 3:19. w18.03 24 ¶5-6




Sunday, June 2

He and his entire household were baptized without delay.​—Acts 16:33.



The jailer was not familiar with the Scriptures. So to gain a solid foundation of Scriptural knowledge, he needed to learn basic Bible truths, understand what it means to be one of God’s servants, and be determined to obey Jesus’ teachings. In a relatively brief time, his knowledge of basic Scriptural truths and his appreciation of them prompted him to get baptized. (Acts 16:25-33) No doubt he continued to add to his knowledge after his baptism. With this example in mind, what can you do when your child expresses a heartfelt appreciation for basic Scriptural teachings, including the meaning and significance of dedication and baptism? You Christian parents may conclude that he can contact the congregation elders to see if he meets the qualifications to get baptized. Like other baptized disciples, he will continue to increase in knowledge of Jehovah’s purpose throughout his life, even for all eternity.​—Rom. 11:33, 34. w18.03 10 ¶8-9




Monday, June 3

Have . . . the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had.​—Rom. 15:5.



As we work at cultivating spirituality, holy spirit will give us the power to transform our mind. With the spirit’s help, we can gradually begin to think more and more as Christ did. Additionally, it will help us root out fleshly desires and cultivate qualities pleasing to God. Our Christlike thinking will influence our speech, our conduct at work or in school, and the decisions we make each day. Those decisions will reveal that we strive to be followers of Christ. As spiritual people, we want nothing to jeopardize our relationship with our heavenly Father. When we are confronted with temptations, our Christlike attitude will move us to push them away. When making decisions, we will stop and ponder over these questions: ‛What Bible principles will help me decide? What would Christ do in this situation? What decision will please Jehovah?’ w18.02 25 ¶12; 26 ¶14




Tuesday, June 4

Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.​—Gen. 6:8.



By the time of Noah’s great-grandfather Enoch, people had become very ungodly. They were even saying “shocking things” against Jehovah. (Jude 14, 15) Violence was increasing. In fact, in Noah’s day, “the earth was filled with violence.” Wicked angels materialized as humans, took wives, and produced brutal, hybrid offspring. (Gen. 6:2-4, 11, 12) But Noah stood out as different. “He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries. Noah walked with the true God.” (Gen. 6:9) Consider what those words say about that righteous man. For one thing, Noah did not walk with God in that wicked pre-Flood world for a mere 70 or 80 years​—the life span of many today. He lived in that world for almost 600 years! (Gen. 7:11) And unlike us today, he did not have a congregation of fellow worshippers​—evidently not even his siblings—​to turn to for spiritual support. w18.02 4 ¶4-5




Wednesday, June 5

Men will be . . . lovers of money.​—2 Tim. 3:2.



People who love money will always want more, and striving to amass it, they will bring on themselves “many pains.” (1 Tim. 6:9, 10; Eccl. 5:10) We all need money, of course. It provides a measure of protection. (Eccl. 7:12) But can a person be truly happy if he has only enough for his basic needs? Absolutely! (Eccl. 5:12) Agur son of Jakeh wrote: “Give me neither poverty nor riches. Just let me consume my portion of food.” We can readily understand his reason for not wanting to be extremely poor. As he went on to explain, he did not want to be tempted to steal because theft would dishonor God. But why did he pray not to have riches? He wrote: “So that I do not become satisfied and deny you and say, ‘Who is Jehovah?’” (Prov. 30:8, 9) Jesus said: “No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.”​—Matt. 6:24. w18.01 24 ¶9-11




Thursday, June 6

My heavenly Father will also deal with you in the same way if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.​—Matt. 18:35.



We promote unity by freely forgiving others. When we forgive those who have offended us, we show that we appreciate the forgiveness of our own sins made possible by Christ’s ransom sacrifice. Consider one of Jesus’ illustrations as recorded at Matthew 18:23-34. Ask yourself: ‘Am I moved to apply what Jesus taught? Do I show patience and understanding to my fellow servants? Am I ready to forgive those who sin against me personally?’ Granted, there are degrees of sin, and some offenses are very hard for imperfect humans to forgive. Yet, this illustration teaches us what Jehovah expects. Jesus makes it clear that Jehovah will not forgive us if we do not forgive our brothers when there is a sound basis for doing so. What a sobering thought! We protect and preserve our precious unity when we forgive others as Jesus taught us to do. w18.01 15 ¶12




Friday, June 7

For 30 days whoever makes a petition to any god or man except to you, O king, should be thrown into the lions’ pit.​—Dan. 6:7.



While it meant risking his life, Daniel decided not to give even the impression that he was compromising in his worship. Jehovah blessed Daniel’s conscientious and courageous decision by miraculously sparing him a cruel death. In fact, the outcome resulted in a marvelous witness for Jehovah that reached the farthest parts of the Medo-Persian Empire! (Dan. 6:25-27) How can we cultivate faith like Daniel’s? The key to strong faith is not simply to read God’s Word but to ‘get the sense’ of it. (Matt. 13:23) We want Jehovah’s mind on matters, which includes grasping Bible principles. Hence, we need to meditate on what we read. Also important is regular heartfelt prayer, especially when we face trials or other challenging situations. When we pray in faith for wisdom and strength, Jehovah will generously give them to us.​—Jas. 1:5. w18.02 10-11 ¶13-15




Saturday, June 8

Taste and see that Jehovah is good.​—Ps. 34:8.



Even as a young baptized servant of God, you can taste Jehovah’s goodness by experiencing his support as you share your faith with others. You can do that in the ministry as well as at school. Some find it difficult to preach to their peers at school. You likely can understand why. You have no idea how they will react. It can be especially challenging when speaking to a large group rather than to a classmate one-on-one. What can help you? First, think about why you are convinced of your beliefs. Are the study guides found on jw.org available in your language? If you are not sure, take the time to look for them. They are designed to help you reflect on what you believe, why you believe it, and how you can explain your beliefs to others. When your conviction is strong and you are well-prepared, you will feel impelled to give a witness for Jehovah’s name.​—Jer. 20:8, 9. w17.12 26 ¶12, 14-15




Sunday, June 9

Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe.​—2 Tim. 3:14.



More is involved in imparting spiritual education to children than simply teaching them about the people and events of the Bible. Timothy was also “persuaded to believe.” In the original language, that phrase means “to be assured of” or “to be convinced and certain of the truth of something.” Timothy knew the Hebrew Scriptures from infancy. But at some point he was convinced by compelling evidence that Jesus was the Messiah. How can you help build conviction in your children so that they are persuaded to believe, as Timothy was? First, be patient. Conviction does not come about overnight; nor does it pass from you to your offspring simply because you have been persuaded to believe. Each child needs to use his or her own “power of reason” to develop conviction about Bible truth. (Rom. 12:1) You as a parent play an important role in that process, especially when your child asks questions. w17.12 19 ¶3, 5-6




Monday, June 10

I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.​—John 11:24.



Jesus’ close friend and disciple Martha was grieving. Her brother, Lazarus, had died. Could anything ease her sorrow? Yes. Jesus assured her: “Your brother will rise.” (John 11:20-23) Martha was sure that would occur in the future. Jesus then performed a miracle. He brought Lazarus back to life that very day. We have no basis to expect that Jesus or his Father will now perform such a miracle for us. Are you, though, just as sure as Martha was of a future resurrection for a loved one? Maybe it is your deceased mate, your mother, your father, or a beloved grandparent. Or you may be grieving over the loss of a child. You long to hug, to speak with, and to laugh with that dear one. Happily, like Martha, you have good reason to say, ‘I know that my loved one will rise in the resurrection.’ Still, it will do each Christian good to reflect on why that is a valid conviction. w17.12 3 ¶1-2




Tuesday, June 11

To do your will, O my God, is my delight, and your law is deep within me.​—Ps. 40:8.



Jesus loved the Mosaic Law. And no wonder! That Law came from the most important Person in Jesus’ life​—his Father, Jehovah. Jesus’ deep affection for the law of God was prophetically expressed in today’s text. By word and deed, Jesus affirmed that God’s Law was perfect, beneficial, and sure to be fulfilled. (Matt. 5:17-19) How pained Jesus must have been, then, when he saw the scribes and Pharisees misrepresent his Father’s Law! They meticulously obeyed some of its smallest details, for Jesus acknowledged: “You give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin.” So, what was the problem? He added: “But you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness.” (Matt. 23:23) Unlike those self-righteous Pharisees, Jesus grasped the spirit behind the Law, the divine qualities reflected in each commandment. w17.11 13 ¶1-2




Wednesday, June 12

This is the will of God, that you should be holy and abstain from sexual immorality.​—1 Thess. 4:3.



People may say to us: “Life is to be enjoyed. Why condemn having sex outside marriage?” The suggestion that a Christian should tolerate sexual immorality is wrong. Why? Because God’s Word forbids sexual immorality. (1 Thess. 4:4-8) Jehovah has the right to make laws for us because he created us. The law of God that permits sexual relations only between a man and a woman who are married to each other is part of what defines the marriage arrangement. God gives us laws because he loves us. They benefit us. Families who obey them enjoy love, respect, and security. God does not tolerate willful disobedience to his law. (Heb. 13:4) God’s Word teaches us how to keep far away from sexual immorality. An important way to do so is by controlling what we look at. (Matt. 5:28, 29) Therefore, a Christian will avoid looking at pornography or listening to music with immoral lyrics.​—Eph. 5:3-5. w17.11 22 ¶9-10




Thursday, June 13

It is good to sing praises to our God.​—Ps. 147:1.



Faithful worshippers of Jehovah have long used music as a way to praise Jehovah. It is noteworthy that when the ancient Israelites were faithfully serving Jehovah, singing was prominent in their worship. For example, in preparation for service at the temple, King David organized 4,000 Levites to provide music of praise. Among these, 288 were “trained in song to Jehovah, all experts.” (1 Chron. 23:5; 25:7) At the inauguration of the temple, music and singing played a prominent role. The account tells us: “At the moment when the trumpeters and the singers were praising and thanking Jehovah in unison, and as the sound ascended from the trumpets, the cymbals, and the other musical instruments as they were praising Jehovah, . . . the glory of Jehovah filled the house of the true God.” What a faith-strengthening occasion that must have been!​—2 Chron. 5:13, 14; 7:6. w17.11 4 ¶4-5




Friday, June 14

Do not think I came to bring peace to the earth; I came to bring, not peace, but a sword.​—Matt. 10:34.



Jesus knew that his teachings would divide people and that those who follow him would need courage to do so in the face of opposition. Jesus’ motive was to proclaim God’s message of truth, not to damage relationships. (John 18:37) Still, holding faithfully to Christ’s teachings would be challenging if one’s close friends or family members rejected the truth. In order to prove worthy of the Christ, his disciples have had to endure ridicule or even alienation from their families. Yet, they have gained far more than they have lost. (Mark 10:29, 30) Even when our relatives oppose our efforts to worship Jehovah, we continue to love them, but we must remember that our love for God and Christ comes first. (Matt. 10:37) We must also realize that Satan will try to use our affection for our family to break our integrity. w17.10 13 ¶3-6




Saturday, June 15

He threw [Wickedness] back into the ephah container, after which he thrust the lead weight over its mouth.​—Zech. 5:8.



This part of the vision highlights that Jehovah will not tolerate wickedness of any kind among his people. He will see to it that it is contained and speedily removed. (1 Cor. 5:13) The angel assures us of this by thrusting the lead lid back over the container. What a relief this vision must have brought to the Israelites of Zechariah’s day​—a guarantee that Jehovah would keep pure worship clean! However, the vision also reminded the Jews of their responsibility to maintain the purity of their worship. Wickedness cannot and will not be allowed to creep into and dwell among Jehovah’s people. After we have been brought into the protective and loving care of God’s clean organization, we have the responsibility to help maintain it. Are we moved to keep our “house” clean? Wickedness in any form does not belong in our spiritual paradise. w17.10 24 ¶14-15; 25 ¶17-18




Sunday, June 16

I love your law.​—Ps. 119:163.



The first 39 books of the Bible were written by Israelites, or the Jews. They were the people initially “entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.” (Rom. 3:1, 2) However, by the third century B.C.E., many Jews no longer understood Hebrew. Why not? Because Alexander the Great had expanded the Grecian Empire by means of his conquests. (Dan. 8:5-7, 20, 21) As that empire spread, Greek became the common language of many of its subjects, including Jews who were scattered over a vast area. But as many Jews became Greek-speaking, understanding the Hebrew Scriptures became more difficult for most. What was the solution? Translation of the Bible from Hebrew into Greek, which was completed in the second century B.C.E. The resulting collection of Bible books came to be known as the Greek Septuagint. The Septuagint is the first known written translation of the entire Hebrew Scriptures. w17.09 20 ¶7-9




Monday, June 17

I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.​—Heb. 13:5.



Your employer may regularly ask you to work overtime on evenings and weekends​—times that you have set aside for family worship, field service, and Christian meetings. Courage is required to turn down such regular requests and set the right example for your children. We also show courage when we help our children to set and reach spiritual goals. For instance, some parents may hesitate to encourage their child to pursue a career of pioneering, to serve where the need is greater, to enter Bethel service, or to work on theocratic construction projects. The parents may fear that their child will not be able to care for them when they are old. However, wise parents show courage and put faith in Jehovah’s promises. (Ps. 37:25) Then an added way that you can demonstrate courage and reliance on Jehovah is by helping your child to do the same.​—1 Sam. 1:27, 28; 2 Tim. 3:14, 15. w17.09 30 ¶14-15




Tuesday, June 18

The fruitage of the spirit is . . . self-control.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.



How can you help your children to develop self-control? Parents know that this quality does not come naturally to young people. And as is the case with all qualities that their children need to learn, parents should set the example. (Eph. 6:4) So if you see that your children are struggling to control their impulses, ask yourself whether you are setting a fine example. Do not minimize the good effect of your being regular in the field service, in attending meetings, and in conducting family worship. Do not be afraid to say no to your children’s requests if need be! Jehovah set limits for Adam and Eve​—limits that could have instilled in them a proper regard for his authority. Similarly, parental discipline and example have the goal of teaching children self-control. Love for God’s authority and respect for his standards are among the most precious things that you can cultivate in your children.​—Prov. 1:5, 7, 8. w17.09 7 ¶17




Wednesday, June 19

There should be no division in the body, but its members should have mutual concern for one another.​—1 Cor. 12:25.



Until Satan’s world comes to an end, we will continue to experience trials. We deal with unemployment, serious illnesses, persecution, natural disasters, loss of possessions because of crime, or other hardships. To support one another in our suffering or adversity, we need to have genuine compassion. Feeling tender compassion will move us to acts of kindness. (Eph. 4:32) These aspects of the new personality will help us to imitate God and be of comfort to others. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) How can we show even greater consideration toward foreigners or disadvantaged ones in our congregation? We need to befriend such individuals and help them to see that they are a valuable part of the congregation. (1 Cor. 12:22) Also, out of compassion for immigrants, many Witnesses endeavor to learn a new language. (1 Cor. 9:23) This has led to rich blessings. w17.08 23-24 ¶7-9




Thursday, June 20

Jehovah is my share . . . That is why I will show a waiting attitude for him.​—Lam. 3:24.



Each one of us needs to be willing to wait, to show a patient attitude. But what will help us to do this? Pray for God’s spirit. Remember, patience is an aspect of the fruitage of the spirit. (Eph. 3:16; 6:18; 1 Thess. 5:17-19) Plead with Jehovah to help you to endure patiently. Remember, too, what helped Abraham, Joseph, and David to wait patiently for the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises. It was their faith in Jehovah and their trust in his dealings with them. They did not focus just on themselves and their personal comfort. As we contemplate how well things worked out for them, we too will be encouraged to show a waiting attitude. So even though we face tests and trials, we are determined to show “a waiting attitude.” Yes, at times we might cry out: “How long, O Jehovah?” (Isa. 6:11) But with the strengthening power of God’s holy spirit, we can echo the words of Jeremiah in today’s text. w17.08 7 ¶18-20




Friday, June 21

To do your will, O my God, is my delight.​—Ps. 40:8.



As a child, Jesus no doubt played and had fun. God’s Word says that there is “a time to laugh . . . and a time to dance.” (Eccl. 3:4) Jesus also drew close to Jehovah by studying the Scriptures. When he was 12 years old, the teachers at the temple were amazed at “his understanding and his answers” regarding spiritual matters. (Luke 2:42, 46, 47) Jesus grew up to be a happy adult. What made him happy? He knew that, among other things, God wanted him “to declare good news to the poor . . . and a recovery of sight to the blind.” (Luke 4:18) Doing what God asked him to do made Jesus happy. He enjoyed teaching people about his heavenly Father. (Luke 10:21) Once, after teaching a woman about true worship, Jesus said to his disciples: “My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.” (John 4:31-34) Showing love for God and for others made Jesus happy. It can make you happy too. w17.07 23 ¶4-5




Saturday, June 22

The peace of God . . . will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.​—Phil. 4:7.



Jehovah’s tender empathy was perfectly expressed in the words and actions of his compassionate Son, Jesus, when he was on earth. (John 5:19) Jesus was sent to provide comfort for “the brokenhearted” and “all who mourn.” (Isa. 61:1, 2; Luke 4:17-21) Hence, he was characterized by deep compassion​—a sympathetic awareness of people’s suffering and a heartfelt desire to alleviate their suffering. (Heb. 2:17) The Scriptures reassure us that “Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.” (Heb. 13:8) Since “the Chief Agent of life” personally understands what it is like to feel grief, “he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test.” (Acts 3:15; Heb. 2:10, 18) Christ continues to be moved by the anguish of others, to understand their grief, and to provide them consolation “at the right time.”​—Heb. 4:15, 16. w17.07 13 ¶6-7; 14 ¶10




Sunday, June 23

Where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.​—Luke 12:34.



Satan and his world are constantly seeking to weaken or destroy our appreciation for the spiritual treasures that Jehovah has given us. We are not immune to these tactics. We could easily be enticed by promises of a lucrative career, dreams of a lavish lifestyle, or the desire for a showy display of material riches. The apostle John reminds us that this world is passing away and so is its desire. (1 John 2:15-17) Therefore, we must work hard to safeguard our affections and protect our love and appreciation for spiritual riches. Be willing to give up anything that could replace your wholehearted love for God’s Kingdom. Continue to preach zealously, never losing appreciation for our lifesaving ministry. Earnestly continue to search for divine truths. As you do this, you will build up “treasure in the heavens, where no thief gets near and no moth consumes.”​—Luke 12:33. w17.06 13 ¶19-20




Monday, June 24

A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else!​—Ps. 84:10.



Jehovah’s way of ruling is neither oppressive nor rigid. It allows for freedom and promotes joy. (2 Cor. 3:17) David expressed it this way: “In his [God’s] presence are majesty and splendor; strength and joy are in his dwelling place.” (1 Chron. 16:7, 27) Similarly, the psalmist Ethan wrote: “Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face. They rejoice in your name all day long, and in your righteousness they are exalted.” (Ps. 89:15, 16) Frequent meditation on Jehovah’s goodness can strengthen our conviction that his rulership is best. How could it be otherwise? As our loving Designer and Creator, Jehovah knows what we need in order to be truly happy, and he fills that need abundantly. Whatever he requires of us is for our benefit and ultimately results in our greatest joy. That is so even if his requirements involve our making some sacrifices.​—Isa. 48:17. w17.06 29 ¶10-11




Tuesday, June 25

Expectation postponed makes the heart sick.​—Prov. 13:12.



Consider the case of a sister in England who very much wanted a child but whose hopes in that regard had not been fulfilled. Then she entered the change of life. She admitted that she felt devastated, for she realized that her desire would not be satisfied in this system of things. She and her husband decided to adopt a child. Nonetheless, she said: “I still went through a sort of grieving process. I knew that adoption would not be exactly the same as giving birth to my own child.” The Bible does mention a Christian woman’s being “kept safe through childbearing.” (1 Tim. 2:15) But this does not mean that giving birth or having children results in gaining everlasting life. Rather, it refers to the fact that a woman’s having children to tend to, along with the other aspects of caring for a household, may keep her from falling into a pattern of gossiping and meddling in others’ affairs.​—1 Tim. 5:13. w17.06 5-6 ¶6-8




Wednesday, June 26

What do you give [God]; what does he receive from you?​—Job 35:7.



Was Elihu suggesting that our efforts in God’s service are pointless? No. He was saying that Jehovah does not depend on our worship. Jehovah is complete. We cannot make him richer or stronger. On the contrary, any goodness, talent, or strength that we possess is a trust from God, and he takes note of how we use it. Jehovah considers acts of loyal love expressed toward his servants as being rendered to him personally. “The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, and He will repay him for what he does,” says Proverbs 19:17. Is this scripture implying that Jehovah takes note of every act of kindness performed in behalf of lowly ones? Can we conclude that the Creator of the universe considers himself to be indebted to mere humans who perform deeds of mercy and that he views such giving as loans that he repays with favor and blessings? Yes, and this was verified by God’s own Son.​—Luke 14:13, 14. w17.04 29 ¶3-4




Thursday, June 27

His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he reads His law in an undertone day and night.​—Ps. 1:2.



Besides reading the Bible and our Bible-based publications, how else can we develop a deep love for Bible truth? We can enhance our love for Bible truth by regularly attending congregation meetings. The weekly study of the Bible with the help of The Watchtower is a principal means by which we are taught. To get the sense of the subject that is considered, we need to prepare well for each Watchtower Study. One way we can do so is by looking up each of the cited Bible texts. Nowadays, The Watchtower can be downloaded from the jw.org website or viewed on the JW Library app in many languages. Some electronic formats allow us to access quickly the cited texts from each study article. But whatever method we use, reading these scriptures carefully and meditating on them will deepen our love for Bible truth. w17.05 20 ¶14




Friday, June 28

Each of us will render an account for himself to God.​—Rom. 14:12.



After baptism, we want to continue living up to our dedication in faithful service to God. There is no way to undo a dedication vow, taking back what we promised God. If a person tires of serving Jehovah or of living a Christian way of life, he cannot claim that he was never really dedicated and that his baptism was invalid. To all intents and purposes, he presented himself as one who was wholly dedicated to God. He will be accountable before Jehovah and the congregation for any serious sins that he may commit. May it never be said of us that ‘we left the love we had at first.’ Instead, we want Jesus to be able to say of us: “I know your deeds, and your love and faith and ministry and endurance, and that your deeds of late are more than those you did at first.” (Rev. 2:4, 19) May we zealously continue to live up to our dedication vow​—to Jehovah’s delight. w17.04 6-7 ¶12-13




Saturday, June 29

The Rock, perfect is his activity, for all his ways are justice.​—Deut. 32:4.



“Will the Judge of all the earth not do what is right?” (Gen. 18:25) With that question, Abraham expressed confidence that Jehovah would render perfect justice in the case of Sodom and Gomorrah. Abraham was convinced that Jehovah would never act unjustly by “putting the righteous man to death with the wicked one.” Such an act was “unthinkable” to Abraham. He could express such confidence because Jehovah is the greatest example of justice and righteousness. In fact, the Hebrew words rendered “justice” and “righteousness” often appear together in the Hebrew Scriptures. Basically, there is no distinction between what is just and what is right. Logically, since Jehovah is the ultimate standard of righteousness, his view of matters will always be just. Further, according to his own written Word, “he loves righteousness and justice.”​—Ps. 33:5. w17.04 18 ¶1-2




Sunday, June 30

No greater joy do I have than this: that I should hear that my children go on walking in the truth.​—3 John 4.



Parents, your example is essential to start your children on the path to endless life. When your children see you “seeking first the Kingdom,” they learn to depend on Jehovah for their daily needs. (Matt. 6:33, 34) So live modestly. Sacrifice material things for spiritual benefits​—not the other way around. Strive to stay out of debt. Seek “treasure in heaven”​—Jehovah’s approval—​and not riches or “the glory of men.” (Mark 10:21, 22; John 12:43) Never get so busy that you do not have time for your children. Let them know that you are proud of them when they decide to put Jehovah first instead of seeking prestige or riches​—for themselves or for you. Avoid the unchristian view that children should provide their parents with a life of ease. Remember, “children are not expected to save up for their parents, but the parents for their children.”​—2 Cor. 12:14. w17.05 8-9 ¶3-4




