
November
Friday, November 1

Reject ungodliness and worldly desires and . . . live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion.​—Titus 2:12.



Self-discipline includes exercising control over ourselves in order to improve in our behavior and thinking. We are not born with an inclination toward self-discipline. We have to learn it. When parents consistently and patiently train their little ones “in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah,” they are also helping their children to develop self-discipline and wisdom. (Eph. 6:4) The same principles apply to those who come to know Jehovah as adults. True, they may already have developed a measure of self-discipline. Spiritually speaking, however, a new disciple starts off being immature. But he or she can steadily grow toward maturity as part of learning to put on the Christlike “new personality.” (Eph. 4:23, 24) Self-discipline is an important part of that growth. w18.03 29 ¶3-4




Saturday, November 2

Follow the course of hospitality.​—Rom. 12:13.



We welcome all who attend our Christian meetings as fellow guests at a spiritual meal. Jehovah and his organization are our hosts. (Rom. 15:7) When new ones attend, we become cohosts, as it were. Why not take the initiative to welcome these new ones, no matter how they may be dressed or groomed? (Jas. 2:1-4) If a visitor is not already being cared for, could you invite him to sit with you? He might appreciate help to follow the program and perhaps to find scriptures being read. This would be a fine way to “follow the course of hospitality.” Visits of public speakers from other congregations, as well as visits of circuit overseers and, at times, representatives from the local branch office, provide opportunities for us to extend hospitality. (3 John 5-8) Providing refreshments or a meal is one fine way of doing this. Could you assist? w18.03 15 ¶5, 7




Sunday, November 3

What prevents me from getting baptized?​—Acts 8:36.



Consider the example of a Jewish man who was persecuting Christians. He was born in a nation that was dedicated to God. However, the Jews had lost their special relationship with Jehovah. That man was zealous for the traditions of Judaism, but he learned a better way. He received a personal witness from the resurrected and glorified Jesus Christ. What was the man’s response? He welcomed assistance from the Christian disciple Ananias. Regarding that man the Bible tells us: “He then got up and was baptized.” (Acts 9:17, 18; Gal. 1:14) You certainly recognize that Jewish man as the one who came to be known as the apostle Paul. But reflect on the fact that once he gained appreciation for the truth about Jesus’ role in the outworking of God’s purpose, Paul acted. He got baptized without delay. (Acts 22:12-16) It is much the same with Bible students today, whether young or old. w18.03 5-6 ¶9-11




Monday, November 4

I was not able to speak to you as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men.​—1 Cor. 3:1.



Jacob did not have an easy life. He had to put up with his fleshly-minded brother, Esau, who intended to kill him. On top of that, he had to deal with a deceitful father-in-law, who repeatedly tried to exploit him. Yet, despite being surrounded by “physical” men, Jacob was a spiritual man. (1 Cor. 2:14-16) He had faith in the promise made to Abraham and devoted himself to caring for the family who would play a special role in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose. (Gen. 28:10-15) Jacob’s words and actions reveal that he had God’s standards and will in mind. For example, when he felt threatened by Esau, Jacob said to God: “Save me, I pray you . . . You have said: ‘I will certainly deal well with you, and I will make your offspring like the grains of sand of the sea.’” (Gen. 32:6-12) He obviously put faith in Jehovah’s promises and wanted to act in harmony with God’s will and purpose. w18.02 20 ¶9-10




Tuesday, November 5

He is an upright man of integrity, fearing God and shunning what is bad.​—Job 1:8.



The life of Job is a study in contrasts. Before his trial, he was “the greatest of all the people of the East.” (Job 1:3) He was wealthy, well-known, and highly respected. (Job 29:7-16) Yet, despite all of this, Job did not develop a lofty view of himself or feel that he did not need God. In fact, Jehovah called him “my servant.” Satan launched a series of vicious attacks against Job, leading Job to assume that God was to blame. (Job 1:13-21) Then three false comforters arrived and attacked Job with cruel words, basically saying that God was giving him what he deserved! (Job 2:11; 22:1, 5-10) Yet, Job maintained his integrity. When the trial was over, Jehovah gave Job double what he had before the trial began, as well as an added 140 years of life. (Jas. 5:11) During that time, he continued to give Jehovah exclusive devotion. w18.02 6 ¶16; 7 ¶18




Wednesday, November 6

Men will be . . . boastful, haughty, . . . puffed up with pride.​—2 Tim. 3:2, 4.



People with such traits crave to be admired and adored. One scholar wrote the following about the person who has an all-consuming pride: “In his heart there is a little altar where he bows down before himself.” Some have said that inordinate pride is so distasteful that even the proud dislike it in others. Jehovah certainly detests pride. He hates “haughty eyes.” (Prov. 6:16, 17) Pride hinders approach to God. (Ps. 10:4) It is a characteristic of the Devil. (1 Tim. 3:6) Sadly, though, even some loyal servants of Jehovah have become infected with pride. Uzziah, a king of Judah, proved faithful for years. “However,” the Bible states, “as soon as he was strong, his heart became haughty to his own ruin, and he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah his God by entering the temple of Jehovah to burn incense.” Later, King Hezekiah too fell prey to haughtiness, though only temporarily.​—2 Chron. 26:16; 32:25, 26. w18.01 28 ¶4-5




Thursday, November 7

Each of you should set something aside according to his own means.​—1 Cor. 16:2.



The aspect of giving from personal resources is well-established in the Scriptures. In some cases, Jehovah’s people contributed for specific projects. (Ex. 35:5; 2 Ki. 12:4, 5; 1 Chron. 29:5-9) When the brothers in the early Christian congregation were made aware of the need that arose because of a famine, they “determined, each according to what he could afford, to send relief to the brothers living in Judea.” (Acts 11:27-30) Of course, the sources of such donations varied. In the first century, some Christians sold items that they owned, such as fields or houses, and brought the money to the apostles. The apostles distributed these funds to those in need. (Acts 4:34, 35) Others set aside money and gave regular donations to support the work. Thus, people of all walks of life​—from the very wealthy to the very poor—​had a share.​—Luke 21:1-4. w18.01 18 ¶7; 19 ¶9




Friday, November 8

Boys will tire out and grow weary.​—Isa. 40:30.



No matter how qualified we may be, we are limited in what we can accomplish in our own strength. That is a lesson we all must learn. Although he was a capable man, the apostle Paul had limitations that prevented him from doing everything he wanted to do. When he expressed his concerns to God, he was told: “My power is being made perfect in weakness.” Paul got the point. He concluded: “When I am weak, then I am powerful.” (2 Cor. 12:7-10) What did he mean by that? Paul realized that there was only so much he could do without help from a higher source. God’s holy spirit could supply the power that Paul lacked. Not only that, but God’s spirit could empower Paul to perform tasks that he would never have been able to complete in his own power. The same is true of us. If the strength we have comes from Jehovah, we will be strong indeed! w18.01 9 ¶8-9




Saturday, November 9

From infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation.​—2 Tim. 3:15.



When your child expresses interest in getting baptized, make good use of material that Jehovah’s organization has provided for parents. Your doing so may lay the groundwork for stressing both the seriousness and the blessings of being dedicated to Jehovah and of being a baptized Christian. As a parent, you have the weighty responsibility​—and privilege—​to bring up your children “in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) That requires not only teaching them what the Bible says but also helping them to develop conviction about what they learn. Yes, they need a conviction that is so strong that it moves them to dedicate themselves to Jehovah and to serve him wholeheartedly. May Jehovah’s Word, his spirit, and your efforts as a parent help your children to become “wise for salvation.” w17.12 22 ¶17, 19




Sunday, November 10

You will stand up for your lot at the end of the days.​—Dan. 12:13.



Daniel was almost 100 years old and nearing the end of his life. Would Daniel get to live again? Absolutely! At the end of the book of Daniel, we read God’s assurance to him: “As for you, go on to the end. You will rest.” Elderly Daniel knew that the dead are at rest, with no “planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave.” Daniel would soon be going there. (Eccl. 9:10) But that would not be the end of him. He was promised a future. The message to the prophet Daniel continued with the words of today’s text. No date or length of time was given. Daniel was to come to his end in death and then rest. Yet, saying that he would ‘stand up for his lot’ in the future amounted to a clear promise of a resurrection to come​—long after he had died. That would be “at the end of the days.” The Jerusalem Bible renders the promise to Daniel: “You will rise for your share at the end of time.” w17.12 7 ¶17-18




Monday, November 11

No one will be put to death on the testimony of just one witness.​—Num. 35:30.



Jehovah commissioned Israelite elders to imitate his high standard of justice. First, the elders needed to establish the facts. Further, they had to weigh carefully a manslayer’s motive, attitude, and previous conduct when deciding whether to show mercy. To reflect divine justice, they had to determine whether the fugitive acted “out of hatred” and “with malicious intent.” (Num. 35:20-24) If the testimony of witnesses was considered, at least two witnesses had to substantiate a charge of intentional murder. Thus, after establishing the facts of the case, the elders had to look at the person, not just the action. They needed insight, the ability to look beyond the obvious and to see into a matter. Above all, they needed Jehovah’s holy spirit, which would enable them to reflect his insight, mercy, and justice.​—Ex. 34:6, 7. w17.11 16 ¶13-14




Tuesday, November 12

Ponder over these things.​—1 Tim. 4:15.



We discovered some priceless truths when we first began to associate with God’s people. We learned that Jehovah is our Creator and Life-Giver and that he has a purpose for mankind. We also learned that God lovingly provided the ransom sacrifice of his Son so that we might be freed from sin and death. We further learned that his Kingdom will end all suffering and that we have the prospect of living forever in peace and happiness under Kingdom rule. (John 3:16; Rev. 4:11; 21:3, 4) From time to time, our understanding of a Bible prophecy or some Scriptural passage may be adjusted. When such new understandings are provided, we ought to take time to study the information carefully and meditate on it. (Acts 17:11) We seek to understand clearly not only the major adjustments but also the subtle differences between the old understanding and the new one. In this way, we are certain to place the new truth securely in our own treasure store. w17.06 12-13 ¶15-16




Wednesday, November 13

Deaden . . . your body members that are on the earth as respects sexual immorality, uncleanness, uncontrolled sexual passion.​—Col. 3:5.



It is especially important to be on guard when we are confronted by circumstances that could tempt us to compromise Jehovah’s moral standards. For example, it is wise for a couple, right from the start of a courtship, to set clear limits for themselves about such matters as touching, kissing, or being alone together. (Prov. 22:3) Morally dangerous situations may also come up when a Christian is away from home on a business trip or when a Christian has to work with someone of the opposite sex. (Prov. 2:10-12, 16) We may also find ourselves at greater risk if we are depressed and vulnerable. We may even become so desperate for emotional support that we will accept attention from just about anyone. If that ever happens to you, turn to Jehovah and his people for help.​—Ps. 34:18; Prov. 13:20. w17.11 26 ¶4-5




Thursday, November 14

Select for yourselves the cities of refuge.​—Josh. 20:2.



Jehovah took seriously all cases of bloodshed in ancient Israel. Willful murderers were put to death by the victim’s nearest male relative, known as “the avenger of blood.” (Num. 35:19) This act atoned for the innocent human blood that had been spilled. Swift execution protected the Promised Land from becoming defiled, for Jehovah commanded: “You must not pollute the land in which you live, for [the shedding of human] blood pollutes the land.” (Num. 35:33, 34) How, though, did the Israelites handle cases of accidental bloodshed? Although his deed was accidental, an unintentional manslayer was still guilty of shedding innocent blood. (Gen. 9:5) Mercifully, however, he was allowed to flee from the avenger of blood to one of the six cities of refuge. There, he could find protection. The unintentional manslayer had to remain in the city of refuge until the high priest’s death.​—Num. 35:15, 28. w17.11 9 ¶3-5




Friday, November 15

The shrewd man overlooks an insult.​—Prov. 12:16.



A sister from Australia relates: “My father-in-law strongly opposed the truth. Before calling to check on him, my husband and I would pray that Jehovah help us not to respond in kind to angry reactions. To avoid long conversations that would usually lead to a heated discussion about religion, we set a time limit for the visit.” Conflict can make you feel guilty, especially if you love your relatives dearly and have always tried to please them. However, strive to put your loyalty to Jehovah ahead of your love for your family. Such a stand may actually help your relatives to see that applying Bible truth is a life-and-death matter. In any case, remember that you cannot force others to accept the truth. Instead, let them see in you the benefits of following Jehovah’s ways. Our loving God offers to them, just as he does to us, the opportunity to choose the course they will follow.​—Isa. 48:17, 18. w17.10 15-16 ¶15-16




Saturday, November 16

We should love, not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.​—1 John 3:18.



Our love must not be limited to words, especially when the circumstances call for action. For example, when a fellow Christian lacks the basic necessities of life, he needs more than our good wishes. (Jas. 2:15, 16) Similarly, love for Jehovah and our neighbor moves us not only to ask God ‘to send out workers into the harvest’ but also to have a full share in the preaching work. (Matt. 9:38) The apostle John wrote that we must love “in deed and truth.” Thus, our love must be “without hypocrisy,” or “free from hypocrisy.” (Rom. 12:9; 2 Cor. 6:6) This means that we cannot show genuine love while pretending to be something that we are not, as if we were wearing a mask. We might wonder, ‘Is there such a thing as love with hypocrisy?’ Not really. This would not be love at all but a worthless imitation. w17.10 8 ¶5-6




Sunday, November 17

You must read it in an undertone day and night, . . . then you will act wisely.​—Josh. 1:8.



If God’s Word is to have an effect on us, we need to read it regularly​—daily if possible. Of course, most of us lead very busy lives. Still, we cannot afford to let anything​—even legitimate responsibilities—​disrupt our Bible reading routine. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Many of Jehovah’s people have found creative ways to make time for daily Bible reading, whether at the start of their day or at the end or somewhere in between. They feel as did the psalmist, who wrote: “How I do love your law! I ponder over it all day long.” (Ps. 119:97) In addition to reading the Bible, it is important for us to meditate on what we read. (Ps. 1:1-3) Only then will we be able to make the best personal application of its timeless wisdom. Whether reading God’s Word in printed or electronic form, our goal should be to get it off the page and into our heart. w17.09 24 ¶4-5




Monday, November 18

All of you have . . . tender compassion.​—1 Pet. 3:8.



Compassion does not necessarily need to be shown in every situation. For example, King Saul was disobedient when he showed what he may have felt was compassion. He spared the life of Agag, an enemy of God’s people. Consequently, Jehovah rejected Saul from being king over Israel. (1 Sam. 15:3, 9, 15, ftn.) Jehovah, of course, is the righteous Judge. He can read people’s hearts, and he knows when compassion is not warranted. (Lam. 2:17; Ezek. 5:11) The time is coming when he will execute judgment on all those who refuse to obey him. (2 Thess. 1:6-10) That will not be the time for him to show compassion for those whom he has judged to be wicked. Rather, executing them will be an appropriate expression of God’s compassion for the righteous, whom he will preserve. Clearly, it is not our role to judge whether people should be executed or preserved alive. Instead, we need to do all we can now to help people. w17.09 10-11 ¶10-12




Tuesday, November 19

The fruitage of the spirit is . . . self-control.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.



Self-control is a godly quality. Jehovah possesses self-control in perfect measure. Humans, however, are imperfect and therefore struggle to maintain self-control. Indeed, many of the problems that people face today stem from a lack of self-control. That lack may result in procrastination and underperformance in school or at work. It may also lead to verbal abuse, drunkenness, violence, divorce, needless debt, addiction, imprisonment, emotional trauma, sexually transmitted disease, and unwanted pregnancy, to name a few. (Ps. 34:11-14) And the problem of lacking self-control is worsening. Self-discipline was studied in the 1940’s, but recent studies have shown that people have become much worse at exercising self-discipline. This is no surprise to students of God’s Word because the Bible foretold that one evidence that we are living in “the last days” is that men would be “without self-control.”​—2 Tim. 3:1-3. w17.09 3 ¶1-2




Wednesday, November 20

The peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts.​—Phil. 4:7.



When we have “the peace of God,” our hearts and minds remain at rest. We know that Jehovah cares for us and wants us to succeed. (1 Pet. 5:10) That knowledge guards us from becoming overwhelmed by anxiety or discouragement. Soon mankind will face the greatest tribulation that will ever occur here on earth. (Matt. 24:21, 22) We do not know all the details of what that will mean for us individually. However, there is no need for us to be consumed by anxiety. Even though we do not know everything Jehovah will do, we do know our God. We have seen from his past dealings that no matter what happens, Jehovah will always accomplish his purpose, and sometimes he does it in an unexpected manner. Each time Jehovah does so for us, we may experience in a new way “the peace of God that surpasses all understanding.” w17.08 12 ¶16-17




Thursday, November 21

Be patient . . . until the presence of the Lord.​—Jas. 5:7.



“How long?” That was the question raised by the faithful prophets Isaiah and Habakkuk. (Isa. 6:11; Hab. 1:2) Even our Lord Jesus Christ asked this question when confronted with the faithless attitude of those around him. (Matt. 17:17) So we should not be surprised if we find ourselves at times asking the very same question. Perhaps we have had to deal with some form of injustice. Or maybe we are enduring old age and sickness or the pressures of living in these “critical times” that are so “hard to deal with.” (2 Tim. 3:1) Or maybe the wrong attitudes of those around us are wearing us out. Whatever the cause, how encouraging it is to know that Jehovah’s faithful servants in the past felt free to express the same question that may loom in our minds, and they were not condemned for asking it! But what can help us when we come face-to-face with such difficult circumstances? The disciple James answers with the words of today’s text. w17.08 3-4 ¶1-3




Friday, November 22

Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches.​—Luke 16:9.



Jesus urged his followers to use “unrighteous riches” to make friends in heaven. An obvious way to prove ourselves faithful with our material things is by contributing financially to the worldwide preaching work that Jesus foretold would take place. (Matt. 24:14) A young girl in India kept a small money box and gradually added coins, even giving up toys to do so. When the box was full, she handed the money over to be used for the preaching work. A brother in India who has a coconut farm contributed a large number of coconuts to the Malayalam remote translation office, reasoning that since the office needs to buy coconuts, his supplying them directly will help his contribution to go further than it would if he gave cash. That is practical wisdom. Likewise, brothers in Greece regularly contribute olive oil, cheese, and other foods for the Bethel family. w17.07 8 ¶7-8




Saturday, November 23

Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.​—Ps. 137:3.



As captives in Babylon, the Jews did not feel like singing. They needed comfort and consolation. However, true to God’s prophetic word, deliverance came through Cyrus, king of Persia. He conquered Babylon and proclaimed: “Jehovah . . . has commissioned me to build him a house in Jerusalem . . . Whoever there is among you of all his people, may Jehovah his God be with him, and let him go up.” (2 Chron. 36:23) What a comforting effect this development must have had on the Israelites dwelling in Babylon! Jehovah gave comfort not only to the nation of Israel as a whole but also to each individual. The same is true today. God “heals the brokenhearted; he binds up their wounds.” (Ps. 147:3) Yes, Jehovah cares for those who are having problems​—whether physical or emotional. He is eager to comfort us and to soothe our emotional wounds. (Ps. 34:18; Isa. 57:15) He gives us wisdom and strength so that we can cope with any troubles we may face.​—Jas. 1:5. w17.07 18 ¶4-5




Sunday, November 24

Where your treasure is, there your hearts will be also.​—Luke 12:34.



Jehovah is the wealthiest Person in the universe. (1 Chron. 29:11, 12) As a generous Father, he openhandedly shares his spiritual riches with all who discern their excelling value. How grateful we are that Jehovah has given us spiritual treasures, which include (1) God’s Kingdom, (2) our lifesaving ministry, and (3) the precious truths found in his Word! If we are not careful, though, we could lose appreciation for these treasures and, in effect, throw them away. To hold on to them, we must use them well and constantly renew our love for them. Granted, many of us have made life-transforming changes to become subjects of God’s Kingdom. (Rom. 12:2) Even so, our work is not finished. We must remain alert to things that actively compete for our affection, including the desire for material things and any immoral sexual desires.​—Prov. 4:23; Matt. 5:27-29. w17.06 9 ¶1; 10 ¶7




Monday, November 25

Do you know this?​—Job 38:21.



Nowhere do we read of God’s telling Job specifically the reason behind his suffering. The main point of Jehovah’s words was not to explain to Job why he was suffering, as if God had to justify himself. Rather, Jehovah wanted to help Job recognize his insignificance in comparison with God’s greatness. And he helped Job to see that there were greater issues with which to be concerned. (Job 38:18-20) This helped Job regain the proper perspective. Was Jehovah harsh in giving such straightforward counsel after Job had endured so severe a trial? God was not, and Job did not think so. Despite his ordeal, Job finally began to speak appreciatively. He even stated: “I take back what I said, and I repent in dust and ashes.” Such was the effect of Jehovah’s pointed but refreshing counsel. (Job 42:1-6) After Job responded to God’s reproof and corrected his view, Jehovah expressed to others his approval of Job’s faithfulness under trial.​—Job 42:7, 8. w17.06 24-25 ¶11-12




Tuesday, November 26

Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.​—Luke 10:42.



To help determine whether we have a balanced view of secular matters and spiritual responsibilities, it is good to ask ourselves: ‘Do I find my secular work interesting and exciting but view my spiritual activities as ordinary or routine?’ Thinking about and meditating on these matters can help us to determine where our true affection lies. Jesus set the standard in balancing secular interests and spiritual matters. On one occasion, Jesus visited the home of Mary and her sister, Martha. While Martha scurried about preparing a meal, Mary chose to sit at Jesus’ feet and listen to him. When Martha complained that Mary was not helping, Jesus told Martha the words of today’s text. (Luke 10:38-42) Jesus was teaching Martha a valuable lesson. To avoid being distracted by secular matters and to prove our love for Christ, we must continue to choose “the good portion,” to give priority to spiritual things. w17.05 24 ¶9-10




Wednesday, November 27

Listen . . . to the discipline of your father.​—Prov. 1:8.



Jehovah has assigned parents​—not grandparents or anyone else—​the privilege of raising their children in the truth. (Prov. 31:10, 27, 28) Still, parents who do not know the local language may need help to reach their children’s heart. Arranging for such help need not mean abdicating their spiritual responsibility; rather, it can be part of bringing up their children “in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) For example, parents may ask elders in the congregation for suggestions on conducting family worship and for help in providing good association for their children. Also, they may invite other families to join them in family worship from time to time. Further, many young people thrive under the influence of spiritually balanced companions who may, for example, accompany them in the ministry and share with them in wholesome recreation.​—Prov. 27:17. w17.05 11-12 ¶17-18




Thursday, November 28

Flee to Egypt.​—Matt. 2:13.



After Jehovah’s angel warned Joseph that King Herod intended to kill Jesus, young Jesus and his parents became refugees in Egypt. They remained there until Herod died. (Matt. 2:14, 19-21) Decades later, Jesus’ early disciples “were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria” because of persecution. (Acts 8:1) Jesus had foreseen that many of his followers would be forced from their homes. He said: “When they persecute you in one city, flee to another.” (Matt. 10:23) This has been the case for thousands of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many have lost loved ones and nearly all their possessions. Some faced danger when fleeing or when living in a refugee camp where people drank, gambled, stole, and were immoral. Yet, they kept a positive attitude by recalling that, like Israel’s trek in the wilderness, their stay in the camp would eventually come to an end.​—2 Cor. 4:18. w17.05 3-4 ¶2-5




Friday, November 29

Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; nothing can make them stumble.​—Ps. 119:165.



On rare occasions, you or someone you know may experience or observe what seems to be an injustice in the congregation. Do not let yourself be stumbled. Instead, as faithful servants of God, we loyally and prayerfully rely on him. At the same time, we modestly acknowledge that we likely do not have all the facts. We are keenly aware that the fault may lie in our imperfect view of matters. We want to avoid negative speech, knowing that such speech only makes a bad situation worse. Finally, rather than taking matters into our own hands, let us be determined to be loyal and wait patiently on Jehovah to correct matters. Such an approach is sure to bring Jehovah’s approval and blessing. Yes, we can be certain that Jehovah, “the Judge of all the earth,” will always do what is right, “for all his ways are justice.”​—Gen. 18:25; Deut. 32:4. w17.04 22 ¶17




Saturday, November 30

Let the wicked man leave his way . . . Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him.​—Isa. 55:7.



What of those individuals who refuse to change, who continue to support this system right up to the time of the great tribulation? Jehovah has promised to rid the earth of wicked people for all time. (Ps. 37:10) The wicked may think that they are safe from such judgment. Many have learned to hide what they do, and in this world they often seem to escape justice and consequences. (Job 21:7, 9) Yet, the Bible reminds us: “God’s eyes are upon the ways of a man, and He sees all his steps. There is no darkness or deep shadow where wrongdoers can conceal themselves.” (Job 34:21, 22) There is no hiding from Jehovah God. No impostor can fool him; no shadow is so dark or deep that God’s limitless vision cannot pierce right to the heart of matters. After Armageddon, then, we may look where the wicked used to be, but we will not see them. They will be gone​—forever!​—Ps. 37:12-15. w17.04 10 ¶5




