
October
Tuesday, October 1

If any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching.​—Jas. 1:5.



Jehovah is the Source of wisdom, and he generously shares his wisdom with others. One way that we acquire wisdom from God is by accepting his discipline. And that wisdom can safeguard us from moral and spiritual harm. (Prov. 2:10-12) As a result, we “keep [ourselves] in God’s love . . . with everlasting life in view.” (Jude 21) However, our sinful leanings, our upbringing, and other factors make it a challenge to accept discipline or to view it in the right light. We build appreciation for discipline when we experience its benefits, which confirm God’s love for us. “My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, . . . for those whom Jehovah loves he reproves,” says Proverbs 3:11, 12. Yes, let us never forget that Jehovah has our best interests at heart. (Heb. 12:5-11) Because God fully knows us, his discipline is always appropriate and properly measured. w18.03 28 ¶1-2




Wednesday, October 2

Be hospitable to one another.​—1 Pet. 4:9.



The apostle Peter wrote the above to the culturally diverse congregations in Asia Minor. They were facing “fiery trials.” What could help Christians everywhere to get through those stressful times? (1 Pet. 1:1; 4:4, 7, 12) Note that Peter urged his Christian brothers and sisters to be hospitable “to one another,” to those whom they already knew and associated with. How would being hospitable help them? It would draw them together. Consider your own experience. Have you had the pleasure of being invited to someone’s home? Did that occasion not leave you with warm memories? When you entertained some from your congregation, was your friendship not deepened? By extending hospitality, we get to know our brothers and sisters in a more personal way than we can in other settings. Christians in Peter’s day needed to draw ever closer as conditions grew worse. The same is true for Christians in these “last days.”​—2 Tim. 3:1. w18.03 14-15 ¶1-3




Thursday, October 3

Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.​—Matt. 5:3.



The Bible speaks highly of spiritually-minded people. Romans 8:6 shows the advantage of being spiritually-minded, saying: “Setting the mind on the flesh means death, but setting the mind on the spirit means life and peace.” By focusing on spiritual things, we gain peace with God and with ourselves now and the prospect of everlasting life in the future. However, we live in a dangerous environment. Since fleshly attitudes are all around us, we need to put forth real effort to develop spirituality and to guard it once we have it. If a person loses his spirituality, he creates a moral vacuum and the polluted “air” of this world will rush in. Jude spoke of those who would deteriorate even to the point of “not having spirituality.”​—Jude 18, 19. w18.02 19 ¶5, 7; 20 ¶8




Friday, October 4

Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.​—2 Tim. 3:13.



Many health-care professionals work among those infected with contagious diseases. They care for their patients because they want to help them. In doing so, however, they need to protect themselves so that they do not become infected with the disease they are seeking to treat. Likewise, many of us live and work with those who are infected with attitudes and characteristics that run counter to godly qualities. This presents a challenge for us. These last days are a time of moral chaos. The apostle Paul’s second letter to Timothy describes the characteristics of people who are alienated from God. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) Though we may be shocked by the prevalence of such qualities, we could be influenced by the behavior and attitudes of those who display them. (Prov. 13:20) Therefore, we must protect ourselves from being infected with negative traits while at the same time helping others spiritually. w18.01 27 ¶1-2




Saturday, October 5

Make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them.​—Matt. 28:19.



In 33 C.E., the resurrected Jesus appeared to a crowd of more than 500 men, women, and possibly even children. It may have been on that occasion that he said the above. (1 Cor. 15:6) Yes, it seems that hundreds of his followers were present when Jesus gave the commission to make disciples. Jesus thus revealed that baptism would be a requirement for those who accept the yoke of Christian discipleship. (Matt. 11:29, 30) Anyone who wished to serve God acceptably would have to acknowledge and accept Jesus’ role in the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose. After doing so, that person could get baptized. This would be the only water baptism having God’s approval. The Bible record provides abundant evidence that in the first century, new disciples of Christ understood the significance of baptism. And they did not unnecessarily delay getting baptized.​—Acts 2:41; 9:18; 16:14, 15, 32, 33. w18.03 5 ¶8




Sunday, October 6

O Daniel, you very precious man.​—Dan. 10:11.



Today, we live in a world that has been morally and spiritually corrupted by Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, “a dwelling place of demons.” (Rev. 18:2) Hence, we stand out as different, even becoming targets for ridicule. (Mark 13:13) Like Daniel, therefore, let us draw close to Jehovah, our God. When we humbly and obediently trust in him, we too will be precious in his eyes. (Hag. 2:7) Parents can learn from the example of Daniel’s parents. How so? Despite the wickedness that prevailed in Judah during Daniel’s early childhood, the boy grew to love God. This reflected good parental training. (Prov. 22:6) Even Daniel’s name, which means “My Judge Is God,” points to God-fearing parents. (Dan. 1:6, ftn.) So parents, do not give up on your children, but teach them patiently. (Eph. 6:4) Also, pray with them and for them. When you strive to impress Bible truth on their hearts, you invite Jehovah’s rich blessing.​—Ps. 37:5. w18.02 5 ¶12; 6 ¶14-15




Monday, October 7

Everything is from you, and we have given to you what comes from your own hand.​—1 Chron. 29:14.



Giving is an expression of our worship of Jehovah. In vision, the apostle John heard Jehovah’s servants in heaven say: “You are worthy, Jehovah our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.” (Rev. 4:11) Would you not agree that Jehovah is worthy of all the glory and honor that we can give him by offering the best that we have? Through Moses, Jehovah commanded the nation of Israel to appear before Jehovah at three annual festivals. As part of their worship at those festivals, the Israelites were not to “appear before Jehovah empty-handed.” (Deut. 16:16) Likewise today, unselfish giving in appreciation for and in support of the work of the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization is a fundamental aspect of worship. w18.01 18 ¶4-5




Tuesday, October 8

I will refresh you.​—Matt. 11:28.



Jesus added: “Take my yoke upon you . . . For my yoke is kindly, and my load is light.” (Matt. 11:29, 30) How true that statement is! At times, we may feel exhausted when we leave home to attend a congregation meeting or to engage in the field ministry. But how do we feel when we return? Refreshed​—and better prepared to deal with life’s trials. Jesus’ yoke is kindly indeed! A sister whom we will call Kayla has had to battle with chronic fatigue syndrome, depression, and migraine headaches. Understandably, she has sometimes found it difficult to attend congregation meetings. However, after she made the effort to attend a public meeting, she wrote: “The talk was about discouragement. The information was presented in such an empathetic and concerned way that I was moved to tears. I was reminded that the meetings are where I need to be.” How happy she was that she made the effort to attend! w18.01 8-9 ¶6-7




Wednesday, October 9

My feet had almost strayed.​—Ps. 73:2.



What if your son or daughter begins to express doubts at some point after baptism? For example, a baptized adolescent may seem attracted to the things of the world or may begin to question the wisdom of living by Bible principles. (Ps. 73:1, 3, 12, 13) As a parent, realize that how you handle such questioning on the part of your son or daughter may influence whether your child will choose to draw closer to your faith or he will draw away from it. Be determined not to declare war with your child over this issue, whether he is still quite young or he is now an adolescent. Your goal should be to provide loving support and help in a winning way. Of course, a youth who is baptized has made a solemn dedication to Jehovah. That dedication is a promise to love God and to put his will above everything else. (Mark 12:30) Jehovah does not take that promise lightly, and it should not be taken lightly by anyone who has made it.​—Eccl. 5:4, 5. w17.12 22 ¶16-17




Thursday, October 10

I know [my brother] will rise in the resurrection on the last day.​—John 11:24.



As did Martha, Jehovah’s loyal servants knew that a future time of resurrection was in store. Think of what God told Abraham to do with Isaac, the long-awaited heir. Jehovah said: “Take, please, your son, your only son whom you so love, Isaac, and . . . offer him up . . . as a burnt offering.” (Gen. 22:2) Imagine the feelings that such a command would stir up. Jehovah had promised that through Abraham’s offspring all nations would be blessed. (Gen. 13:14-16; 18:18; Rom. 4:17, 18) Also, Jehovah said that the blessing would come “through Isaac.” (Gen. 21:12) But how could that occur if Abraham put Isaac to death as a sacrifice? Paul was inspired to explain that Abraham believed that God was able to raise Isaac from the dead. (Heb. 11:17-19) Abraham could not know when his son would be raised to life again. But he trusted that Jehovah would resurrect Isaac. w17.12 5-6 ¶12-14




Friday, October 11

I am clean from the blood of all men.​—Acts 20:26.



Like Paul, we should strive to cultivate a godly view of life. Jehovah “desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Pet. 3:9) Do you? You may find that kindling a merciful attitude in your heart will motivate you to increase your zeal in the ministry and fill you with more joy as you do so. We also share Jehovah’s view of life by cultivating a proper attitude toward safety. We must drive and work safely, even when we are building, maintaining, or traveling to places of worship. Never put production, finances, or schedules ahead of safety and health. Our just God always does what is right and proper. We want to be like him. Elders in particular strive to be conscious of both their own safety and the safety of those working around them. (Prov. 22:3) If an elder reminds you of safety rules and standards, therefore, accept his counsel. (Gal. 6:1) View life as Jehovah views it, and “no bloodguilt will come upon you.”​—Deut. 19:10. w17.11 16 ¶11-12




Saturday, October 12

Let no man deprive you of the prize.​—Col. 2:18.



Like the apostle Paul, spirit-anointed Christians today have the precious prospect of receiving “the prize of the upward call of God.” (Phil. 3:14) They look forward to serving with Jesus Christ in his heavenly Kingdom and sharing with him in bringing mankind to perfection. (Rev. 20:6) What a wonderful goal such ones have been invited by God to pursue! The other sheep have a different hope. They look forward to gaining the prize of everlasting life on earth​—and what a happy prospect that is! (2 Pet. 3:13) To help fellow anointed Christians to stay faithful and attain the prize, Paul urged them: “Keep your minds fixed on the things above.” (Col. 3:2) They were to keep in mind the precious hope of receiving their heavenly inheritance. (Col. 1:4, 5) Indeed, contemplating the blessings that Jehovah sets before his people helps all of God’s servants to keep their eyes on the prize.​—1 Cor. 9:24. w17.11 25 ¶1-2




Sunday, October 13

Sing to Jehovah!​—Ps. 96:1.



Many of the songs from “Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah are in the form of a prayer. With these songs, you can express your personal feelings to Jehovah. Other songs will help “to incite [us] to love and fine works.” (Heb. 10:24) Surely we want to become familiar with the melodies, rhythms, and lyrics of our songs. You can do so by listening to the vocal renditions available on jw.org. By practicing the songs at home, you can learn to sing them with confidence and heartfelt expression. Remember that singing is an important feature of our worship. It is a powerful way to show our love and appreciation for Jehovah. (Isa. 12:5) When you sing out joyfully, you will also encourage others to sing with confidence. Indeed, all in the congregation​—young, old, and newly interested ones—​can join in this form of direct worship of Jehovah. So do not hold back in expressing yourself in song. Yes, make a joyful sound! w17.11 7 ¶18-19




Monday, October 14

Prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.​—Matt. 10:16.



Many of today’s refugees come from countries where our preaching work is restricted. Thanks to zealous Witnesses in the lands receiving refugees, thousands of refugees are hearing “the word of the Kingdom” for the first time. (Matt. 13:19, 23) Many who are “loaded down” are finding spiritual refreshment at our meetings and quickly acknowledge: “God is really among you.” (Matt. 11:28-30; 1 Cor. 14:25) Those who preach to refugees need to be “cautious” and even “shrewd.” (Prov. 22:3) Listen patiently to their concerns, but do not discuss politics. Follow directions from the branch office and from local authorities; never put yourself or others at risk. Learn and respect refugees’ religious and cultural sensitivities. For instance, people from some lands have strong feelings about proper dress for women. Therefore, when preaching to refugees, dress so as not to cause needless offense. w17.05 7 ¶17-18




Tuesday, October 15

Let your words always be gracious.​—Col. 4:6.



We can ask Jehovah for his holy spirit so that we can display its fruitage when speaking with our unbelieving relatives. We should not try to argue about all their false religious ideas. If they hurt us by their speech or actions, we can imitate the example of the apostles. Paul wrote: “When insulted, we bless; when persecuted, we patiently endure; when slandered, we answer mildly.” (1 Cor. 4:12, 13) Although mild speech is helpful in dealing with opposing relatives, our good conduct can speak even louder. (1 Pet. 3:1, 2, 16) By your example, let your relatives see that Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoy happy marriages, look after their children, and live a clean, moral, and fulfilling life. Even if our relatives never accept the truth, we can have the joy that comes from pleasing Jehovah by our faithful course. w17.10 15 ¶13-14




Wednesday, October 16

Present yourself approved to God.​—2 Tim. 2:15.



Should we be surprised that many in modern times have made remarkable changes as a result of studying God’s Word? Not at all! Such experiences remind us of our first-century brothers and sisters, who had the heavenly hope. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) After listing a number of types of people who will not inherit God’s Kingdom, the apostle Paul added: “That is what some of you were.” But they had changed with the help of the Scriptures and of God’s holy spirit. Even after accepting the truth, some had to overcome serious spiritual problems. The Bible mentions one anointed Christian in the first century who had to be disfellowshipped; later, he was reinstated. (1 Cor. 5:1-5; 2 Cor. 2:5-8) Do we not find it encouraging to consider the range of problems that our fellow believers have faced and that they have overcome by means of God’s Word? We surely want to make the best use of it. w17.09 23-24 ¶2-3




Thursday, October 17

We should love, not in word or with the tongue, but in deed and truth.​—1 John 3:18.



Love based on right principles (a·gaʹpe) is a gift from Jehovah. He is its Source. (1 John 4:7) This kind of love is the highest form of love. While it can include affection and warmth, it is primarily identified by unselfish actions for the good of others. According to one reference work, a·gaʹpe “can be known only from the actions it prompts.” When we show or are shown unselfish love, our lives are enriched, being filled with joy and meaning. Jehovah showed love for humans even before he created Adam and Eve. He made the earth to be man’s everlasting home, a place where man does not just survive but enjoys life to the full. Jehovah did this solely for our benefit, not for personal gain. He further showed unselfish love by blessing his children on earth with the prospect of living forever in the Paradise that he had prepared for them. w17.10 7 ¶1-2




Friday, October 18

You must love your neighbor as yourself.​—Jas. 2:8.



James added: “If you continue showing favoritism, you are committing sin.” (Jas. 2:9) In contrast, love will move us to avoid any discrimination based on education, race, or social status. Indeed, impartiality needs to be more than a veneer. It must be a genuine part of our personality. Love is also “patient and kind” and “does not get puffed up.” (1 Cor. 13:4) It truly takes patience, kindness, and humility to continue sharing the Kingdom message with our neighbors. (Matt. 28:19) These same qualities make it easier for us to get along with all the brothers and sisters in the congregation. What is the reward for showing such love? It produces united congregations that reflect well on Jehovah and that attract newly interested ones. Fittingly, the Bible’s description of the new personality concludes with this powerful truth: “Besides all these things, clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.”​—Col. 3:14. w17.08 26 ¶18-19




Saturday, October 19

Jehovah [warned] them again and again, because he felt compassion for his people.​—2 Chron. 36:15.



Should we not feel similar compassion for people who could potentially repent over a sinful life course and gain God’s favor? Jehovah does not want any to be destroyed in the coming judgment. (2 Pet. 3:9) So until God acts to destroy the wicked, let us continue to proclaim his compassionate warning message. We can learn a lesson from Jesus. He felt compassion for the crowds he met, for “they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” How did he react to their pitiful state? “He started to teach them many things.” (Matt. 9:36; Mark 6:34) His attitude was in stark contrast to that of the Pharisees, who had no desire to help the common people. (Matt. 12:9-14; 23:4; John 7:49) Do you not feel a yearning, similar to what Jesus had, to feed spiritually famished people? w17.09 9 ¶6; 10 ¶9




Sunday, October 20

When I act, who can prevent it?​—Isa. 43:13.



While in a prison hole in Egypt, did Joseph have any idea that he would be appointed to the second-highest position in the land or that he would be used by Jehovah to save his family from starvation? (Gen. 40:15, ftn.; 41:39-43; 50:20) No doubt Jehovah’s actions exceeded all of Joseph’s expectations. Did aged Sarah expect that Jehovah would allow her to give birth to a son? The birth of Isaac certainly exceeded all that Sarah could ever have imagined. (Gen. 21:1-3, 6, 7) Granted, we do not expect that Jehovah will miraculously take away all our problems before the promised new world; nor do we demand that spectacular things occur in our lives. But we do know that the God who helped his servants in amazing ways is our God, Jehovah. (Isa. 43:10-12) We know that he can do whatever is needed to empower us to accomplish his will fully. (2 Cor. 4:7-9) Yes, Jehovah can help us to conquer the seemingly unconquerable if we remain faithful to him. w17.08 11-12 ¶13-14




Monday, October 21

Commit to Jehovah whatever you do, and your plans will succeed.​—Prov. 16:3.



Full-time service brings you into contact with fellow full-time servants and helps you to mature as a Christian. Many have found that serving Jehovah fully during youth also helped them to have a more successful marriage. Often, those who pioneered before marriage have been able to continue in that service together as a married couple. (Rom. 16:3, 4) Planning involves your heart. Psalm 20:4 says of Jehovah: “May he grant you the desires of your heart and give success to all your plans.” So think about what you want to do with your life. Consider what Jehovah is doing in our time and how you can have a share in his service. Then plan to do what is pleasing to him. Serving Jehovah fully will bring you deep satisfaction because it is the way of life that honors God. Yes, “find exquisite delight in Jehovah, and he will grant you the desires of your heart.”​—Ps. 37:4. w17.07 26 ¶15-18




Tuesday, October 22

Praise Jah! . . . How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!​—Ps. 147:1.



When someone has done well at an assigned task or has displayed a remarkable Christian quality, he deserves praise. If that is true of humans, how much more do we have reason to praise Jehovah God! We can praise him because of his immense power, as seen in the wonders of his creation, or because of his warm dealings with humankind, as evidenced by his provision of the ransom sacrifice of his own Son. The writer of the 147th Psalm was moved to praise Jehovah. He also encouraged others to join him in giving God praise. (Ps. 147:7, 12) We do not know who wrote this psalm, but the psalmist apparently lived about the time when Jehovah restored the Israelites to Jerusalem from Babylonian exile. (Ps. 147:2) The restoration of God’s people to their place of true worship would certainly have moved the psalmist to praise Jehovah. What reasons do you have to cry out “Hallelujah!” in your own life?​—Ps. 147:1, ftn. w17.07 17 ¶1-3




Wednesday, October 23

Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that when such fail, they may receive you into the everlasting dwelling places.​—Luke 16:9.



Jesus knew that most of his followers would need to make a living in this unjust commercial world. Although Jesus does not explain why he calls riches “unrighteous,” the Bible makes clear that commercialism was not part of God’s purpose. Jehovah provided abundantly for Adam and Eve’s needs in Eden. (Gen. 2:15, 16) Later, when holy spirit operated on the first-century congregation of anointed ones, “not even one of them would say that any of the things he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common.” (Acts 4:32) The prophet Isaiah pointed to the time when all humans would freely enjoy earth’s material resources. (Isa. 25:6-9; 65:21, 22) But in the meantime, Jesus’ followers would need “practical wisdom” to make a living, using the “unrighteous riches” of today’s world while seeking to please God.​—Luke 16:8. w17.07 8 ¶4-6




Thursday, October 24

Everything that he has is in your hand.​—Job 1:12.



In the book of Job, one of the earliest Bible books to be written, we learn of Satan’s contention that if subjected to intense suffering, Job would reject God. Satan suggested that God personally afflict Job. Jehovah did not do that, but he allowed Satan to test Job. In a short time, Job lost his servants, his means of livelihood, and his ten beloved children. Satan accomplished this in a way that made it appear as if God himself had been the cause of Job’s troubles. (Job 1:13-19) Satan next afflicted Job with a painful and repulsive illness. (Job 2:7) His despair was deepened further by the disheartening words of his wife and of three companions who acted as if they were his friends. (Job 2:9; 3:11; 16:2) The result? Satan’s claim was shown to be completely false. Job refused to turn his back on God.​—Job 27:5. w17.06 24 ¶9-10




Friday, October 25

If anyone does not provide for those . . . who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith.​—1 Tim. 5:8.



Family heads today recognize that they have a Scriptural responsibility to provide for their family’s material needs. They must work hard to fulfill this obligation. However, in these last days, secular work is often a source of anxiety. As a result of fierce competition for a limited number of jobs, many employees feel compelled to work more hours, sometimes for less pay. Also, the constant push for increased production takes a heavy toll on people physically, mentally, and emotionally. Employees who are unwilling to make such sacrifices for their company risk losing their jobs. As Christians, we owe our primary loyalty to Jehovah God, not to our employer. (Luke 10:27) Secular work is simply a means to an end. We work to provide our basic material needs and to support our ministry. If we are not careful, however, secular work could interfere with our worship. w17.05 23 ¶5-7




Saturday, October 26

Listen to your father who caused your birth, and do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.​—Prov. 23:22.



On occasion, new ones ask mature publishers to help them teach their children the truth. If a parent decides to have someone study with the children, the one who does so should not try to take over the role of the parents. (Eph. 6:1-4) There have been instances when a Witness was asked to study with children whose parents were not interested in the truth. The Witness needs to bear in mind, though, that in providing spiritual help, he or she does not become the children’s parent. And if such a study is conducted, it would be wise to do so either in the children’s home with the parents or another mature Witness around or in a suitable public area. Thus no one would have a basis to misconstrue what is occurring. It is to be hoped that the parents will, in time, fulfill their God-given responsibility to care spiritually for their children. w17.06 8 ¶15-16




Sunday, October 27

If I do not understand . . . the one speaking, . . . the one speaking will be a foreigner to me.​—1 Cor. 14:11.



If children do not identify with their parents’ culture, they may resist learning their parents’ language​—and their faith. Christian parents put their children’s spiritual well-being ahead of personal preferences. (1 Cor. 10:24) A brother named Samuel relates: “My wife and I observed our children to see in which language they thrived spiritually, and we prayed for wisdom. . . . When we saw that they were getting little benefit from the meetings in our language, we decided to move to the local-language congregation. Together, we regularly attended meetings and shared in the ministry. We also invited local friends to join us for meals and excursions. All of this helped our children to get to know the brothers and to get to know Jehovah, not only as their God but also as their Father and Friend. We considered this to be much more important than their mastering our language.” w17.05 10 ¶11-13




Monday, October 28

Praise Jehovah!​—Judg. 5:2.



Soon the earth will be filled with those who prefer Jehovah’s sovereignty over any other. How we long for that day! With Deborah and Barak, we sing: “Let all your enemies perish, O Jehovah, but let those who love you be like the sun rising in its glory.” (Judg. 5:31) This petition will be answered when Jehovah brings an end to Satan’s wicked world! When the battle of Armageddon begins, there will be no need for human volunteers to rout the enemy. That will be the time for us to “stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah.” (2 Chron. 20:17) But in the meantime, there are many opportunities for us to support Jehovah’s cause with courage and zeal. “Because of the people’s volunteering, praise Jehovah!” Thus, Deborah and Barak began their victory song with praise, not to creatures, but to the Most High. (Judg. 5:1, 2) Likewise today, may your volunteer spirit move all those who benefit from it to “praise Jehovah!” w17.04 32 ¶17-18




Tuesday, October 29

I have not done anything here for which they should put me in prison.​—Gen. 40:15.



Although Joseph did not forget the wrongs he suffered throughout his 13-year ordeal, he did not become embittered by them. (Gen. 45:5-8) Most important, he did not allow the imperfections and wrong actions of others to separate him from Jehovah. Joseph’s loyalty gave him the opportunity to see Jehovah’s hand in correcting the injustices and in blessing him and his family. In a similar way, we must cherish and guard our relationship with Jehovah. Never should we allow the imperfections of our brothers to separate us from the God we love and worship. (Rom. 8:38, 39) Instead, if we experience injustice at the hands of a fellow worshipper, let us be like Joseph and draw even closer to Jehovah, striving to have his view of matters. When we have done all that we Scripturally can to remedy the situation, we need to leave the matter in Jehovah’s hands, confident that he will correct it in his own time and way. w17.04 20 ¶12; 22 ¶15-16




Wednesday, October 30

If you . . . give to your servant a male child, I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life.​—1 Sam. 1:11.



Hannah did exactly as she had vowed to God. She did not even think of doing otherwise. She took Samuel to High Priest Eli at the tabernacle in Shiloh and said: “It was for this boy that I prayed, and Jehovah granted my petition that I asked of him. I, in turn, now lend him to Jehovah. For all his days, he is lent to Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 1:24-28) There, “the boy Samuel continued growing up before Jehovah.” (1 Sam. 2:21) But what did that mean for Hannah? She dearly loved her little boy, but now she would not be able to have everyday contact with him during his boyhood. Think of how she longed to cuddle him, to play with him, to nurture him​—to share in all the endearing memories that a loving mother cherishes as she watches her little one grow up. Even so, Hannah had no regrets about keeping her vow to God. Her heart rejoiced in Jehovah.​—1 Sam. 2:1, 2; Ps. 61:1, 5, 8. w17.04 5 ¶7-8




Thursday, October 31

Know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.​—2 Tim. 3:1.



After foretelling that this present era would involve “critical times hard to deal with,” the apostle Paul was inspired to write: “Wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse.” (2 Tim. 3:2-5, 13) Have you seen those prophetic words come true? Many of us have been victims of wicked people, such as violent bullies, hateful bigots, and vicious criminals. Some of those are openly wicked; others are impostors, hiding what they do under an appearance of righteousness. Even if we ourselves have not been victims, such wicked people still affect us. We are sickened at heart when we learn of their horrible acts. The way the wicked brutalize children, the elderly, and other defenseless ones fills us with horror. Wicked people exhibit a spirit that seems subhuman, animalistic, even demonic. (Jas. 3:15) Happily, Jehovah’s Word counters such bad news with good news. w17.04 10 ¶4




