Can You Auxiliary Pioneer in March and April?
1 No doubt many of you will give an unhesitating “Yes” as your answer to the above question. Your plans are already made. Others will likely reply: “Maybe . . . if all goes well.” Still others could feel that auxiliary pioneering this March or April is not possible and so reply: “I would like to, but I can’t.” In what way do you respond?
2 Little needs to be said to those whose plans have already been made, except for words of encouragement to keep such plans before Jehovah so that they will be firmly established. (Prov. 16:3) If you are uncertain at this point, we recommend that you realistically consider your circumstances and search out whatever may help you to enroll. Take advantage of the positive influences in your congregation that can encourage and motivate you. Are there regular or auxiliary pioneers in your congregation? Ask them if you can work along with them for a month or two. And since over 84,000 shared in the auxiliary pioneer work last April, very likely you will find right in your own congregation others with circumstances similar to yours who are planning to pioneer again this March and April. Talk with them. They may be able to offer helpful suggestions. Make plans with them, if possible.
3 The elders are intensely interested in helping all to increase their service to Jehovah. Feel free to approach them regarding any assistance they may be able to offer. Prayerfully consider your prospects. Seek out those in a position to encourage you; you may find you will be able to serve as an auxiliary pioneer this March and April.​—Prov. 13:20.
SACRIFICES NECESSARY
4 Even if you feel you definitely cannot pioneer, because of your personal circumstances, you may find it possible to expand your ministry during March and April by working along with the pioneers just as often as you can. Some publishers set personal goals as to the increased number of hours they will try to get in during these two months. Those who, despite difficulties, succeeded in reaching their personal goals, found that taking the matter to Jehovah in fervent prayer strengthened their determination. (Phil. 4:6) They recognized that certain things would have to be sacrificed and that vigorous exertion would be necessary. (1 Cor. 9:23; Luke 13:24) In planning their schedule, some decided to rise early each morning to ensure a full day of activity. Others cut back on recreation and other personal pursuits. Whole families have cooperated to minimize the time and effort spent on even necessary things around the home. In a sense, they have “put off every weight” and are directing all their efforts toward pioneering for a month or two. (Heb. 12:1) Many have told us about the blessings they received as a result.
5 To give a few examples, a 74-year-old sister with heart problems took up the challenge. With the support of others, she succeeded and enjoyed every minute of it. A brother who is a real-estate salesman adjusted his schedule for showing homes so as to allow time for him to auxiliary pioneer. An elder who works nights rearranged his sleeping schedule so he could get his time in service. He felt rewarded by having shared in the field service with so many of his brothers and sisters. A newly baptized person was able to auxiliary pioneer with the help of her unbelieving husband. Yes, all these individuals and many more made personal sacrifices, but how richly rewarded they felt because of experiencing the blessing of Jehovah!​—Prov. 10:22.
PLAN NOW
6 Now is the time to make definite plans for March and April. Elders can help by making well-organized arrangements for service, determining literature needs in advance and providing ample territory. It would also be good to keep the congregation informed as to special service arrangements through appropriate announcements. By all means make pioneering a subject of personal and congregational prayer.​—1 Tim. 2:8.
7 Will we exceed the more than 29,600 who auxiliary pioneered last March and the 84,285 of last April? Those of us who can make room for auxiliary pioneering this March and April can best answer. Proverbs 10:21 tells us that “the very lips of the righteous one keep pasturing many.” May you be one whose lips will be used in this way during March and April to bless Jehovah and direct sheeplike ones onto the path of life.

