Increase Praise to Jehovah During February
1 Jehovah deserves to be praised! He is worthy of honor because he created all things, including us. (Rev. 4:11) We owe our lives to him. For this we are grateful and feel motivated to praise Jehovah in any way we can.
2 How can you personally increase your praise to Jehovah during February? One fine way is by having a good share in distributing the Live Forever book. This may require careful planning and perhaps some adjustments in your regular daily schedule. Also remember to invite others to work with you in field service. Especially try to help publishers who may be having difficulty in getting out regularly in the house-to-house ministry.
3 The Live Forever book has proved to be especially effective in moving others to praise Jehovah. It not only presents basic truths in a clear manner but also builds appreciation for the fine qualities of our God. Continue to offer this outstanding Bible study aid during February.
STARTING BIBLE STUDIES
4 Another way that we can honor Jehovah is by diligently following up interest we find in the field. Placing literature is just the start. The real goal is to make disciples who can share with us in praising our God. (Compare Acts 2:42, 46, 47.) Strive to start studies. The Live Forever book makes conducting studies easier, enabling even newer publishers to have a share in this important work. One publisher, who conducted no studies before the book was released, reported later: “I have three studies and a fourth one ready to start. . . . I cannot say ‘Thank you’ enough for making Bible studies easy to conduct.” Have you sincerely tried to start a study in this book? Have you prayed about the matter? If you feel you need help, have you asked your Congregation Book Study conductor or another experienced publisher to assist you? Others are willing to help you and in this way also increase praise to Jehovah.
5 The Live Forever book has been instrumental in increasing the number of Bible studies being conducted. During the 1982 service year, we averaged 344,493 Bible studies each month. However, during the 1983 service year when we started using the Live Forever book in field service, we averaged 390,678, an increase of 13 percent, more than 46,000 additional studies each month! In April of 1983 we had an all-time peak of 436,500 studies. These studies are being conducted with people whose lives can be saved. The end result will be a further increase in praisers of our deserving God.
STUDY WITH WHOM?
6 With whom can studies be started? In addition to those started with interested persons found in house-to-house work, others may be started with relatives. Look what happened when Andrew enthusiastically reported the good news to his fleshly brother, Simon Peter. (John 1:40-42) Or, have you talked with your neighbors, co-workers or schoolmates, offering them a Bible study? Since you are close acquaintances, there is already a foundation on which you can build. Prayerfully consider these opportunities and act in harmony with your requests.​—Matt. 7:7.
7 You may already have as many studies as you can conveniently conduct. What can you do if you find others who are willing to study? You can start a study and turn it over to someone who would like to conduct it. Or perhaps you could assist someone to start a study for him to conduct. Could you take someone with you when starting a study and progressively turn the study over to that one? In all these ways you may share in increasing praise to Jehovah.
8 Truly, Jehovah deserves to be praised. Each day, consider every opportunity to praise him and take advantage of it. (Ps. 145:2) This will bring us deep satisfaction now. And what of the future? May we, and those persons whom we help qualify, share in praising Jehovah eternally.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

