Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 29
Song 63
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Relate experiences from placing Live Forever book in January. Remind brothers to bring Our Ministry book to next week’s Service Meeting.
20 min: “Increase Praise to Jehovah During February.” Talk with audience participation. In connection with paragraph 4 interview a publisher who has started a study in the Live Forever book. Highlight why it is easier to conduct studies in this book.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With the Live Forever Book.” Question-and-answer discussion. Get comments from audience as to what points they use in making their transition into the book. Make some assignments in advance. Have brief, well-prepared demonstration of how to make a transition. Encourage all to share in offering the Live Forever book in service this Sunday, the first Sunday of the month.
Song 66 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 5
Song 70
15 min: “An Encouraging U.S. Service Report.” Animated talk, preferably by service overseer. Include encouraging aspects of congregation year report as indicated on Congregation Analysis Report sent to Society at end of service year. Suggest areas needing special attention for future progress of congregation and explain what may be done with view to improvement. Warmly commend brothers for accomplishments in field service. End this portion with necessary local announcements and encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
15 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, from beginning of chapter 8, page 81, to subheading on page 87. Enthusiastic talk by capable elder. Emphasize need to display Jesus’ attitude toward the field ministry. Call special attention to points in paragraph 2 on page 83.
15 min: Arrange locally according to needs of congregation. Or one of the elders may present a talk based on the article “Duties or Pleasures​—Which Do You Put First?” from the November 1, 1983, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 45 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 12
Song 81
15 min: Local announcements. Remind brothers to bring School brochure and Our Ministry book to Service Meeting next week. Also, talk by elder covering information in article “When Our Hearts Impel Us to Do All We Can” in the December 1, 1983, issue of The Watchtower, pages 20 through 22. Tie in congregation accounts report.
15 min: “Expanding Your Ministry as a Regular Pioneer.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. If possible, interview one who started regular pioneer service during the past two or three years and highlight what obstacles he or she had to overcome to get into the pioneer work. Suggest to those undecided that they may want to ‘try it for a year.’
15 min: “Can You Auxiliary Pioneer in March and April?” Discussion between an elder and two who are planning to auxiliary pioneer. Cover highlights of article as well as describe how some in congregation have been able to schedule their affairs to enroll. Mention number of auxiliary pioneers congregation had in March and April 1983.
Song 23 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 19
Song 116
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage support of magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Share brief presentation from current magazines.
20 min: “Extracurricular Activities.” Well-qualified elder to cover material on pages 22-5 of School brochure. Reason with the brothers as to why the instruction to ‘keep separate from the world’ is wisely applied in connection with many of these activities. Help the young people see the benefit of loyally following the direction provided through “the faithful and discreet slave.” Try to get children to comment on what goes on in connection with these activities, emphasizing the value of keeping separate. Elder conducting should show sensitivity and balance in covering this material.
15 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. Talk by capable elder. Involve the audience. Start at subheading on page 87 and go to subheading on page 92. Have someone from audience relate experience he or she had in either street witnessing or conducting Bible study.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.

