Presenting the Good News​—With the Live Forever Book
1 Jesus Christ had “sayings of everlasting life.” (John 6:68) From whom did he receive these? In prayer to Jehovah he said: “The sayings that you gave me I have given to them.” (John 17:8) Thus Jesus faithfully passed on to his disciples information from his Father that dying men need in order to come into a good relationship with Jehovah and receive everlasting life.
2 Jesus knew that his disciples would not keep this vital knowledge to themselves but would make it known to others “through their word.” (John 17:20) Today there are over two and a half million persons who possess ‘the knowledge that means everlasting life.’ (John 17:3) It is their privilege to pass on to still others this precious, lifesaving knowledge that originated with Jehovah God.
3 There is no doubt that the Live Forever book is a fine instrument to use in helping to impart “sayings of everlasting life.” But for people to realize its value, we need to show them how the scriptures in our Topic for Conversation relate to points in the book. How have you been doing this?
FITTING ILLUSTRATIONS
4 After reading John 17:17, you could say: “It is clear from this that Jesus Christ believed God’s Word is the truth. Nevertheless, there are many people today who wonder if the Bible is really true. Perhaps you, too, have questions about this. [Wait for response.] I have found some very interesting information about this question that you may appreciate. [Read paragraph 21 on page 53.]” You could then briefly go on to mention points about the Bible’s accuracy in scientific matters, in relating historical events or particularly in foretelling future events. Perhaps you could conclude with the information on pages 54 and 55 or the reasoning developed in paragraph 28 on page 56. Then offer the book.
5 Or, after discussing John 17:17, you could say: “For something to be the truth it must be supported by facts. So, if the Bible says that we can live forever, we can rightly ask, ‘Is this based on facts or just speculation?’ It may interest you to know that informed men have said that living forever is a possibility for humans. For example, let me share with you these published comments.” Then read paragraph 4 on page 7. After making comments regarding the need to take in further knowledge of the Bible, offer the book. Of course, there are many other portions of the Live Forever book that could be highlighted according to the householder’s needs or interests.
STARTING STUDIES ON THE FIRST CALL
6 Have you ever attempted to start a Bible study on the initial call? Not long ago a sister called on a lady who was just leaving her home to mail a letter. After placing the Live Forever book, the sister took the occasion to demonstrate a home Bible study and made arrangements for this to continue. As the sister was leaving, the woman commented that the letter she had been about to mail was addressed to a religious organization, asking them for a Bible study!
7 How could you go about offering a Bible study on the first call? After placing the book, you might say: “This book is designed not just for reading but also for making a careful study of the Scriptures. Note the questions at the bottom of the page that relate to each paragraph and the cited scriptures. To assist people with their study, we are offering a free home Bible study course. If you have a few moments, I would like to demonstrate how these discussions are conducted.” Then in a relaxed, conversational manner you can discuss a few paragraphs either in the first chapter or a portion thereof in which the householder may have shown special interest.
8 May Jehovah bless our united efforts to share with others the lifesaving knowledge that has been entrusted to us.

