Watching the World
Not Worth the Risk
◆ Drivers who try to “save time” by speeding and taking other risks in traffic are not gaining much, and may lose more. In the Federal Republic of Germany, in a test that covered about 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers), two identical cars were fitted with instruments that registered every driving detail. One driver was told to drive to the limit of his ability and to make the trip as fast as possible. The second driver was instructed to make the trip in a relaxed style, avoiding any risk and moving only as fast as the traffic flow. The “fast” driver finished only 31 minutes ahead of the other. He had used his brakes 1,339 times, including four emergency stops. The “slow” driver braked only 652 times, with no emergency stops. The faster driver used 10 gallons (38 liters) more of gasoline, and his car had greater wear and tear on brake linings, suspension, engine and transmission. He no doubt experienced greater wear and tear on his own nervous system as well. An observer concluded: “You will be doing yourself and your vehicle a good turn by slowing down. And you’ll only lose a few minutes or seconds in the process.” In addition, since speeding is a major cause of traffic deaths and injuries, the attempt to “save time” may prove costly indeed.
Unusual Kidney-Stone Treatment
◆ Doctors at the Munich University Clinic in the Federal Republic of Germany say that patients with kidney stones will soon be able to have them dispersed painlessly and without surgery with the aid of ultrasonics. A device has been developed that focuses ultrasound waves on kidney stones by means of a special reflector. The sound crushes the stones into fine particles within a thousandth of a second. It is claimed that this does not damage adjacent soft tissues. The patient is then X-rayed, and any remaining large particles of the stone are dispersed by a second treatment. It is hoped that the apparatus will be suitable for treating about half of those who have kidney stones.
Highway Outbursts More Violent
◆ Arguments among angry motorists have long marked driving in many lands. But in the past few years this has taken an ominous turn. The following report is an example: “Denver area motorists have been attacking each other in record numbers recently, sometimes provoked by nothing more than an omitted turn signal or slow acceleration from a stop sign. Fifty shootings, stabbings, beatings and other violent acts between motorists were reported last month alone, according to Denver police, who say that figure probably represents only one-third of the attacks which actually occurred during the period.” (Rocky Mountain News, Denver) Police find it disturbing that the attacks are being committed by ‘just ordinary, otherwise law-abiding citizens.’ “But they’re starting to shoot each other and that’s what’s got us worried,” stated a police officer. In Chicago a policeman said: “This is getting more common. Everybody seems to be uptight.” Nor are the police immune. In California last year, 413 policemen were attacked and injured by motorists whom they had pulled over, compared to 244 in 1973. Why this ominous trend? Cited are the increased tensions in society, more congested traffic, as well as the growing abuse of alcohol and drugs.
Marijuana Dangers
◆ “Marijuana poses a substantial risk. Anybody who takes that drug and thinks that nothing is happening to his body has lost his mind. Marijuana is a powerful drug that is influencing his entire body.” That assessment comes from Dr. Robert DuPont, Jr., chairman of the World Psychiatric Association’s drug-dependency section. He also said: “One of the most distressing facts to me has been the difficulty communicating the risks of marijuana use.” He noted that “marijuana does influence the hormone levels of the body, the body’s immune response, the way we think and the tissues of the lung. Bronchitis, for example, is common in people who smoke marijuana cigarettes. Furthermore, there is laboratory evidence to show that marijuana is more likely to cause cancerlike lesions than is cigarette smoke.”
Learning from Fireflies
◆ What makes a firefly glow? This happens when, within its body, an enzyme called luciferase comes in contact with another substance called luciferin. The luciferin molecules become excited, releasing excess energy as light. This light is called ‘cold light’ because it does not give off heat, as fire and electricity do. Scientists are trying to imitate the process, although at present luciferase is too complicated to synthesize. One product has resulted in a lightstick that produces a yellow-green cold light. It is a plastic tube that contains two liquids, one of which is in an inner glass vial. When the tube is bent enough, the vial breaks, allowing its liquid to mix with the liquid in the rest of the tube. The chemicals react and produce excited molecules that give off visible light. But only 16 percent of the chemicals’ molecules give off light, compared with 88 percent for the firefly. Yet, the lightstick is luminous enough to be read by for three hours, and can be used as a marker or warning light for about 12 hours.
Recreation Woes
◆ Millions of Americans have become ‘weekend athletes,’ trying to keep weight down and get the body in shape by engaging in various activities such as jogging. However, many of these are older persons who push an out-of-condition body too far, too fast. As a result, injuries in recreational athletics have climbed steadily: in 1963 there were about 12 million injuries; in 1971 there were 17 million; last year there were some 20 million, many requiring hospitalization. Some died due to heart attacks. Says orthopedist B. Berson of New York: “People should realize they simply cannot ask their bodies to do as much at age 30, 40 or beyond as they could at age 20.” A complete physical examination is recommended for anyone over 35 before any exercise program is begun.
‘Better Cows’ by Computer
◆ The Holstein-Friesian Association of America is using a computer to “build a better cow,” said a spokesman. The identities of more than 10 million registered Holstein cattle, dating back almost 100 years, are stored either on microfilm or in the memory banks of the organization’s computer. The system allows the parentage, pedigree and characteristics of any registered cow or bull to be determined almost instantly. Officials say that matching by computer has resulted in a dramatic improvement in the milk production of Holsteins, the country’s most popular dairy breed.
Underemployed
◆ The Bureau of Labor Statistics in the United States indicates that about one quarter of the college graduates who look for work through 1985 will have to settle for a job that traditionally has not required a college degree. In other words, about 10.4 million graduates will be competing for about 7.7 million jobs that usually require a college degree. That leaves 2.7 million to look for other work.
Weeding with Geese
◆ More California cotton farmers are discovering that weed-eating geese are better at stripping away unwanted vegetation than are machines. The weeder goose, a variety of the white Chinese goose, is an undemanding worker, conscientious, and deposits an enriching fertilizer. The geese have a voracious appetite, but only for weeds and grass, not for the cotton plants. Farmers who use them say that the geese can clean out a field of tough Johnson or Bermuda grass. Once the grassy part above ground is eaten, the geese dig their two-inch beaks into the ground and begin dining on the roots, avoiding the roots of the cotton plants. Farmers say that it costs about $9 (U.S.) an acre to use the geese, compared to $75 an acre for human labor. Now some fruit growers also are using the birds. Of course, the grass-eating geese cannot be used to weed lawns because they will eat the lawn grass too.
Electricity from Sunlight
◆ The generation of electricity directly from sunlight is making progress. New Scientist tells of solar cells that now convert about 11 percent of the sunlight falling on them to electricity. Two years ago, solar-cell efficiency was only about 4 percent, and last year about 8 percent. Work continues toward making the cells even more efficient.
Vanishing Life-Forms
◆ Worldwatch Institute warns that at the present increasing rate of extinction, hundreds of thousands of plants and animals may vanish by the end of this century, fundamentally altering the nature of life on earth. From 1600 to 1950 one species of animal, on the average, disappeared per decade. Today the rate is one per year. Plant life is now becoming extinct at the rate of about one species each day. It is feared that in 20 years the extinction of plant and animal life may reach one an hour. Experts blame air and water pollution, the destruction of natural habitats, excessive hunting, growing of a few types of crops where many types of plants had existed before and “exploding” populations that spread cities, towns, homes and factories into country areas.
Good Leadership
◆ A Texas research organization studied 16,000 executives to determine which type of leadership got the best results from workers. It discovered that executives who achieved the best results tended to care about people as well as profits. Those who achieved average results concentrated on production. Those who achieved the least were “obsessed with their own security.” The high achievers listened to both workers and superiors, while the low achievers tended to avoid communication, relying on policy manuals instead. Researchers concluded that high achievers are not born, but are made. The key is training young executives to have proper views toward work and workers.
Automobile Expenses
◆ What does it cost to run your car? “A lot more than you think,” says Changing Times magazine, basing its conclusions on the analysis of a company that specializes in living costs. After considering insurance, license, taxes, maintenance, gasoline, oil, tires, trade-in value, finance charges and depreciation for four years of driving, at 14,000 miles (22,500 kilometers) a year in 1978 cars, the company gave these average weekly costs:
​—Four-cylinder subcompacts: $46 (U.S.)
​—Six-cylinder compacts: $50
​—Six-cylinder medium-size cars: $51
​—Eight-cylinder full-size cars: $58
​—Full-size luxury cars: $83
Different Telescope Design
◆ A 236-inch reflecting telescope, the largest in the world, is now operational in the Soviet Union. Astronomers feel that this is likely to be the largest reflecting telescope that will ever be built. Larger ones would be subjected to excessive strains caused by gravity, which would impair the precision needed. However, astronomers feel that they can overcome the problem by clustering a number of medium-size telescopes whose combined light-collecting ability would be equivalent to a much larger one. Such an instrument is now under construction on Mt. Hopkins, near Tucson, Arizona. It is a union of six 72-inch telescopes clustered like the revolving chamber of a “six-shooter” revolver. All six telescopes point in the same direction. If it proves successful, other multiple arrangements are being considered that could yield a performance equal to a 1,000-inch telescope.

