
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Training New Ones




Why Important: New disciples of Jesus must learn to observe “all the things” he commanded, which includes teaching the truth to others. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Many new ones have already qualified to join the Theocratic Ministry School and may have witnessed informally to family members or friends. However, as they grow in appreciation for what they are learning and come to know that Jehovah wants all people to hear the good news, they may express a desire to share in the field ministry. (Rom. 10:13, 14) After new ones are approved as unbaptized publishers, good training will help them be more confident as they take this necessary step in their spiritual progress.—Luke 6:40.



How to Do It:
           Help the new publisher obtain the publications he will need for preaching and teaching. Show him how you organize your witnessing case, and explain the purpose of each publication you carry.

            Together, select a sample presentation from Our Kingdom Ministry and practice it. Encourage the new one to put the presentation in his own words. Rehearse settings from the Ministry School book, page 82, that are common in your territory. Emphasize the importance of modest dress and grooming.—2 Cor. 6:3, 4.

            Provide progressive training. Show the new publisher a territory card, and teach him how to use a house-to-house record. Demonstrate how to make a record of interested ones. Teach him how to use jw.org in the ministry as well as the booklet Good News for People of All Nations. Help him cultivate the interest he finds.—1 Cor. 3:6.

            Be patient, and offer commendation. (Prov. 25:11) Set a good example. Your zeal and the personal interest you show will have a positive effect for years to come.




Try This During the Month:
            Work in the house-to-house ministry with your student, and take him on a return visit or a Bible study. If you do not have a student, invite a less experienced publisher to work with you.





