
“These Words . . . Must Be on Your Heart”




Parents are like shepherds. They must take good care of their children, who could easily stray and become vulnerable to attack. (Prov. 27:23) How can parents fulfill this role? They must spend time each day communicating with their children in order to know what is in their minds and hearts. (Prov. 20:5) Also, parents must build with fire-resistant materials to fortify the faith of their children. (1 Cor. 3:10-15) The video “These Words . . . Must Be on Your Heart” underscores the importance of regular family worship. View it as a family, and then discuss the following questions.
(1) What led to the Roman family’s lack of spiritual focus? (2) Why was Brother Roman’s initial attempt at family worship unsuccessful? (3) What Scriptural formula leads to the best chance of success in raising children? (Deut. 6:6, 7) (4) What can contribute to better communication in the family? (5) What kind of sacrifices do children need their parents to make? (6) How were Brother and Sister Barrow a positive influence on the Roman family? (Prov. 27:17) (7) What must a family head do in advance in order to make family worship successful? (8) How did Brother Roman begin to turn things around in his family? (9) Why is consistency vital for family worship? (Eph. 6:4) (10) What are some practical ideas for family worship? (11) How was Brother Roman calm but firm when helping Marcus to appreciate the importance of doing what is right? (Jer. 17:9) (12) How did Brother and Sister Roman reason with Rebecca to help her make the right decision regarding her relationship with Justin? (Mark 12:30; 2 Tim. 2:22) (13) How did Brother and Sister Roman manifest faith when making adjustments in their lives? (Matt. 6:33) (14) How does this video emphasize the need for family heads to provide spiritually for their families? (1 Tim. 5:8) (15) What is your determination as a family head?
NOTE TO FAMILY HEADS: This modern-day drama was presented at the regional conventions in 2011. At that time, did you detect a need for improvements in your family worship? What about now? If further adjustments are needed, please prayerfully make changes for the everlasting benefit of your family.—Eph. 5:15-17.




