Announcements
LIVING NOW AS A NEW WORLD SOCIETY
Christians today take the same position Jesus did when on earth. They are in the world, but are not a part of it. During December all now living as part of the New World society will with one accord tell others of God’s loving and good provisions. After a brief, pointed sermon, three books and three booklets, all setting forth Kingdom truths, will be offered to the householder on a contribution of $1.50, or the New World Translation of either the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures together with one book on a contribution of $2. All who wish may share in this work.
“THIS GOOD NEWS OF THE KINGDOM”
“Is there any good news on earth today? Yes, there is, in spite of all the saddening, disturbing and frightening conditions that we all see on earth today. And this good news, too, comes from a most reliable and authoritative source, and is backed up by the very things that we see happening and existing. Why, then, should you be sorrowful and hopeless, when you can be joyful and hopeful and can make others happy with this good news? Read this little booklet, and then, we feel, you will want to pass its refreshing information on to others.”
The above is the brief message with which the publishers introduce the new booklet “This Good News of the Kingdom”. It takes as its title the words spoken by Christ Jesus, and in very simple language it explains just what this good news for our day is that Jesus said should be preached now in all the inhabited earth. You should read it yourself, and you should distribute it to others for them to read. Individual copies of this 32-page booklet are 5c. But for distribution to others, why not get 7 for 25c or 30 for $1?
1955 YEARBOOK AND CALENDAR
In the eagerly awaited Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses for 1955 is found another service year’s report on the combined preaching activity of God’s servants throughout the world. You will read of the preaching work in new lands that have been opened up and of the tremendous forward movement of the New World society throughout the earth. A copy will be sent to you for 50c. The calendar for 1955 is also ready. It displays the Bible text that Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will have in mind throughout the year as they continue preaching the Kingdom message. Calendars are 25c each, or 5 for $1 to one address.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of January 2: The Fight for Freedom to Preach World-wide.
Week of January 9: Never Fighting Illegally or Quitting World-wide preaching.

