Living Now as a New World Society
IN SPITE of two world wars since 1914, underneath its surface this old world has not changed: selfishness motivates and strife separates the nations, and the unseen wicked forces are still in control. However, since 1914 something new has emerged, a New World society, which is no part of this world and which was brought forth, not by political catch slogans, but by the wisdom and power of God and as a result of Jehovah’s people preaching the good news of the Kingdom.—Matt. 24:14.a
This New World society, consisting of upward of a half million Christians, is to be found on all continents and in many islands of the sea, working together in a common work, meeting together regularly and worshiping the one true God.
Living now as a New World society requires not only that we keep separate from the world but also that we do not bring its wicked ways into our society. It also means giving our allegiance to God’s kingdom, “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”—Acts 5:29, NW.
With the Kingdom’s establishment in 1914 added responsibilities have come upon dedicated Christians: no longer may ‘every man do what is right in his own eyes,’ nor may we act independently or indulge in private interpretation, but we must be theocratic in thought, in deed, in worship and in organization.
Living as a New World society also means that we show love and put up with our brothers in love, straightening out our difficulties in line with Matthew 18:15-17; for we did not leave the squabbles of the old world only to have new ones of our own making, did we? Dare we let Armageddon come down upon us as a thief with us in a provoked state against our brother?—Eph. 4:26, 27.
And living as a New World society means that we are to be a happy people. Rather than introvertedly dwelling on the mistakes of the past let us take joy in the fact that the Kingdom is established, the King is present, the great ingathering is taking place and the complete vindication of Jehovah’s name is imminent. Yes, let us keep our minds on what Jehovah God has done, is doing and yet will do to his unfading glory and the blessing of his faithful people.
Truly, those of the New World society should be the most joyful, the most optimistic people on earth, for Jesus promised: “Everyone that has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive many times more and will inherit everlasting life.”—Matt. 19:29, NW.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, August 15, 1953.

