Acts of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Modern Times
The brief report that you have read about Jehovah’s witnesses on all the continents of the world and the islands of the sea certainly shows that they are confident and determined, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, to give a good witness concerning God’s kingdom and they are doing this in all the world. (Matt. 24:14) Jehovah’s Christian witnesses everywhere know that we are living in perilous times, but this will not stop them from exulting in Jehovah. This is the time to make known his word and kingdom and to aid people to take their stand on Jehovah’s side before the end of this system of things comes.
We would like to go into detail now as to how the work of Jehovah’s witnesses in modern times got started in the Central African Republic, in China, Hong Kong and Macao, and in Germany. You will learn of the terrible trials, hardships and persecution that came upon many of our brothers over the years. Despite this hatred, thousands upon thousands of people are seeking the truth and associating themselves with Jehovah’s Christian witnesses, even though they know them to be a persecuted and hated people. Jesus said: “If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.” (John 15:18) Your being “objects of hatred by all the nations on account of my name” is something that Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere will have to go through. (Matt. 24:9) While Jesus was upon the earth training his disciples, he told them: “The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness concerning it that its works are wicked.” (John 7:7) Nevertheless, his disciples kept on walking with Christ Jesus and took up the same message concerning God’s kingdom that he preached, and it was not long until the world also hated them.
It is easy to see that one cannot serve two masters, and the history of faithful Christian witnesses of Jehovah in all parts of the world is faith inspiring. They feel just like Paul who said: “Nevertheless, I do not make my soul of any account as dear to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received of the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.”​—Acts 20:24.

