Yeartext for 1974
“Although the fig tree itself may not blossom, . . . I will exult in Jehovah himself.”​—Hab. 3:17, 18.
With bad economic conditions in the earth can people exult in Jehovah himself? Those who understand Jehovah’s purposes can do so because they realize that what they see transpiring in the earth today, such as unrest of nations, wars, pestilence, earthquakes and famines staring them in the face, means that a big change is due. A great tribulation is about to come upon the earth and it will culminate in Armageddon. That will mean the destruction of everything that is evil, to be followed by the abyssing of Satan himself and a victory for Jehovah God through his Son Christ Jesus, who will establish an everlasting government upon the earth.​—Dan. 2:44.
Jehovah’s witnesses have acquainted themselves with Bible prophecies and so expect the great tribulation and the battle of Armageddon. They do as Jesus Christ said: “As these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift your heads up, because your deliverance is getting near.” (Luke 21:28) They are determined to be like Habakkuk, who said: “I will exult in Jehovah.” This means that they will leap vigorously for joy, they will spring up like a hind, they will keep in high spirits, they will be rejoicing in Jehovah’s triumph. Habakkuk goes on to say: “Jehovah the Sovereign Lord is my vital energy; and he will make my feet like those of the hinds, and upon my high places he will cause me to tread.” (Hab. 3:19) During these very troublesome days throughout the world, we certainly want to stay close to Jehovah and His organization, taking in all the spiritual food so as to keep our spirits high. The only way we can do this is to take in the refreshing water of truth. (Ps. 42:1) In these troublesome times we must have confidence that “God is for us a refuge and strength, a help that is readily to be found during distresses. That is why we shall not fear, though the earth undergo change and though the mountains totter into the heart of the vast sea.”​—Ps. 46:1, 2.
Certainly we should not be downhearted or despair or be impatient. We know Jehovah will perform his work even though famine may come in the land, as is pictured by the fig tree not blossoming. Even so, “without fail I will exult in Jehovah.” This is no time to panic with fear. This is no time to yield to the attacking enemies and to renounce one’s faith and cease to be one of Jehovah’s Christian witnesses. This is the time to be like a hind, leaping for joy, happy because of knowing Jehovah’s purposes and seeing his accomplishments. Together the remnant of the anointed and the great crowd of “other sheep” can truly take the attitude of Habakkuk. After Habakkuk describes the terrible situation that will exist in the earth during the climax of the great tribulation at Armageddon, he says: “Yet, as for me, I will exult in Jehovah himself; I will be joyful in the God of my salvation. Jehovah the Sovereign Lord is my vital energy; and he will make my feet like those of the hinds, and upon my high places he will cause me to tread.” (Hab. 3:18, 19) We can join the prophet in saying this.

