Announcements
SHARERS WITH JEHOVAH RATHER THAN WITH DEMONS
In typical Israel the anointed priesthood served as Jehovah’s ministers. They were allowed to partake of portions of sacrifices made on the altar to Jehovah, which made them sharers with Jehovah at his altar table. All Israel was commanded to refrain from making offerings to idols, for to do so would mean their sharing with demon gods in opposition to Jehovah. Similarly, today men must choose whom they will serve. (1 Cor. 10:21, NW) To choose to serve Jehovah willingly one has the grand privilege of sharing with Jehovah at his altar table and finds resultant joy. Those failing to worship and serve thus are drawn into the camp of demon worshipers, there being no neutral ground in this day of decision. Service of God means doing his will, proclaiming his truths to his name’s honor and vindication. In the month of April Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to share at Jehovah’s altar table by offering their willing service and inviting others to learn of him by subscribing for the Watchtower magazine. A free booklet entitled “What Do the Scriptures Say About ‘Survival After Death’?” will be given with each new subscription at $1 a year.
A SHIELD FOR YOUR MIND
In today’s cold war for control of the world’s thinking, the minds of men are the bull’s-eye of propaganda. What is your defense? ‘Wisdom,” says the Bible. (Eccl. 7:12) Wisdom discerns the truth that shields the mind from the missiles of propaganda. For this reason Awake! magazine is one of your best defensive weapons. It is concerned only with the truth. It is uncensored by selfish interests, uninfluenced by common misconceptions. No advertisers dictate the policy of Awake! and no doctrinal prejudice influences its presentations. From all over the earth, from every field of human endeavor, Awake! draws the facts that will keep you properly informed, alert to present world trends, aware of man’s misleading schemes. Awake! is pledged to righteous principles, to warn of dangers ever present, to point the way to real freedom. In this way it brings true faith, hope and courage to its readers, twice a month. Subscribe for Awake! today. The cost is only $1 for a year. Three informative booklets will be sent free if you write at once.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 21: “Love Builds Up.” Page 177.
April 28: Love Builds Up the New World Society. Page 183.

