Words of Health from the Ill
ARE you limited by poor physical health? Is there a temptation to say: “In my condition, what can I do for Jehovah? How can I publicly praise him?” Does physical incapacity prove a “thorn in the flesh” that succeeds in keeping you from meetings of true worshipers? If so, remember Paul’s attitude toward his “thorn in the flesh”: “When I am weak, then I am powerful.” How? As Jehovah told him: “My power is being made perfect in weakness.”—2 Cor. 12:7-10, NW.
Physical sickness does not mean spiritual sickness, nor does a fettered body necessitate a fettered mind. Many are the physical invalids whose minds are bright as sparkling winter snow, fully capable of “holding the pattern of healthful words” that they have heard, “with the faith and love that are in connection with Christ Jesus.”—2 Tim. 1:13, NW.
But how does an invalid bring that mind into association with other Christian minds for learning and with good-will minds for teaching and praise? Consider the answer of one of our correspondents, an invalid for over thirty-three years, bedfast with crippling arthritis, paralyzed, physically helpless, totally blind.
Says she: “I am happy to say that I am a regular publisher, doing not only incidental preaching, but with the kind help of others I write letters by dictation, sending along a booklet, magazine or tract. Also, for nearly a year now I have had the joyful privilege of attending a Bible study at the service center just across the street from our home. This is possible because four years ago an intercommunication system was installed between our home and the home of my sister and brother-in-law to meet my needs. This system is now being used to make it possible for me to “attend” the studies. I do not always hear everything spoken, but enough so that it has become a rich blessing. I also have the happy privilege of joining in by answering questions directed to me.”
Now how about you? Perhaps your case is not identical with this one. It may be that not all the measures above are possible for you. But the point to note from all this is that, by giving thought to your case and ferreting out all the possibilities, your mind too may find new avenues of expression. With expression, your outlook will brighten, your mind sharpen, your spiritual joys increase and you can say with the apostle Paul: “When I am weak, then I am powerful.”

