From Our Readers
Jewish Heritage
I tell myself, here is one Jew changing to Jehovah’s Witness, and this magazine is capitalizing on it. That is not what I object to. I object to your giving the impression that the Jehovah’s Witness member is an angel (morality, clean speech and honesty). And that the rabbi is only out to make a fool of the chap and that, in fact, the rabbi is the fool​—how wrong you are! (Jewish clergymen wanted to humiliate me​—The rabbi avoided answering the question—​He didn’t know the answer​—He never phoned back.) If you want to “have a dig,” don’t pick on us, the Jewish people. Religions should not verbally attack other religions. Surely you believe that, as long as one believes in God, it does not really matter which religion he takes, as long as he is honest to himself and strives to be a good person, all round.
S. J., South Africa
We were not trying to capitalize on a story of one Jew changing to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses nor were we attacking the Jewish religion. This was a true-life story about a Jewish couple telling how certain doubts arose as to their Jewish heritage and of their experiences with certain rabbis who tried to convince them to stay with their Jewish traditions. The article was published to help others who felt that something was missing from their Jewish heritage, and to help them to get an understanding of the true faith and hope of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David and the prophets. We believe that if a person is a true believer in God, he should seek to know who God is, what his purposes are, copy his qualities and walk in the way he requires according to the Holy Scriptures. It is stated at Ecclesiastes 12:13, 14 (Leeser’s translation): “Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. For every deed will God bring into the judgment concerning every thing that hath been hidden, whether it be good, or whether it be bad.”​—ED.
I would like to congratulate you for the article “Something Was Missing from My Jewish Heritage.” Being of Jewish origin, I have had exactly the same thoughts and experiences. Jehovah’s Witnesses have helped me to discover the truth and now I want to be baptized. How happy I am that God guided my steps on the narrow path! May I thank you for writing such fine, interesting articles that hold my attention from start to finish.
C. C., France
Life in Outer Space
This is in reference to your article entitled “Searching for Life in Outer Space.” The argumentation was superbly developed. This reader was impressed.
K. H. B., Germany
Migrating Birds
I must commend you for the article “Astonishing Facts About Migrating Birds.” This should attract ones of all ages. This article, as well as the one “Eye Fashion​—Not Just for Looks,” shows a sense of humor as well as seriousness in praising our Grand Creator.
S. S., Oregon

