Comfort for the Repentant
HAVE you ever erred seriously and later been deeply sorry for your wrongdoing? It can happen even to longtime servants of God. King David of Israel committed adultery, yet when he displayed sincere repentance, God forgave him and upheld him during the difficult years of his life that followed.​—2 Samuel 11:2-4; 12:13.
Where can you receive help and comfort if you have committed a serious moral wrong? The experience of a young woman who, at the time, had recently begun studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses illustrates. She explains:
“My parents were far from what you would call religious. Dad used to comment on the gross hypocrisy of the churches he had personally investigated. Nevertheless, he taught my two older brothers to be gentlemen and me to be a lady. Dad actually had long talks with me, explaining that sexual pleasures should be reserved exclusively for marriage. He was such a fine man; our family felt a deep loss when he died in 1967.
“Six years later, I began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. However, after only a few weeks, my Bible studies were interrupted when a work assignment took me to England. There I fell in love with a close working companion, and, in time, he asked me to marry him.
“But what can happen when an unmarried man and woman, deeply in love, are alone in a beautiful hotel suite with the fragrant aroma of flowers filling the air, soft lights and music in the background, plus an extensive selection of fine wines on hand? First a touch, then a kiss, and one thing quickly leads to another. Then, before one realizes it . . .
“At the time, I really didn’t know what the Bible said about fornication, although I suspected that it didn’t approve. But I was well aware of what my parents had taught me. My conscience began to bother me more and more. I felt so ashamed and disappointed in myself. For nearly two weeks I brooded, until I couldn’t stand it any longer. I wasn’t quite sure where I stood with Jehovah, and it bothered me.
“Finally, I built up courage and arranged to speak with my friend Robin, with whose wife I had arranged to continue my Bible studies. He was a Christian elder of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I don’t know why I wanted to confess. I certainly didn’t look at Robin as some sort of priest. Nevertheless, I felt compelled to seek his advice and counsel.
“Robin listened attentively, patiently, while I literally blurted out to him what I had done. He handed me his clean, white handkerchief so that I could dry my tears. And for what seemed to me like hours, he made no remark at all. Finally, he said:
“‘Oh, you precious child. Don’t you know Jehovah cares for you? I know it took a lot of courage and humility to come to me. These are rare qualities, rare indeed. I’m sure God can mold a person like you and use you. Of course, I’m not saying that what you did was right because it wasn’t. Let’s see what the Bible says about your problem, in hopes that we may both be upbuilt and strengthened. All right?’
“I shall never forget the first Bible text Robin turned to. I could barely read it through my tears. ‘So that, on the contrary now, you should kindly forgive and comfort him, that somehow such a man may not be swallowed up by his being overly sad.’ (2 Corinthians 2:7) So it was that during my last few weeks in London, I received an abundance of helpful Bible counsel and instruction from Robin and his wife.
“I explained to the man I loved my new resolves about meeting God’s standards of moral cleanness and made clear my intentions of eventually becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He hesitantly agreed to my decision, not fully understanding.”
Shortly afterward this young woman was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. And although deeply in love, she told the man that she would not marry him unless he, too, became a servant of Jehovah God. When he did not progress spiritually, she eventually broke off their relationship. She began the full-time pioneer ministry and has been a regular pioneer now for ten years.
[Blurb on page 22]
“First a touch, then a kiss, and one thing quickly leads to another”

