From Our Readers
Oral Rehydration Saves Lives
I would like to thank you immensely for the article “A Salty Drink That Saves Lives!” (September 22, 1985) A young man’s mother was struck with diarrhea and vomiting, and he bought some drugs for her treatment. Hearing about this, I showed him the prescription for the oral rehydration drink printed in your article. Instead of using the drugs he bought, he used this prescription. Within one hour his mother, who was near death, revived and gained strength. His father also took ill and was given the remainder of this mixture. He recovered immediately.
D. A. O., Nigeria
The Catholic Church and Marriage
I am writing in connection with the article “The Church’s View of Sex and Marriage.” (November 8, 1985) For six years I studied at the seminary of Our Lady of Fatima, but I left because of the great negligence on the part of our superiors in teaching us how to serve God and man and also because of the homosexuality practiced by those attending. On leaving the seminary, many of us had difficulty in adjusting to married life because what we had been taught degraded marriage in that sexual relations in the marriage arrangement were considered a sin. Continue to publish such upbuilding material.
M. B., Brazil
Peace in the Family
I am writing to express my thanks for the article “‘It’s All His Fault!’​—Peace Despite Differences.” (January 8, 1986) My husband reads your magazine though he does not share my faith. After having read the article mentioned above, he was compelled to clarify a question that had put a strain on our relationship, and he embraced me tenderly. This, thanks to your articles that deal with actual facts and give advice that touches the heart.
M. P., Italy
Horoscopes​—Helpful or Harmful?
I must protest against the ignorance of your article “Horoscopes​—Helpful or Harmful?” (September 8, 1985) The moon can exert a pull on our vast oceans, yet we so-called intelligent humans don’t want to admit that there may be some effect on us as well. Serious astrologers do not profess to be able to read the future by looking at the heavenly bodies. They believe the stars can help us to become aware of when it is time to apply caution, to stop a negative behavior pattern for instance. The constructive use of astrology helps us to come to terms with and consciously transform the more difficult or negative sides of our nature.
A. C., Australia
To accept that our relatively close moon can exert a physical gravitational pull on bodies of water on earth in no way supports the thought that stars located many light-years away have any influence on human behavior. It is God’s Word that is a true light for our guidance. (Psalm 119:105) It is ‘all Scripture inspired of God that is beneficial for teaching that the man of God may be completely equipped for every good work.’ (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) It is God’s Word and holy spirit that is able to discern the intentions and thoughts of the heart. (Romans 8:26, 27; 1 Corinthians 2:10-13; Hebrews 4:12, 13) And it is through accurate knowledge of God’s Word that we are able to clothe ourselves with a new personality according to God’s image. (Colossians 3:9, 10) To look to the stars for guidance, whether for knowledge of the future or to make improvements in one’s nature, is contrary to God’s Word. (Isaiah 47:12-15) Please see our issue of May 8, 1986, with the subject “Your Future​—Written in the Stars?”​—ED.

