The Fascination of the Occult
WEIRD, mysterious, spooky​—these are words many people use to describe the occult. The term literally means “hidden,” “covered over,” “concealed.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary defines occult: “Something mysterious or supernatural.”
So occultism includes experiences and happenings that cannot be explained in the normal way. Paranormal, defined as “beyond the range of scientifically known or recognizable phenomena,” is another term frequently used when discussing the occult.
Beginning in the 1930’s, Dr. Joseph Banks Rhine pioneered studies of the mysteries of occultism and introduced the term “extrasensory perception” (ESP). He predicted that, “as the enlightenment of scientific research spreads to the dark corners wherein mystery still lurks,” occultism will pass away. “Just as the occult practices of astrology gave way to a science of astronomy, occult alchemy turned into scientific chemistry, magical cures were supplanted by sound medicine,” he said, “so in time will a more reliable foundation supplant the remaining occult systems.”
Yet, even after extensive studies of occultism, mysteries remain unsolved. And the fascination, rather than diminishing, is growing.
Reasons for Fascination
Take the case of Mrs. Rosemary Brown. As a child, she received little musical training. She was not particularly interested in music. Then, in adulthood she began to produce musical scores that she claimed were dictated to her by Beethoven, Brahms, and Schubert. Describing the investigation of her case, the The New Encyclopædia Britannica, 1977, Macropædia, reports:
“When these [musical scores] were shown to outstanding experts they agreed that had these scores been found in some derelict attic they would have been regarded as genuine; each was not simply reasonable pastiche but genuinely expressive of what was known of the composer’s emotion and personality. Apparently even highly trained musical experts could not easily (if at all) have produced work of this calibre; how a simple working-class woman with very little musical training could have done so is baffling, particularly as she was never taught composition.”
For many, such experiences are fascinating. How are they possible? The New Encyclopædia Britannica acknowledges: “The idea of the ghosts of these Germanic musicians queuing up to dictate their recent compositions to this woman in English is not appealing.” And yet the encyclopedia observes: “The facts are undisputed; no obvious explanation is forthcoming. As such, the story is typical of many others.”
Consider also the report from Flixborough, South Humberside, England. A massive explosion at a chemical plant took place at 4:53 p.m. on June 1, 1974. Nearly five hours earlier a young woman living some 25 miles (40 km) away told of seeing a newsflash on television, reporting the explosion as well as the death and injury of workers at the plant. Before 2:00 p.m. that day, she spoke about it to two other people who were visiting her. Then, in the evening the TV news reported the event, giving the time of the explosion as late afternoon. All the TV companies broadcasting in that area denied transmitting any such newsflash earlier.
Are you, along with so many others, fascinated by such experiences?
Then there is a “game” that may seem such an innocent pastime. It is played with what is called a Ouija board. While there are variations of the board, generally it is a rectangle 24 by 18 inches (61 by 46 cm) and a quarter of an inch (0.6 cm) thick. On it are the letters of the alphabet, a row of numbers from 1 to 9 and 0, the word “Yes,” and the word “No.” The most important part is the small, heart-shaped indicator that points to each letter to spell out a message.
Players put the board on their laps and lightly place their fingers on the heart-shaped indicator. Then they ask a question and wait for an answer. Does it really work? Those who say it does are legion. “Sometimes the answers are amazingly accurate,” wrote columnist George R. Plagenz. “The Ouija board has even been known to foretell events which later have taken place.”
The game fascinates millions. In fact, a few years ago it was called “the most popular game in the U.S.​—more popular than Monopoly.”
Growing Popularity
“The occult, the supernatural and the paranormal are big business,” observes U.S.News & World Report, “with people from all walks of life paying top dollar to consult with readers, seers and other self-proclaimed visionaries.”
Among such visionaries are astrologers, psychics, spiritualists, and others of the some 600,000 occult practitioners in the United States, who charge fees of up to $300 for their advice. Millions of dollars are also spent on magazines, books, tapes, and movies that deal with occultism.
The situation is similar in Britain. Mail-order shops supplying books and objects used in occult practices are experiencing a business boom. One of Britain’s leading suppliers reportedly processes “hundreds of orders each week and has some 20,000 regular clients on his books.”
“Five years ago,” reports London’s Guardian of March 6, 1985, “there were thought to be some 60,000 witches in Britain: today the number is estimated by some witches to have grown to 80,000.”
Indeed, the Western world is experiencing what The World Book Encyclopedia calls “a widespread revival of occultism.”
Though the occult fascinates many, what does scrutiny of it reveal? Are there dangers involved? If so, what are they?
[Picture on page 4]
Selling occult objects is a growing business

