VOL. XXXVI OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"As Deceivers and Yet True" 291 

Concessions for the Sake of Others 291 

Justification— Reckoned and Actual 292 

Present Object of Consecration 293 

All the World are Yet Heathen 294 

"The Saints Shall Judge the World" 294 

The Two Great Intercessions 295 

Overcoming Desires for Earthly Things 296 

Primary Battle is With Self 296 

Victory or Death! 297 

The Christ Perfected by Suffering 297 

God's Purpose in Testing Us 297 

The Fire to Burn Among Us 297 

Tortures of Today More Refined 298 

Elisha's Restitution Ministry 299 

Pure Water— Pure Truth 299 

Other Restitution Types 301 

Awakening the Shunammite's Son 301 

Interesting Letters 302 

News from French Bible Students 302 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 



and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



"CREATION" SCENARIO IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES 

In the Lord's providence the SCENARIO of THE PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION has been translated into several foreign 
languages, and we now have it in stock in goodly quantity, 
as follows: 

IN SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete $0.25 postpaid 

Paper " " 15 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 

IN GERMAN AND FINNISH (glossed paper, embossed, 
like English Ed.): 

De Luxe, gold edge (Finnish only) 1.00 " 

Cloth, red edge (German and Finnish) 50 " 

Paper, 3 Parts (German and Finnish) per set. .25 " 
Newspaper edition, 4 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper ed. only, 2c ea.; per set .05 " 
Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half 

from above prices if shipment is ordered charges collect. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
November follow: (1) 154; (2) 7; (3) 321; (4) 281; (5) 333; 
(6) 265; (7) 102; (8) 98; (9) 155; (10) 106; (11) 129; (12) 165; 
(13) 45; (14) 303; (15) 144; (16) 62; (17) 60; (18) 325; (19) 299; 
(20) 258; (21) 87; (22) 261; (23) 107; (24) 267; (25) 38; (26) 14; 
(27) 193; (28) 145; (29) Vow; (30) 227. 



PRICE OF DIAGLOTT REDUCED 

Hereafter we will have the Diaglott only in leather binding, 
and at the reduced price of $2. We have filled all back 
orders. If you have ordered the Diaglott and have not received 
it, please notify us at once. If you paid the former 



price of $2.50 within the last two months, please take a credit 
of 50 cents on your next remittance for THE WATCH TOWER. 
We still offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year, as a premium, 
to any one not a TOWER subscriber, who orders the Diaglott; 
this introduces to him THE WATCH TOWER literature. 



R5773 : page 291 

"AS DECEIVERS AND YET TRUE" 

"Giving no offense in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed; 
...by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report; 
as deceivers, and yet true."— 2 Corinthians 6:3,8. 

HOW varied are the experiences of an active 

Christian— experiences of honor and of dishonor, 

of being well reported and evil reported, 

of suffering for righteousness' sake, 

of being called deceivers, etc. ! Some may 

have a greater amount of publicity than do 

others and thus attract more attention. 

Some may have a wider field of service and 

greater opportunities than do others. But 

every faithful disciple of Christ will have 

more or less of these experiences enumerated in our text 

and in its context. Some will speak well of us and others 

will speak ill. Throughout the entire Gospel Age it has 

ever been true that "all who will live godly in Christ 

Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12.) 

Especially has this been true of these last days. 

Amongst the brethren of Christ all of the Lord's 
saints should have honor. While none should seek for 
honor of the brethren, nevertheless a great deal of esteem 
should attach to every one who has taken the great step 
of full consecration to God— no matter how ignoble the 
person may be according to the flesh. The fact that God 
has begotten any one of His Holy Spirit should make us 
wish to respect those whom the Lord has thus honored. 
Each of the saints, however humble, is greatly loved of 
our Lord Jesus; and therefore all of the children of God 
should take heed how they treat even the least of His 
little ones— their brethren. 

"As deceivers, and yet true." On many occasions the 
great Apostle Paul was dishonored; at other times he 
was honored. He had evil reports spread abroad concerning 

R5774: page 291 

him, as well as good reports. He was considered 
a deceiver by many who professed to be the people of 
God. Yet all the while he was true to the Lord and to 
His people. He was considered a renegade Jew, because 
he was not teaching obedience to the Law Covenant as 
the only hope of everlasting life. He was teaching 



what was far superior— salvation through faith in the 
merit of the sacrifice of Christ; and this doctrine made 
the Law look inferior. Therefore his fellow Jews accused 
him of being unfaithful to the Law of their 
fathers. To a Jew this was considered a great dishonor. 

As a result, very evil reports of St. Paul went broadcast 
among the unbelieving Jews everywhere. He was 
branded as one of the greatest deceivers ever known. 
Everybody was warned against him— "Watch out for 
that man Paul; he is coming ! Whoever will kill that 
fellow will do God a service and glorify His name!" 
"Why?" might be asked by some. "Because he is deceiving 
the people by telling them that Jesus of Nazareth 
is the Messiah— telling them that when they die to the 
Law they become alive through this man Jesus- 
telling them that the Law which we have had for sixteen 
hundred years is of no account! He is trying to draw 
people after that Nazarene!" 

Then St. Paul was also accused of trying to draw 
followers after himself. Yet he was true to God in every 
sense of the word. He was true to the nation of Israel, 
to the Law, and to the Prophets. He was true to God 
and to the Lord Jesus Christ. He was no deceiver in 
any sense; he was merely called a deceiver by those who 
were blinded by the god of this world. He seemed "as 
a deceiver" to his blinded Jewish brethren and to those 
who served false gods. 

CONCESSIONS FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS 

The Apostle's earnest desire and endeavor was to 
give "no offense in anything, that the ministry be not 
blamed." The word ministry is frequently used today in 
reference to the clergy as a whole. The ministers, or 
preachers, of the churches are spoken of as the ministry; 
such as the Presbyterian ministry, the Methodist ministry, 
etc. But we think St. Paul had a broader thought; 
namely, that of proclaiming the true Gospel of Christ 
or of serving the Lord in whatever manner. He used 
the word in the sense of service. A minister is a 
servant. All who serve the Lord, whether publicly or 
privately, are ministers, and should endeavor to live so 
true a life, so honorable a life, that even though they 
may be called deceivers, nevertheless others will take 
note of their exemplary walk. Each should try to live 
in so inoffensive a manner that the world will call it 
good, proper living. Live above reproach. Give no just 
cause for offense. This is the Apostle's thought, that we 
should not give any one just reason to be offended at us. 

Among the Jews, for any one to eat pork would be 
an offense. He would be looked down upon and not 
considered properly religious. In our day, the eating of 
pork is not condemned by many. But failure to observe 
Sunday as the Sabbath would be considered a violation 
of a Divine command. We might, so far as our own 
consciences are concerned, do certain things; yet the 



ministry, the service of the Truth, might be blamed for 
our so doing. Many are very scrupulous as to Sunday 
observance as the Sabbath. So, as the Apostle enjoins, 

R5774 : page 292 

we should, as children of God, be so careful in our conduct 
as to go to the extreme of faithfulness, wherever 
possible. The conscientious scruples of an individual 
are not to be treated lightly. 

In some parts of the world it is the custom to remove 
the shoes before entering the house. If we were in such 
a locality we should conform ourselves to the general 
custom. We should ever be willing to adapt ourselves to 
the custom of those around us where we can do so without 
violating our conscience, if by conforming to their 
ways we would avoid offense or increase our influence 
for good. To fail to do this would be a lack of love and 
consideration, and hence in some manner, an injury to 
the Lord's Cause. 



R5774 : page 292 

JUSTIFICATION-RECKONED AND ACTUAL 

TO GET the right focus upon the word "justification," 

our minds should go back to ascertain 

what is the difficulty with man, and 

why there is any need of justification by 

faith or any other way. We find that the 

necessity for justification before any man 

could be in accord with God lies in the fact 

that man had become a sinner, and that a 

death sentence had been pronounced upon 

him by God, the great Judge of the Universe. 

Before his fall, Adam was called the son of God; 

but no man since Adam had been called by that name, 

until Jesus came. Jesus was called the Son of God because 

He was so born, and because He was such in His 

pre-human condition, before He came into the world. 

Adam and his children were condemned to death because 
they were unworthy of life, under the sentence, 
"Dying, thou shalt die." Not only so, but sickness and 
mental imperfection accompanied the fulfilment of the 
sentence. A further part of the sentence was separation 
from God, alienation from God. In order for man to 
come back into God's favor and blessing, a sacrifice for 
sins was required. Until that sacrifice would be made 
there could be no justification, in the full sense. 

The Apostle Paul pointed out that under the terms of 
the Mosaic Law given to Israel, the people were promised 
harmony with God, forgiveness of past sins, justification, 
if they would keep the Law. But after trying for fifteen 
hundred years and more, they found that they were unable 



to keep it; "for by the works of the Law shall no 

flesh be justified" in God's sight. (Gal. 2:16.) But meantime, 

while none were justified under the Law, because 

unable to keep that Law, there were some who commended 

themselves to God by the manifestation of a proper spirit, 

a spirit of faith and obedience. These we speak of as 

belonging to the Ancient Worthy class. This class includes 

Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job, Moses and all 

the Prophets, besides others not so notable. See 

Hebrews 1 1 . 

But the justification which came to the Ancient 
Worthies was not a justification to life. No real justification 
to life could come until the Redeemer had laid 
down the Redemption-price for sin— until Christ had died, 
"the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God." 
(1 Peter 3:18.) Since Christ died for this purpose, it 
follows that none were brought to God until after Christ 
had died; for if, according to God's arrangement of "like 
for like," it had been possible to justify mankind by any 
other means, then Christ had not died. If these Ancient 
Worthies could have been justified to life by some other 
method, so could other people have been; and the death 
of Christ would not have been necessary. 

JUSTIFICATION TO LIFE 

What then was the particular difference between the 
relationship to God which was granted to Abraham and 
all the other Worthies of olden time and that which comes 
to us who in this Age exercise faith? For the word 
"justification" is used of both classes; Abraham was justified 
by faith, and so are we— "Being justified by faith, we 
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
But Abraham and others of previous ages, could not in 
a legal sense, have peace with God; for Christ had not yet 
come to earth and died for the sins of the world. And so 
the record is that Abraham was justified to friendship 
with God. Friendship with the Creator was one of the 
things which were lost when Adam sinned. Therefore 
man was a stranger to God, an "alien through wicked 
works." But God counted Abraham as His friend. 

Abraham's faith was manifested by his works. His 
was not an empty profession of loyalty to God; he demonstrated 
his faith in a practical way— by his works of 
obedience. After his faith had been tested, he received 
certain promises from God. He was no longer dealt 
with as an enemy. But being justified to friendship with 
God is a different thing from being justified to life. If 
Abraham had been justified to life, without Christ, then 
neither he nor the remainder of the world would have 
needed a Savior at all. All could have been alike justified. 

But the Scriptures assure us that there is no other 
name given under Heaven by which we must be saved 
except the name of Jesus. Therefore if we cannot be 
saved except through faith in Jesus' name and in His 
blood, by being brought into relationship with God 



through Him, neither could Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 
Moses, the Prophets and other Worthies have been otherwise 
justified. As they could not exercise faith in a 
Savior who had not yet come, and whose work had not 
been accomplished, it follows that they were never legally 
justified; i.e., justified to life. However, their obedience 
to God was tested and demonstrated, and they were 
treated as God's friends and made acquainted to some 
extent with certain features of the Divine Program. God 
said that He would not hide these things from Abraham, 
because he was His friend. 

But there has been a curse resting upon the human 
race ever since the fall of Adam. There could not be a 
blessing of God and a curse of God upon the world at 
the same time; and the blessing has not yet come. Only 
those who are in Christ Jesus have as yet come legally 
from under this curse. These alone have been justified 
to life. Abraham was informed by the Lord that this 
blessing would come to mankind through his posterity, because 
of his great faith and implicit obedience. But 
Abraham was never invited to present his body a living 
sacrifice, as believers of this Gospel Age have been invited 
to do. There was none prior to Jesus' time, manifestly, 
who could have been granted the opportunity to 
"follow in His steps."— 1 Peter 2:21. 

R5775 : page 292 

Jesus referred to this when He said, "there hath not 
arisen a greater Prophet than John the Baptist; nevertheless, 
I say unto you that the least in the Kingdom of 
Heaven is greater than he."— Luke 7:28. 

GOD'S SERVANTS AND HIS SONS 

If all in the Kingdom of Heaven are greater than John 
the Baptist, they are greater also than Enoch, Abraham, 
etc. Why is this? The answer is that it is not that the 

R5775 : page 293 

followers of Jesus are more worthy than John the Baptist 
or these others, but that the opportunity of becoming 
members of the House of Sons has been granted only 
since Pentecost, and is granted to those alone who take 
up their cross and follow Jesus. Since He was the Forerunner 
of this class, none could precede Him. Those who 
may become sons are pointed out in the Gospel of St. 
John: "To as many as received Him [Jesus], to them 
gave He power [liberty, privilege] to become sons of God, 
even to them that believe on His name, who are begotten, 
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will 
of man, but of God." This class are the favored ones, 
they have lived in the appointed time, "The acceptable 
time"; and the Message of the Gospel has gone to these. 
The Gospel did not go to Abraham in the same sense, 



although St. Paul says that the Gospel was preached 

beforehand to Abraham. We see that God first proclaimed 

His purpose to him. But that feature of the 

Gospel which is preeminently the preferential feature, 

Abraham did not know; for the Sacrifice for sins had 

not yet been given. God could not justify any to life 

and make of them sons until after Jesus had come and 

prepared the way. The privilege of becoming sons of 

God was, then, given first in Jesus' day, to those who received 

Him. All who had previously exercised faith 

were friends or servants. Israel was called a "House of 

Servants." "Moses verily was faithful as a servant over 

his House, but Christ as a Son over His own House, 

whose House are we, if we hold fast the confidence and 

the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end."— Heb. 3:1-6. 

So we see the contrast between the House of Servants 
and the House of Sons, and the reason why. We are not 
to think of the Church as being better intentioned or as 
being less sinful by nature than were Abraham, Isaac, 
Moses and the Prophets; but this opportunity of sonship 
has come to us, and it did not come to the others, because 
their day was not God's "due time." It is for us, then, 
to avail ourselves of the great opportunity of entering 
the House of Sons and thus become heirs of God. 

JUSTIFICATION TO LIFE FOLLOWS CONSECRATION 

So, then, the Church were justified to life, through the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice. Hence they had something 
which God could accept. And day by day they offer 
themselves to God. Abraham had no merit by which he 
could be an acceptable offering to God; for, being a 
member of the fallen Adamic race, he was a sinner, and 
the Divine arrangement was that nothing blemished 
could come to God's altar. But now since Christ has died, 
has risen again, has ascended up on High, has entered 
into the presence of God and made satisfaction for the 
Church, He imputes His righteousness to us at our consecration, 
and our justification is made complete— we are 
freely justified from all things— made alive from the dead. 
It is ours then to present our bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, and receive the begetting to the 
new nature— the Divine. 

Not having this full justification, neither Abraham nor 
any one else, up to the time of our Lord, could present 
his body to God as a sacrifice. So we find no preaching 
of this message prior to Jesus' day. We read that Christ 
"brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel." 
These were not brought to light before He came. The 
way to life had not been opened up. To Abraham there 
was a dim, shadowy promise that there would some time 
be a blessing for all mankind; but neither life everlasting 
nor immortality, the highest form of life, was made clear 
to him. He knew simply that a blessing was coming; 
and he had the faith to seek to walk in harmony with God. 

Seeing how wonderful are the opportunities afforded 



the Gospel Church, "How shall we escape, if we neglect 
so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken 
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard Him?" (Hebrews 2:3.) Here the Apostle is distinctly 
declaring where this "great salvation" began to be 
proclaimed. It was never made clear before. The 
Apostles of our Lord could proclaim a salvation from 
death, a salvation unto life, then offered; but those who 
lived prior to their time could not have proclaimed it. 
Jesus was the first who brought the Message of Salvation 
to us, and His words on the subject were corroborated 
by His Apostles, who heard Him. 

Justification to life follows, never precedes, consecration. 
Consecration is the devotion of one's being to the 
Lord, the surrender of one's will and all to God. In connection 
with the Church, it signifies not only the giving 
of one's self to God, but also His acceptance of the one 
thus offering himself. As it is written, "Sanctify [consecrate] 
yourselves, and I will sanctify [consecrate] you." 
During the Gospel Age it has been our privilege to offer 
ourselves to God through Christ, who, as the great High 
Priest, accepts these offerings until the predestinated 
number is complete. Whoever is thus justified and accepted 
by Him is acceptable to the Father; and to such 
a one comes the Holy Spirit of the Father, begetting him 
to the Divine nature. 

During the three and a half years of our Lord's ministry, 
He declared to His disciples that if they would 
abide in Him, the blessing of life should be their portion. 
But they had no legal standing before the Father until 
first Jesus had finished His sacrifice, had been raised from 
the dead and had ascended up to Heaven, there to appear 
in the presence of the Father for them. Then they received 
the Holy Spirit in begetting power, with outward 
demonstration. This came to them at Pentecost. They 
had consecrated themselves before, and Jesus had accepted 
them. Everything was done that could be done 
at that time; but everything was not up to the standard 
required after Jesus had appeared before God and made 
satisfaction for those who were to constitute His Church. 
At Pentecost, and not until then, they were anointed of 
the Spirit and recognized as sons of God. This was the 
completion of their consecration— its result. 

THE PRESENT OBJECT OF CONSECRATION 

So the Scriptures inform us that God is pleased to 
accept in the same way all who come unto Him through 
Christ, until the time when the last member of the foreordained 
number of the Elect has been chosen. After 
that the door will be shut— not the door of mercy, but the 
door to the High Calling to joint-heirship with Christ, 
offered only during the Gospel Age. This is what consecration 
is for during the Gospel Dispensation. The 
Father has ordained that before He will impute the merit 
of Christ to us, we must do our part by the dedication of 



ourselves to God. Only those who do this will be justified 
to life through Christ's imputed merit. 

"If any man will be My disciple, let him deny himself 
and take up his cross and follow Me." This is the condition. 
In no other way will Jesus become our Advocate. 
"We [the Spirit-begotten] have an Advocate with the 
Father." He is not the world's Advocate in any sense. 
He is our Advocate, the Advocate of all who come unto 
the Father by Him. The great Divine Court may not be 
approached except by those who are authorized. 

Jesus became the great High Priest by the offering up 
of Himself. And having become the great High Priest 
over the House of God, He is the Advocate of all those 

R5775 : page 294 

who come into harmony with the Father. He is their 
Surety. As such, He has a right to make His own terms; 
and the terms that He has made are that He will accept as 
disciples only those who renounce self, and take up their 
cross and follow Him. 

We see the great mass of professed Christian people- 
four hundred millions of them— some of them in jail, some 
of them in the army, on one side or the other. The most 
of them are striving for wealth or for the pleasures of 
sense. Few are justified to life. Some may be justified partially 
as was Abraham. In proportion as any are trying to 
do right, they are justified. But in order to have life, it 
is necessary to have this full justification, which can come 
to us only after we have made a complete consecration to 
the Lord.— Romans 12:1. 

ALL THE WORLD ARE YET HEATHEN 

The heathen were not justified in Abraham's day, nor 
in Jesus' day; in fact, the heathen are not justified yet; 
and all the world are heathen, except those who have 
come into covenant relationship with God. The Israelites 
spoke of the remainder of the world sometimes as heathen, 
sometimes as Gentiles, sometimes as people— three different 
terms meaning all who were not children of Israel. 

Since Christ has come among us and inaugurated the 
way to life through His blood, we are privileged to enter 
into a special Covenant with God. The New Covenant is 
reserved for Israel and the world by and by. The special 
Covenant which God has for the Church is shown in His 
command, "Gather My saints together unto Me, those 
who have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) 
Only by sacrifice— only by the giving up of our 
will, our all— can we come into this Covenant, and none 
can come except through the great Advocate. It is a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. The heathen, the world, have entered 
into no such Covenant of Sacrifice; therefore they 
cannot come into the position of sons of God. None can 
enter into this position without a definite knowledge of 
its terms and conditions. 



When the Jewish Epoch had terminated and the 
Gospel Call was extended to the Gentiles, Cornelius the 
Roman centurion was the first to enter. We read that 

R5776 : page 294 

before Cornelius had received this Call he was a just 
man, who feared God, who prayed always, and who gave 
much alms to the people. We would say that he was a 
very fine character. But he was a Gentile, and so had 
not been able to come in under the Call. But now the 
time had come for the Gospel Message to go to the 
Gentiles. Did the Father receive Cornelius at once? No. 
The Lord sent an angel to him, who said, "Thy prayers 
and alms have come up before Jehovah." They had been 
noted before, but God could not receive them until now. 

And did this message to Cornelius bring him into 
covenant relationship to God? Oh, no! The angel of the 
Lord merely directed him what to do. He said, "Send 
men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is 
Peter. He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner. He shall 
tell thee words to the saving of thyself and thy house." 
These words were necessary; the knowledge was indispensable. 
There can be no justification in ignorance. 
Such is not God's Plan. Cornelius and his family were 
ready; for he had previously been a consecrated man to 
the best of his knowledge. St. Peter would not have 
known how to deal with the Gentiles; therefore God 
gave him a vision, a special manifestation of His will. 

The case of Cornelius gives us the clue to the fact that 
God does not justify any Gentiles except those who come 
into Covenant relationship with Him, and that there is no 
way of coming into such relationship except that way 
which He has appointed. The one special way for the 
Jew was through Moses and the Law Covenant, and 
thence into Christ. The method by which the Gentile may 
come into covenant relationship with God is by being engrafted 
into the "good olive tree," whose root is the 
Abrahamic Covenant. (Romans 11:16-22.) Whoever 
would belong to Christ must become an Israelite, a member 
of the true Seed of Abraham. This we do by faith in 
Christ, the Seed, and baptism into His death. Hence we 
are no longer of the world. The whole world are heathen; 
for they are not in covenant relationship with God. They 
are Gentiles; and Gentiles are heathen, from the standpoint 
of the Scriptures. 

"THE SAINTS SHALL JUDGE THE WORLD" 

All the families of the earth shall yet be blessed and 
enlightened, through Abraham's Seed, which Seed is 
Christ. "And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the Promise." We have not 
yet blessed the world; we have not yet judged the world; 
for we are not yet instructed to do so. But the Apostle 
Paul said, "Know ye not that the saints shall judge the 



world? Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" (1 Corinthians 6:2,3.) 

It is not while we are in the flesh, 

but after our glorification in the First Resurrection, that 

we are to be judges. 

So, then, God has appointed a great Day of Judgment 
for the world (Acts 17:31; Psalm 96:9-13; 98:1-9; Acts 15:13-18); 
and the saints are to be the judges with Christ. 
The world are still condemned in Adam. They are yet to 
have justification— "whosoever will"— and the groundwork 
of that justification is to be laid, first of all, in that 
New Covenant which Christ will make with Israel as the 
result of His sacrifice on Calvary. It will be exactly like 
the old Law Covenant, except that it will have a better 
Mediator— The Christ, Head and Body. As the old Law 
Covenant was established on the basis of the typical sacrifices, 
so the New Covenant is to be established on the 
basis of the "better sacrifices." The work of the Gospel 
Age has been the offering of the better sacrifices than bulls 
and goats— Jesus, the Head, and the Church, His Body 
members, associated with Him as parts of these "better 
sacrifices." He will have completed all the sacrificing 
when the last member of His Body shall have passed 
"within the Veil." Then the opportunity to follow in 
Jesus' steps will no longer be given; for there is only a 
definite number to become the Priesthood. These will 
have part in His resurrection, the Chief Resurrection. 
Speaking of these the Apostle says, "We must all be 
changed"; for "flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom 
of God." (1 Corinthians 15:50-54.) When this 
class shall have inherited the Kingdom, they will be prepared 
to do the work of judging the world. 

THE WORK OF THE NEXT AGE 

Immediately after satisfaction is made to Justice for 
the sins of the world, all mankind will be turned over to 
the One who bought them. Then Justice will have no 
more to do with them; for they will be in the hands of 
Christ. He will then be the Life-giver, the Judge, the 
King. During His Millennial Reign His work will be the 
awakening and the uplifting of all for whom He died. 
The opportunity will be given to all to come into harmony 
with the Lord, of devoting themselves to His service. The 
reward for their so doing will be everlasting life and full 
perfection of being on the human plane. Those who thus 
devote themselves will rise out of degradation to full perfection. 
Their perfecting will be their justification; for 
this means to be made right. 

The difference between the justification to which the 
world will attain and that of the Church now, is that with 

R5776 : page 295 

the Church it is a justification by faith, a reckoned justification, 

attained instantly, by the imputation of the merit 

of Christ; while the justification of the world will be by 



works— it will be a making right actually, an actual perfection. 
But there will be no justification without faith 
and heart loyalty, either now or then. Under the Lord's 
present arrangement also it is important that there shall 
be perfect works. The New Creature is actually just, 
perfect; and the Father imputes to our imperfect bodies 
the merit of Jesus and counts us dead according to the 
imperfect flesh. Thus our imperfect works are counted, 
through Christ, as perfect. The perfect New Creature, 
from its small beginning, is gradually to grow and develop 
to maturity, using the fleshly body as its servant. 

With the world it will be different. Theirs will be a 
work of gradually coming to a condition of justification, 
of perfection of mind and body, under the cover of the 
New Covenant, sealed with the blood of Christ. They 
will be coming nearer to this perfection day by day and 
year by year, rising toward perfection. When they shall 
have reached that pinnacle, they will be fully justified, or 
fully made just; and if they pass faithfully their final test, 
after the close of the Millennial Age, the reward of everlasting 
life will be given them. But the dead of the world 
will not live, from God's standpoint, until the close of that 
Age, when Christ shall have finished His Mediatorial 
work. Meantime, those who will not come into accord 
with God's arrangement will die the Second Death; they 
will be destroyed as "natural brute beasts."— 2 Peter 2:12. 

The Second Death is like the first death, only that it 
will be instantaneous; it will not be for the father's sin, 
but for the individual's own sin; and it will be eternal. 
There will be no redemption from it, as from the first 
death. "Christ dieth no more." The reward of the 
righteous will be everlasting life; none will be granted it 
until they have been fully tested and proven. Therefore 
God can guarantee that thenceforth there will be no more 
crying or sighing or dying forever; for all will be fully 
in accord with Him. 

We believe that the time for the world's trial will soon 
come; but we do not think that the door of the Kingdom 
is yet closed. Of course we have no special information 
on the subject; for the Lord does not say that the door to 
the High Calling will close as soon as the Times of the 
Gentiles are ended. The door will be closed when the 
last member of the Body of Christ shall have been 
gathered, shall have been found faithful, shall have finished 
his course and passed beyond the Veil. "Those who 
were ready went in with Him to the marriage, and the 
door was shut." It will be closed then; for none thereafter 
can be added to that elect number. We believe that 
this time is not far distant. 



R5776 : page 295 

THE TWO GREAT INTERCESSIONS 



"Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost that 
come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession 
for them."— Hebrews 7:25. 

ST. PAUL is here contrasting the great Priesthood 

of our Lord Jesus Christ with that of 

the Aaronic Order— the typical priesthood 

under the Mosaic Law. He is pointing out 

to the believing Hebrews the difference between 

these two priesthoods; for the Jews 

had difficulty in understanding how there 

could be a change of priesthood. Their 

priesthood had stood for sixteen hundred 

years. It seemed neither right nor reasonable 

that any should say that God's institution of the Law 

arrangement was not designed to be lasting. It was necessary, 

therefore, that St. Paul should deal with the matter 

extensively. Throughout the entire book of Hebrews he is 

seeking to point out that the Aaronic priesthood was merely 

typical, merely a one-sided priesthood. The great antitypical 

Priest was to be not only a sacrificing, but also a 

reigning Priest. He was to have a great work beyond the 

time of sacrificing. He was the antitype of Aaron, but 

His Priesthood was of an Order entirely different— much 

superior every way. 

This great Priest, when enthroned in glory, was designed 
to be after the Order of Melchizedek. He was not 
to be after the Order of Aaron. The Apostle pointed out 
that of this glorious Priest it was prophesied (Psalm 1 10:4), 
"Jehovah hath sworn and will not repent, Thou 
art a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek"— a 
Priest upon His Throne. 

R5777 : page 295 

Those various sacrifices which the Aaronic Order offered 
year by year were only types of the "better sacrifices." 
(Hebrews 9:23.) The typical priest offered first 
for his own sins, then for the sins of all the people. 
(Leviticus 9:7,8,15; 16:11,14,15.) So the great antitypical 
Priest offers first a sacrifice for Himself (the 
members of His Body), then for the sins of the whole 
world. The blood which was offered in the typical sacrifices 
was the blood of bulls and goats; the blood of the 
"better sacrifices" is the blood of The Christ, Head and 
Body, which has been in process of shedding all down 
through the Gospel Age. But it is the merit of the blood 
of Jesus, the Head of the Body, which gives virtue to the 
sacrifices of the Body. 

"ABLE TO SAVE TO THE UTTERMOST" 

The Apostle shows that the sacrifices of the typical 
priests were efficacious for only a year; that they needed 
to be offered every year; and that the priests of the 
Aaronic Order were not suffered to continue in their office, 



by reason of their death. But the great antitypical Priest 
is to continue always. He will never have a successor; 
for He "ever liveth." He is to accomplish all His great 
work and then sit down on the right hand of the Majesty 
on high. He will never again need to sacrifice, to die for 
sin; for He will have done this effectually, once for all. 

Furthermore, the Apostle, in considering the work accomplished 
by this great Priest for all the people, shows 
how much more efficient His work is than that of the 
earthly priest. The priests of the Aaronic Order, the 
Levitical priesthood, could not properly sympathize with 
the people, nor were their sacrifices able to really take 
away sin. (Hebrews 2:17,18; 4:15; 10:4.) But this 
great antitypical Priest, whose Priesthood is continual, is 
not only able to take away sin, but is able to sympathize 
fully with those for whom His "better sacrifices" have 
been made. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost 
that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to 
make intercession for them." He is able to save fully, 
completely, eternally. 

This text may be understood to apply to the Church 
now, that the Lord not only saves us from the sins that 
are past— when first we accepted Christ, had our sins forgiven 
and were accepted by Him— but throughout our 
course He also covers with the Robe of His merit those 
blemishes and weaknesses which result from the imperfection 
of our human body. Whatever could be shown to be 
unintentional would be canceled by the merit of His sacrifice, 
stripes being administered for the expiation of any 
measure of wilfulness. So He is able to save, not only 
from sins past and present, but from sins future— save to 

R5777 : page 296 

the uttermost, and bring us to the Divine favor which God 
has promised to the faithful footstep followers of Jesus. 

INTERCESSION FOR THE WORLD OF MANKIND 

But this work for the Church is not all that was meant, 
we think, by the Apostle. If the intercession of Jesus, 
the great High Priest, were all in the past, and if only 
the Church of the First-borns were to be benefited by this 
intercession, all the remainder of the world would be left 
out. We are not to think of Jesus as interceding for His 
people over and over every day; but there are two general 
intercessions. The first He made when He presented the 
merit of His sacrifice in the Most Holy (Heaven itself) 
for those who would become His during the Gospel Age, 
and its effects have been applicable throughout the entire 
Age. All who become of the Church class come in under 
the efficacy of this intercession which was provided for 
at the beginning of the Age. His merit ever avails for 
them before the Father. He ever lives as our great Advocate, 
because of the work done for us when atonement 
was made in the presence of God.— Hebrews 9:24. 



But Jesus is to make another intercession. This is 
pointed out in the 2d Psalm: "Ask of Me [Jehovah], and 
I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and 
the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." 
Jesus is to intercede for the heathen, the Gentiles, all who 
are not now members of the Household of Faith. See also 
Romans 11:17-24. 

The same merit which has all through the present Age 
been efficacious for the Church class is to be efficacious 
for the whole world, those in their graves as well as those 
now having a measure of life. It will be a final or complete 
intercession, an intercession to the uttermost. It 
will not leave out even one human being. 

During the Millennium our Lord Jesus will not be 
making intercession for the world; for He will do this at 
its beginning, when He applies His merit for "all the 
people," when the New Covenant is sealed. The Father 
will have no direct dealings with mankind until the close 
of the thousand years, but will deal with them only 
through the Son. During the Messianic Reign, Christ and 
the Church will do a Restitution work for all mankind. 
Because of the presentation of our Lord's merit on their 
behalf, the whole world will be in Christ's hands to be 
dealt with to a completion, to the uttermost, to leave 
nothing undone that can be done. At the close of that 
Age, all the incorrigible will have been destroyed, and 
those brought to perfection will be turned over to the 
Father for a thorough testing. All who then fail, who 
prove not to be fully loyal at heart, will likewise be destroyed, 
"cut off from amongst the people." 



R5777 : page 296 

OVERCOMING DESIRES FOR EARTHLY THINGS 

"But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest 
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway."— 1 Cor. 9:27. 

THE Apostle Paul is here using the illustration 

of a race-course. In certain races there are 

what are called handicaps; that is, one who 

is weaker is given a certain allowance of 

time in starting, and is granted a victory if 

he gets in on time. That would be an accommodation 

for only a few. It is called a 

handicap from the standpoint of the others. 

But in the Christian race there is accommodation 

granted to all; for there is none 

perfect— all come short of the glory of God, and we could 

never gain any reward that God has offered, had it not 

been for the satisfaction which the Redeemer has made. 

Yet it is also true in this race that some have more 
allowance than others. Those who have many weaknesses 



have a corresponding allowance of grace made for them; 
and those who have fewer weaknesses have a less allowance. 
"I therefore so run, not as uncertainly," said St. 
Paul. He was fully determined. He had a definite goal 
in view, and meant to win. This is the only attitude, if 
we would gain the prize that God has offered us; and the 
whole matter is dependent upon our zeal, our faithfulness 
and our earnestness. 

The Greek games had other exhibitions of strength 
and agility besides racing. There were contests with wild 
animals, in which a man would attempt to slay an animal. 
Then there were others between men, in which a man 
would attempt to deal his antagonist a vital blow, if possible, 
with his brass knuckles. In preparation for this contest, 
the contestants had a wind bag to practise on. But 
this was not the real battle, it was merely the preparation. 

So the Apostle says that he was not using his strength 
merely in practise. He was trying to do something. He 
was fighting a real battle. What battle was it? The 
answer of the Bible is that a great battle began away back 
in the days when Satan became the Adversary of God. 
Our first parents came into slavery to Satan, and later 
some of the angels fell. Now many are fighting, and 
some are thoroughly ignorant of whose side they are 
fighting for. Those who are fighting for unrighteousness 
are on Satan's side. Whoever is fighting for moral reforms, 
etc., is on God's side, rather than the side of the 
Enemy of mankind. 

The world are fighting more or less— some more intelligently, 
some less intelligently. There are in every 
army some who could not tell you what the fight is about. 
So now, many do not know that a battle is being waged 
between Righteousness and Sin. The millionaires have 
their own battles and contentions; and the little store-keepers 
have their battles, in competition with the larger 
merchants. The attorney has his battles. He may sometimes 
take a case that is on the side of justice, and defend 
it with zeal; and again he may take a case that is on the 
side of injustice, and prosecute it with equal zeal. But 
the world do not recognize the real battle. The same man 
may be on the right side one day, and on the wrong side 
the next day. 

The Apostle had enlisted under the true banner. 
Christ lifted up a standard in opposition to Satan, and He 
will yet win a glorious victory on the very field where 
Sin has reigned for six thousand years. He had a personal 
conflict with the powers of darkness, in which He 
was Victor. And His victory was gained by His overcoming 
His own natural desires, and fully submitting 
Himself to the will of God. This was the only condition 
on which He could be exalted from the earthly state, to 
the glories of the Divine nature. He has met the required 
condition, of dying the Just for the unjust, and 
has gotten the great victory over Satan. 

The Heavenly Father, in harmony with His own arrangement, 
has empowered the Lord Jesus to take out 



from the world a company to lay down their lives with 
Himself, during a time when everything seems contrary, 
when evil seems to triumph more frequently than do 
righteousness and justice. These, walking by faith, and 
not by sight, are to lay down their lives for the sake of 
righteousness, to carry out the purposes of God. 

OUR PRIMARY BATTLE IS WITH SELF 

Do we ask, Whom, or what, shall we fight? The 
answer is that one would not enter the real conflict at all, 

R5778 : page 297 

if he should follow the impulses of his own mind. In 
such case he would not have any part in this fight. He 
might engage in the ordinary battling of the world— 
sometimes in the right, sometimes in the wrong. But if 
he would get into this company which is being guided by 
Jesus, he must come unto God by Him, and must sacrifice 
earthly hopes, aims and ambitions, and walk in 
Jesus' footsteps— steps of suffering unto death. "For it 
became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are 
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the 
Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." 
(Heb. 2:10.) Thus the battle begins in our mind, our 
will. We submit our mind to the mind of Christ. 

In the typical Day of Atonement sacrifices, the Body 
of Christ is represented by the Lord's goat. And as the 
high priest killed the goat in the type, so in the antitype 
the animal nature is to be killed, slaughtered, sacrificed. 
It is not to be yielded up to sin, but to be overcome. The 
New Creature is in mortal combat with entrenched sin, 
and the cravings of the human nature. He has made a 
consecration of himself to God. And as a result, the 
Advocate has placed His own merit upon the consecrated 
one. When this is done, the battle immediately begins, 
that the New Creature may keep down the old creature, 
the old will.— Galatians 5:17. 

The Apostle says, "I keep my body under,. ..lest, 
when I have preached to others, I myself should become 
a castaway." It must be a real battle, a real conflict; 
for the victory is only to those who overcome. "To him 
that overcometh...will I give power over the nations"; 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 
My Throne."-Rev. 2:26,27; 3:21. 

VICTORY OR DEATH! 

This battle, then, that begins at the time of our consecration, 
continues until the end— our death. It will be 
the death either of the New Creature or of the old 
creature. So far as our earthly interests are concerned, 
we sacrifice them fully— we exchange them for the opportunity 
of gaining glory, honor, immortality, joint-heirship 
with the Lord, participation in the Divine nature. 



So, as the Apostle suggests, we are not to be expending 
our strength merely on a bag of wind, but we are to fight 
to some purpose. 

"For me to live is Christ," says the Apostle; and for 
me to lose in this battle is for me to perish as a New 
Creature, and this means that the Second Death would 
be mine. We should realize that in our position as 
Christians our eternal interests are at stake. We fear 
of losing the eternal life, which we shall surely lose if 
we fail to be overcomers. 

The Apostle Peter writes, "Seeing, then, that all these 
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought 
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness;. ..that 
ye may be found of Him in peace, without spot, and 
blameless!" (2 Peter 3:11,14.) With this anticipation, 
how serious life should be! 

The Christian who knows about these things of the 
future, and who lives in anticipation of them, has a joy 
and a peace of which the world knows nothing. One 
week of such living is worth more than an entire lifetime 
with only such things as the world has to offer. And if 
now we enjoy living the new life, and entering by faith 
into the things that the Lord has in reservation for us, 
what will be the realization! If we would lose much in 
the present time by losing our hope and faith, what would 
it be to lose these things eternally! 

As we realize this, we see that we cannot afford one 
moment of carelessness. The man engaged in combat 
with the animal knows that the bruised and wounded 
animal seeks to kill him. So the Apostle tells us, the 
old nature strives to kill the New Nature. Therefore the 
New Nature must see to it that it uses all its strength to 
gain the victory. The Lord has promised us grace sufficient 
for every time of need. If we are overcome by the 
old nature, it will not be because we have not strength 
sufficient for the victory; for if we call upon the Lord, 
He will sustain us. But the Lord will test our loyalty, 
our faith, our strength of character, our alertness of 
mind. And the victory is sure, so long as our trust is 
in Him! 



R5778 : page 297 

THE CHRIST PERFECTED BY SUFFERING 

"Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made partakers of Christ's sufferings; 
that when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad 
also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:13. 

IT MIGHT at first seem strange to God's 
people that they should suffer special trials 
and difficulties as a result of becoming children 
of God and doers of that which is 
good. The natural expectation would be 



that he who sins shall suffer, and he who 

seeks to avoid sin shall be blessed. This is 

a natural law, and it will operate in due 

time— during the Millennial reign of our 

Lord. Evil-doers shall suffer stripes, and if 

found persistent, shall be cut off in the Second Death. 

But all well-doers shall be rewarded with everlasting life 

and blessing forever. 

This is not true now, however, for the reign of the 
Prince of Righteousness has not yet begun. We are 
under the reign of the Prince of Darkness. And the 
evil-doers often have great success, while the right-doers 
suffer. David says of the wicked, "Their eyes stand out 
with fatness; they have more than heart could wish." 
(Psa. 73:7.) Nevertheless he took his stand with those 
who would please God— and so also do we. 

GOD'S PURPOSE IN TESTING US 

St. Paul, speaking concerning the Church of the 
Gospel Age, says, "All that will live godly in Christ 
Jesus, shall suffer persecution." (2 Tim. 3:12.) There 
is no exception to this rule; and the knowledge and expectation 
of this should make us stand fast, having on 
the breastplate of righteousness, and having our feet 
shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. 

God allows His people to have these experiences and 
to suffer for right-doing. In the present time He is 
calling out a saintly company. This company will be the 
Royal Priesthood of the future, to bless all the world 
during Messiah's Reign. And the Bible explains to us 
that these need trials to prove and test their characters. 

God wishes to see how loyal we are to the principles 
of righteousness. How much are we willing to suffer? 
It is a saying with the world, "Every man has his price." 
And so in the Church there are some who would endure 
a certain amount, and then back down. Others will 
endure a little more, and others still a little more. The 
Lord declares that He is seeking those who will give up 
everything in order to prove faithful to their Covenant 
with Him. This faithfulness means entire loyalty to 
God, to His laws, which are the laws of righteousness. 

THE FIRE TO BURN AMONGST YOU 

The intimation that these fiery trials will try the 
Church, will burn amongst God's people, does not necessarily 

R5778 : page 298 

mean that all the fiery trials will come from the 
Church; but that these trials constitute a fire that is to 
do a purifying work amongst them, burning in their 
midst. It is an experience that must be endured by each 
one individually. It will be a general experience, because 
each one must have a share in this matter. It is not 



merely that the company as a whole will have opposition 
against them, but that each individual will be personally 
exposed to the fiery trials. Therefore this fire burns in 
our midst and will burn to the end. 

It is a different kind of trial from what could come 
to any other body of people. The explanation of this 
difference is in our text— "inasmuch as we are made partakers 
of Christ's sufferings." When we know that each 
member of the Body of Christ must be tried, we can 
rejoice when some of this fire touches us. We say, "I 
am having a share in the sufferings of Christ. I am 
glad that in God's providence I have a share in these 
trials; for if I had no share in them, how could I know 
that I am one of the Body members?" 

THE PRIMARY SOURCE OF TROUBLE 

So we all rejoice, knowing that these fiery trials are 
of the Lord. Not that the Lord is the cause of these 
fiery trials; for usually it is the Adversary. But we 
have put ourselves into the Lord's hands, and He has 
promised to supervise all that concerns us. Therefore, 
whatever comes to us, we may be sure that it is of the 
Father's purpose, or permission for our good. If, therefore, 
we recognize that this is something that the Lord's 
providence has arranged for us, it is all right, no matter 
how frequently we have to go to the Throne of Grace 
for help in time of need. 

God has revealed to us that He purposes to give to 
The Christ very great exaltation, great glory, honor and 
immortality. Therefore we are looking forward to the 
time when this Body shall be perfected, and we shall 
share in the glory of our Head. When the glory shall 
be revealed, we shall be glad with a great joy! These 
trials that come to us are from a variety of sources. In 
our context they are spoken of as the one trial of the 
Church, but that one trial is made up of a variety of 
experiences. If these difficulties and trials came all at 
once, they might be too severe for us. Therefore the 
Lord permits us to be taken out of the fire for a little 
while. "He knoweth our frame; He remembereth that 
we are dust."— Psa. 103:14. 

R5779 : page 298 

TORTURES OF TODAY MORE REFINED 

And so the Father has arranged that we shall have 
little seasons of refreshment between times, so that when 
the next trying experience comes, it will find us a little 
stronger and more ready to profit by it. Some of these 
trials come from the Adversary himself. Apparently the 
things that have been done to the Church could come 
from none other. Think of the devilish disposition manifested 
toward our Lord, and reflect upon His sufferings. 
We cannot think that mankind under any ordinary conditions 



could ever have had so malicious a spirit as that 
manifested against Him. The Devil had to do with all 
the wicked persecutions of the saints— the cutting out 
of tongues, the racking of their poor bodies, and the 
shooting out of bitter words from the tongue. 

We are more used to this latter form of persecution 
today than in olden times; for the world— the average 
man— would not permit the things done in the Dark 
Ages. But the wicked feelings are still there— the animosity, 
the gall. As the Apostle James says, the 
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, and it sets on fire 
the course of nature. (James 3:6.) And so in our day 
the tongue and the pen are often used as weapons of evil. 

We have all noticed, perhaps, how willing the world 
is to speak evil and to believe evil— how willing to say 
that which they do not know. This is all because they 
are obsessed, besieged by the Adversary. But we are 
living in a more civilized day than were our brethren of 
the past. We think the individual who does these wicked 
things today— who slanders and vilifies God's people— is 
under some malevolent influence. And then the temptation 
comes to us to speak evil of them in return— to do 
all the harm we can against them. If we find this disposition 
to speak evil arising within us, we are to resist 
it, to allow the fire of this time to burn up these elements 
of our old nature. And the fire will have this purifying 
effect upon us, if we receive it aright, making us meet 
for the Heavenly Kingdom. 

SECONDARY SOURCE OF TRIAL 

Not only from the Adversary do these trials come, 
but they come from the weaknesses and the imperfections 
of others. And perhaps those that come from the 
brethren are the most difficult to bear. We know that 
"the god of this world hath blinded the eyes of them 
that believe not." But when it comes to those who have 
made a profession of loyalty to God, and who have 
named the name of Christ, whether they be Presbyterians 
or Episcopalians, Baptists or Congregationalists, or those 
who are Bible Students— if in any of these we find the 
persecuting spirit, we are more discouraged and less 
likely to have the proper sympathy for them. 

We are to remember, however, that nothing can 
happen to us unless the Father permits it. If we did not 
get the trials from Methodists or Presbyterians or Bible 
Students, we would get them from somewhere else, in 
order to burn up our dross and strengthen the elements of 
our character which need development. We are to take 
all of these things patiently, knowing that they are working 
out for us a "far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory." We are to look away from these things and 
to recognize the grand purpose of God. We are to reflect 
that this is the way in which God is chiseling us 
and polishing us to make us ready for the grand Temple 
of Glory. And when we think of this, we can look with 



fortitude and patience on these fiery trials, recognizing 
that we shall get a blessing out of them. 

"Through many a thorny path He leads 

My tired feet; 
Through many a path of tears I go, 

But it is sweet 
To know that He is close to me— 

My God, my Guide; 
He leadeth me, and so I walk 

Quite satisfied." 

Thus we learn as people of God to glory. We may 
glory in all the things which He has done for us and in 
us. The things that naturally would be least likely to be 
gloried in are tribulations, persecutions. But we may 
glory also in these. We may rejoice in them— not that 
we enjoy the tribulations, the persecutions, but we 
realize that these are working for us characters pleasing 
to God. The Lord will see to it that we get enough, 
and not too much, tribulation. 

The word tribulation has the thought of serious 
trouble— a combination of troubles that makes the 
experiences serious. It would not mean that we would 
fall into some difficulty and soon get out of it again, 
but it would mean severe and continued trouble. 
Sometimes we cannot see why we have the troubles that 
come to us. They may come in the form of sickness, or 
death, or financial trouble, or humiliation of our unrecognized 
pride and self-love; or we may have a combination 

R5779 : page 299 

of trouble. There is no difference whether it 
is one kind or another kind— they are tribulations. But 
it is for us to recognize that in all these trials the Lord 
supervises and makes them work for our good. 

The world has persecutions of a certain sort. People 
in business will sometimes persecute one another. Sometimes 
persecutions are in a political way. The Lord 
indicates to the Church that we may rejoice in any persecution, 
especially if we are in no way blame-worthy. "If 
any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed 
[feel disgraced]," said the Apostle. (1 Pet. 4:14-16.) 
He is suffering because the "darkness hateth the light," 
and slanders the Truth. This has been so from Jesus' 
time all the way down. 

BLESSING RESULTING FROM PERSECUTION 

Shall we say that we will not be reconciled to any 
certain experience? No; we have committed all to the 
Lord, and it is for us to bow in full submission, knowing 
by faith and from the assurance of God's Word that all 
things are working together for good to us. No matter 
what the trouble may be, it will bring patience if we are 



rightly exercised. Some of the Lord's people may have 
patience well developed, and thus not need so many of 
these experiences. But whatever we need, we should desire. 

We remind you again of the story of a certain 
brother who took account of his qualities, and decided 
that he was most lacking in patience. Then he prayed 
most earnestly to the Lord to give him more patience. 
He kept on praying; and the more he prayed, the more 
difficulties he seemed to have, the greater trials of 
patience. Then it occurred to him that this was the 
answer to his prayer; for that was the way to get 
patience. And when he began to see the matter aright, 
it encouraged him and made a great change. He saw 
that the Lord was answering his prayer by giving him 
the very experiences he needed to develop in his character 
this grace of the Spirit. 

"Tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; 
and experience, hope." This does not mean that 
we get all of our patience first, then all of our experience, 
and then all of our hope; but that they are all developing 
together. We have a good courage and are desirous of 
pleasing the Lord; we are not ashamed to be His children. 
And the reason why we are not ashamed is that 
with this hope, we have the realization of God's love; 
and we are able to say, "If I had tribulation, I now have 
more hope and more patience. I am getting the results 
in these tribulations, in the fruits of the Spirit." Whoever 
escapes experiences that would develop the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit will never gain a place in the Kingdom. 

Patience can be gained only by trials. Faith can be 
developed only by necessities. We have need of preparation 
for our future work. This can be gained only by 
those experiences which will touch us with a feeling of 
the infirmities and difficulties and trials of the groaning 
creation to whom we shall be ministers and representatives 
when we reach the Throne. For us, then, the lesson 
of present experiences is to resist evil; not with evil, but 
with good. "Be not overcome of evil; but resist evil 
with good."— Romans 12:21. 



R5779 : page 299 

ELISHA'S RESTITUTION MINISTRY 

-OCTOBER 17.-2 KINGS 4, 5.- 

ELISHA SUCCEEDS ELIJAH-THE TYPICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THIS 
-HEALS THE SPRING OF WATER-ENCOUNTERS YOUNG 
HOODLUMS-PRONOUNCES SENTENCE AGAINST THEM 
-THEIR PENALTY-REWARDS FAITH OF A WIDOW -HEALS 
GENERAL NAAMAN'S LEPROSY-IS CONSULTED RESPECTING 
NAAMAN'S FUTURE. 

"I am Jehovah that healeth thee."— Exodus 15:26. 



FOR more than six thousand years our earth 

has been under a Divine condemnation because 

of Father Adam's sin and its propagation 

through his posterity, and because of 

God's sentence against sin. For these 

reasons, as the Apostle declares, our world 

has been under a "reign of Sin and Death." 

(Romans 5:14-19.) And it still is; for the 

curse, or penalty, has not yet been lifted. 

Thank God, the Bible abounds with precious 

promises that a better Day is soon to dawn! That 

glorious Epoch is to be inaugurated by Messiah's Kingdom, 

for which Jesus taught His people to pray, "Thy 

Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even as it is 

done in Heaven." Then will come a glorious change to 

the world. Satan shall be bound for a thousand years. 

R5780 : page 299 

The reign of Sin and Death will cease, and a Reign of 
Righteousness and Life will begin. 

That Reign is to last a thousand years. We have the 
words of Jesus Himself that its result will be the entire 
removal of the curse— the freeing of mankind from every 
difficulty and ailment which came upon the world as a 
penalty for Father Adam's sin, etc. From the very beginning 
of Messiah's Reign God's blessing will begin to 
come to the world through Him, and correspondingly the 
curse will begin to fade away; but the full blessing will 
not be here, and the curse will not be entirely removed, 
until about the close of the Millennium. It will be a 
grand work. The promise of Jesus is that eventually 
there shall be no more sighing, no more crying, no more 
dying; for the former things of sin and death will have 
passed away and He will have made all things new, as 
the great King of kings and Lord of lords.— Revelation 21:4,5; 
19:16; 1 Corinthians 15:26,54. 

ELISHA'S WORK A TYPE OF RESTITUTION BLESSINGS 

In a previous lesson we pointed out that Bible students 
understand Elijah's career to have been typical of the experiences 
of the Church in the flesh, ending with glorification. 
Appropriately we might expect that Elisha, the 
companion of Elijah, upon whom fell Elijah's mantle of 
power and authority as the Lord's representative, prefigured 
a class. Our thought is that he typified two 
classes: first, that he typified those who now are associated 
with the Elijah class; and that, after the taking of 
Elijah and his recrossing Jordan, he became a type of 
those in whose charge will be the dispensing of Restitution 
blessings during the Millennium. Let us notice a 
few of his figurative doings. 

PURE WATER-PURE TRUTH 



(1) A certain stream carried brackish water through 
an otherwise favored district. Elisha took a handful of 
salt, went to the head of the brook and poured it in 
there, commanding in the name of the Lord that it should 
henceforth be pure water. Looking for a typical significance 
of this in the Millennium, we remember that a 

stream of water represents a stream of Truth, and that 

brackish water would represent impure doctrines. A purification 

of the stream at its fountain would well represent 

what the Lord has promised through the Prophet respecting 

Messiah's Day: "Then will I turn unto the people a 

R5780 : page 300 

pure Message, that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord, to serve Him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:9. 

The salt cast into the spring reminds us of the Master's 
words respecting His true followers, "Ye are the 
salt of the earth." (Matthew 5:13.) It will be in and 
through the glorified Salt of the Earth that the blessing 
will come, the streams of Truth for human refreshment 
for a thousand years. The light of the knowledge of the 
glory of God will be made to fill the whole earth, as the 
waters cover the great deep.— Isaiah 11:9; Hab. 2:14. 

HURT FIGHTING BEARS 

(2) As Elisha proceeded on his journey, some young 
hoodlums accosted him, saying, "Go up, thou bald head!" 
These were youths— not children, not babies. Elisha 
turned and pronounced upon them a punishment, translated 
in our text a curse. He denounced their conduct as 
wrong and declared that it would have a punishment. 

The punishment came speedily. Two she-bears came upon 
them and tore them, wounded them. There is no suggestion 
that the bears ate them or killed them; but the forty-two 
young ruffians all experienced wounds from their 
conflict with the bears, and this apparently was the punishment 
for their wrong-doing. 

After some such manner there will be judgments in 
the world during the Millennium— punishments for every 
wrong course, rewards for every right deed. Thus, 
through chastisements, called in the Bible judgments, the 
world will be taught right and wrong for a thousand 
years. As it is written, "When the judgments of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) It is for this reason 
that the Millennial Age is called the world's Day of 
Judgment. St. Peter explains that a Day with the Lord 
is as a thousand years. (2 Peter 3:8.) St. Paul tells 
us that "God hath appointed a Day [a thousand years], 
in the which He will judge the world in righteousness." 
(Acts 17:31.) The judgment will be in the nature of 
rewards and punishments wisely administered, that the 
people may learn righteousness and abhor sin. 



OIL ACCORDING TO HER FAITH 

(3) A poor widow in distress because of debt appealed 
to the Prophet Elisha for aid. She found that her resources 
were exhausted, except that she had some olive 

oil. He directed her to take all the vessels that she had 
and to borrow from her neighbors and to pour the oil 
into these until they were filled, then to sell the oil for 
money wherewith to pay her debts and to use the remainder 
for the wherewithal to live. 

This story may illustrate for us the blessed rewards 
of faith that the Lord will grant during the Millennium. 
Indeed, it illustrates the general principle on which the 
Lord operates. The debt was to be paid. Justice was not 
to be violated, and any miracle to be performed would be 
preferably by the blessing of something already possessed. 
Thus doubtless it will be during the Millennium. The 
Lord will bless what people may have according to their 
faith in using it in harmony with His will; and it will 
increase with that for the full supply of all their needs. 

Our Lord Jesus illustrated this in some of His miracles; 
and we should not forget that He made it plain 
that His miracles typified, or foreshadowed, His coming 
in the glory and the majesty of His Kingdom work. 
(John 2: 1 1.) One of these was the feeding of the five 
thousand people from the small quantity of fish already 
at hand. Every person has something of a talent, or possession. 
The lesson to us would be: Use what you have, 
asking God's blessing, and seek to use it in harmony with 
His Word, nothing doubting. The Lord always rewards 
faith. In the case of this widow the oil was quite sufficient 
to fill all the vessels she had borrowed, as well as 
all of her own vessels. Then it stopped. 

SYRIAN GENERAL CURED OF LEPROSY 

(4) In the Far East leprosy is one of the most dreaded 
diseases and is generally accepted as incurable. The 
Bible seems to refer to leprosy as a figure, or type, of 
sin because it is incurable, except by Divine miracle. 
Naaman, the chief commander of the Syrian king's 
forces, was a leper. In his family was a little Hebrew 
housemaid, who had been captured in one of the battles 
between the Syrians and the Israelites. She noted her 
master's plight, and remarked to her mistress about the 
great Prophet in Israel, Elisha, who could do anything, 
she believed. She suggested that he be applied to. 

What seemed like idle talk was seized upon by General 
Naaman as a last and only hope. From his king he 
obtained a letter of introduction to the King of Israel, 
which in substance said: "I am sending this letter by 
the hand of my chief general, Naaman, who is a leper; 
and I desire you to see that he is healed." The king of 
Israel was appalled. He knew that he had no power over 
such a disease, and that it was ranked as incurable. He 



concluded that the Syrian king was trying to pick a 
quarrel with him, and that this meant war, great trouble. 
He rent his outer garment, as was the custom of the time, 
in indication of his great distress. The matter was told 
to the Prophet Elisha, who immediately sent the king 
word not to be disturbed, but to send the general to him. 
This was done. 

When the general arrived at the Prophet's home with 
quite a caravan of servants, costly presents, etc., he sent 
word to the Prophet respecting his errand and that he 
had been sent by the king to him. Elisha curtly sent him 
word to go to the River Jordan and wash seven times. 
Naaman was angry. He said, "This man does not even 
treat me civilly. Why did he not come down to see me 
and make some kind of recognition of my rank and of 
the nation which I represent?" He then declared that 
there were rivers in Syria of much better water than the 
Jordan, and that Elisha was trifling with him. 

While Elisha's conduct undoubtedly was proper and 
directed of God and turned out well, nevertheless it would 
not be a wise course for the Lord's people generally to 
follow. In the New Testament the Apostles urge that 
the servants of God should be courteous toward all and 
render honor to whom honor is due. However, the matter 
worked out well. The servants of the general suggested 
to him that he had to go by Jordan any way on 
his return home, and why not try, as the Prophet of 
Israel had said. It could do no harm and might do some 
good. Any way the Prophet evidently had not been trying 
to make money out of him, nor to get the costly presents 
which he had brought, and which he knew he would gladly 
give for such a cure. The anger of the general cooled. 
He bathed seven times in Jordan, as directed. The result 
was a miraculous cure. 

Naaman was not thankless. He returned to the home 
of the Prophet to thank him and to urge him to accept 
the presents he had brought; but the Prophet would accept 
nothing. He was merely acting as a Divine representative. 
His powers were not for sale. They were Divine 
blessings. Let the General acknowledge them to God! 
And this General Naaman did. He confessed that no 
other God than Jehovah could perform such a miracle. 
He was apparently ready to do the will of God heartily, 
and asked respecting his future course. The Prophet did 
not tell him to become a Jew and to renounce the heathen 

R5781 : page 301 

religion of his own land, but encouraged him to return to 
his home and to continue in his office. 

General Naaman inquired as to his responsibility. If 
he worshiped the true God, what must he do when in 
the company of his king and the latter wished to go to 
the house of a false god? Elisha's answer in substance 
was that if the general made full profession of his faith 
in the true God, it would not be improper for him to 



accompany his master to the house of the false god; for 
his own adherence to Jehovah God would be recognized. 



R5781 : page 301 

OTHER RESTITUTION TYPES 
--OCTOBER 24.-2 KINGS 6:8-23.- 



ELISHA AWAKENS THE SHUNAMMITE'S SON-PUNISHES HIS 
SERVANT GEHAZI-ENTRAPS THE SYRIAN ARMY AND RENDERS 
THEM GOOD FOR EVIL-IMPORTANT LESSONS IN RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— Psalm 34:7. 

IN TODAY'S Study we note Elisha's awakening 

of the Shunammite's son, his punishment 

of his servant Gehazi with leprosy, and 

his entrapping of the Syrian army. (2 Kings 4:8-37; 

5:20-27.) While these things 

may not find exact counterpart in the events 

of the coming Kingdom, they nevertheless 

represent principles which will be in operation 

then— the principles of reward for 

right doing, of punishment for intentional 

wrong-doing, and of sympathetic restraint and instruction. 

All these principles will operate during Messiah's 

Kingdom; and under these the world will gradually make 

progress. "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 

in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 

—Isaiah 26:9. 

AWAKENING THE SHUNAMMITE'S SON 

Millions of people will long remember a most touching 
scene in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, representing 
the death of the Shunammite's son, and showing how 
Elisha awakened the lad from the sleep of death and restored 
him to his parents. Perhaps no more touching 
film was ever produced. Few saw it without tears. It 
pictured the coming Restitution work of the Millennium, 
when all the sleeping dead will be awakened, to resume 
their lives and to complete their education in the school 
of experience under more happy and more favorable conditions 
than any enjoy at the present time, except the 
Church— those who during this Age are blessed of the 
Lord with hearing ears, eyes of faith and obedient hearts. 

GEHAZI SMITTEN WITH LEPROSY 

Gehazi had in many respects been a faithful servant to 
Elisha. As a result, he had blessings of knowledge which 
the majority of people did not possess. With the knowledge 



came responsibility; hence the severe punishment 
inflicted upon the man for hypocrisy and deception. We 
are reminded of the text which declares that if a good 
man depart from his well-doing and sin wilfully, his past 
good deeds shall not be remembered, even as it is with 
the evil-doer who, coming to God with full repentance 
and change of heart, is forgiven and received into God's 
family. His past evil is entirely ignored, except as it may 
bear its fruit in certain weaknesses of mind or body.— 
Ezekiel 3:17-21; 18:20-24; 33:10-16. 

When General Naaman perceived the great miracle 
accomplished in his cleansing from leprosy, he returned 
to Elisha, offering thanks to God and desiring the Prophet 
to receive the presents which he had brought. But Elisha 
would receive none of them. In this he manifested what 
we believe is always the Lord's Spirit— never to sell 
spiritual things for money. It is for this reason that 
some ministers now object to taking up collections, holding 
fairs or soliciting money in any manner. Their contention 
is that whatever is given to the Lord's service 
should be given with a free hand and a ready heart. 
"The Father seeketh such to worship Him as worship Him 
in spirit and in truth." (John 4:23.) It is a privilege to 
give to the Lord and His Cause; for the Almighty is not 
poor, that He should need our gifts. All the gold and 
silver are His, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. — 
Haggai 2:8; Psalm 50:10. 

Under such a noble example Gehazi should have 
profited, but did not. He allowed covetousness to come 
into his mind. He had seen the rich Babylonish garments, 
and thought how fine it would be if he could have 
some of these and plenty of changes of linen garments. 
He would be like a prince. He had perceived that General 
Naaman regretted that his presents were not accepted. 
He pursued, and told the general that the Prophet had 
said that while he did not desire any of the garments or 
other things for himself, he had concluded that he might 
use some of these for his servants, and that he would 
accept gifts for them. The ruse was successful. The 
servant was recognized as the one seen at Elisha's place. 
The goods were joyfully given to him. He hid them 
away secretly, until the Prophet called him, told him all 
about the matter and pronounced his punishment— leprosy. 

So will it be in the coming Age. Any disobedience 
will meet with swift punishment. Of the judges of that 
time it is written that they will not judge with the hearing 
of the ear nor with the sight of the eye; they will 
judge righteously.— Isaiah 11:3,4. 

ELISHA'S CAPTURE ATTEMPTED 

It was probably after the death of General Naaman 
that the king of Syria declared war against the Israelites. 
To his surprise he found that every move he made was 
checkmated. If he planned to capture a certain city, it 
seemed as though the Israelitish king knew every detail. 



Thus his endeavors came to naught. He looked for a 
traitor amongst his own people in his own household, or 
for some explanation. Then it was told him by one of 
his servants, "Behold, the Prophet Elisha is in Israel and 
makes known to their king all thy counsels, even those of 
thy bed-chamber." Apparently the knowledge of Jehovah 
and Elisha had spread from General Naaman to some of 
the household of the king. 

Intent upon his conquest, the king sought to capture 
Elisha. If he could not get some profit out of the man 
for himself and his side, he could at least keep him from 
communicating with the king of Israel. He sent spies to 
find where Elisha dwelt, and located him at the little city 
of Dothan. Thereupon he sent a good-sized force, quite 
sufficient to surround the city and make it impossible for 
Elisha to escape— horses, chariots, etc. He would do two 
things— not only capture a city, but capture the Prophet. 

In the morning early, Elisha's servant looked forth and 
beheld the companies of the enemy on every side, barring 
every way of escape. He was terrified and said, "Alas, 
my master! how shall we do?" Promptly came the 
answer, "Fear not; for they that be with us are more than 
they that be with them." The servant did not appreciate 
this; for he had not come to realize fully what Divine 

R5781 : page 302 

powers were with his master. Then Elisha prayed that 
the eyes of the young man might be opened; and he beheld 
angelic hosts, horses and chariots of fire around 
about Elisha. This was sufficient to give the young man 
the needed courage and to assure him of God's Power. 
Just what kind of vision this was makes no particular 
difference. Undoubtedly it was merely a vision, without 
any reality; but it served its purpose. God's Power surrounds 
all of His consecrated people in an unlimited 
measure. These powers are exercised by spirit beings, 
entirely invisible to men. The important thing is to get 
the right thought— that under all conditions Omnipotent 
Power stands behind and completely surrounds those who 
are His. Nothing can befall this special class except in 
accord with the Divine program. Whatever may occur in 
their experience will be of Divine foreknowledge and 
permission; hence the promise to this class is that all 
things shall work together for their good.— Romans 8:28. 

THE SYRIAN HOST CAPTURED 

The Prophet exercised a supernatural power of blinding 
the Syrian host; but just what the power was or how 
it was accomplished we can only conjecture. Doubtless 
their eyes were wide open; and doubtless they saw the 
hills, valleys, roads, etc.; but the eyes of their understanding 
were closed, apparently, in some hypnotic manner. 
Elisha gave them to understand that he would lead them 
to the proper city; and he did so, guiding them straight 



to the city of Samaria, in through its gates. There, surrounded 
by the hosts of the capital, he broke the hypnotic 
spell. Their eyes opened; and they perceived that they 
were in the hands of their enemies, who, with drawn 
swords and leveled spears, offered no opportunity of 
escape. They had been entrapped, but not to their injury 
—for their good, for their instruction. 

The king of Israel inquired of the Prophet whether or 
not he should smite these and destroy them, or what. 
The answer was, "No; feed them and let them return 
peaceably to their own home." The king caught the 
spirit of the proposition, and not merely gave them bread 
and water, such as might be given prisoners, but made 
them a bountiful feast— treated them royally, treated them 
as friends. Then they were set free to go to their own 
land, there to tell the strange experience that had occurred 
and to demonstrate to their king the impossibility 
of successfully fighting against the kingdom of Israel 
under such circumstances. 



R5782 : page 302 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
NEWS FROM FRENCH BIBLE STUDENTS 

I would be very grateful if you would kindly send me 
some tracts for distribution among sorrowing hearts, as the 
poor world is getting disheartened, and this is the right time 
for presenting to them the Gospel Message. I have already 
made several such distributions, for which the people were 
very glad, several of them saying they wished they were 
already living in that glorious Day. God's Word alone can 
bring them comfort. -JULES ROY. 

Soon an era of righteousness shall be established by Christ 
and His Bride, of whom we are invited to become a part. 
What a comfort this thought is to me through all the dangers 
of this hour! Here new opportunities are afforded me 
to bring this precious message to the friends— soldiers of my 
regiment. Now, as soon as I receive the TOWER, some of 
them want to read it ahead of me. They read also Vol. 1 
of the STUDIES from time to time.-ELIE MALINGRAT. 

I wish to inform you of the departure of Brother Louis 
Durieu for the Orient (Dardanelles). Being told to start 
without delay for Marseilles (where he probably still is), 
he was unable to write to you himself of his going, and thus 
to present you his brotherly regards. I was much delighted 
at the real comfort I derived from reading in the last TOWER 
that marvelous page about Love. May the Lord bless it for 
all the Divine Israel I-ELISEE TRULEUX 

I am glad to be able to write to you these lines to express 
my great joy at receiving THE WATCH TOWER 
(French), which is so interesting and comforting in the 
troublous times now upon us! What a peace fills our hearts 



when everything is crashing about us! By the grace of God 
strengthening us, we are enabled to endure with patience 
and perseverance the greatest trials permitted of Him for 
our spiritual welfare. Yes, we can love and praise our good 
Heavenly Father for His many blessings. --M. NONGAILLARD. 

We are very happy here at C (near Dunkirk), being 

able to devote ourselves freely to holy study during the short 
time permitted us here below, and we pray the Lord to 
strengthen our faith upon the solid foundation of Present 
Truth, so as to better resist the tumultuous current beating 
about. -H. ROUSSEL. 

Here in Liege (Belgium) everything is well in a temporal 
way, but God has blessed us still more spiritually. As 
you know, our meetings have never been interrupted. They 
still take place every Sunday in our hall at the Hawirs, and 
every Thursday at home. During the first three months of 
the war we had four meetings a week. Now, work is going 
on again in all the coal mines and we have been abundantly 
blessed. -F. PETRIE. 

We thank the Lord more and more for having raised 
Pastor Russell and his valiant fellow-servants, through whom 
He has so generously and mercifully blessed us. We remember 
daily before the Throne of Heavenly Grace the great help 
you lend to the good "grain" already garnered, as well as 
pray God to strengthen and sustain you by His all-powerful 
arm in the good fight you have undertaken; also for the 
cause of Truth for which you have vowed to be faithful unto 
death, on behalf of all the brethren and sisters.— VICTOR 
RANDOUR. 
The following letters from brethren who are prisoners in 

Germany: 

I have had the opportunity to preside at a meeting participated 
in by more than one hundred people. Helping me 
were some friends who had also studied the first and second 
volumes of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, as well as some 
tracts. With God's assistance, I have been enabled to give 
my experience before all the Protestants in the camp. The 
aforesaid friends left in March, I being sick at the time. 
Since then I have worked to spread the good tidings of the 
Kingdom. "Do as occasion serve thee, for God is with 
thee." (1 Samuel 10:7.) I want to work for the Lord, and 
may His grace be with me!-FREDERIC POLLARD. 

With much joy I have received the books you forwarded 
me. I have read and studied them without ceasing, having 
asked of our brother J. H. his help to that extent. I have 
understood and I am following. What is necessary is to 
win the final victory. The contents of the books, where followed, 
cause a lasting effect. It is a meat that does not 
decay.— L. FLAMME (newly interested). 

I have received news of my wife and relatives in Rouboix 
(invaded territory); they are in good health, and so are 
the dear brethren and sisters there. I see that the Lord 
knows how to keep His own through all their difficulties, 
and I pray Him to give each of His beloved children the 
needed strength to bear every other trial that may still be 
in store in this evil day. Kindly send me some tracts and 



booklets, and also, if possible, some English and German 
tracts for distribution. I thank you for the tracts received 
and the card, "My Morning Resolve. "--JEAN HER. 



SCRIPTURE PRECEDENTS FOLLOWED 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Some time ago I read in THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
of a suit you had entered against Rev. J. J. Ross in Canada. 

Now, I am only a humble seeker after truth, and I cannot 
criticize you, because I have not sufficient knowledge of the 
Scriptures to do so. There is, however, one point I would 
like to have cleared up; and if you would be so good as to 
take up a few lines in THE WATCH TOWER to answer me, I 
am sure it would do not only me a lot of good, but others also 
who may have given the matter serious thought. 

The question is, dear Pastor, how could you as a follower 
of Jesus bring suit against a fellow creature, no matter how 
vilely he talked about you or your work? 

You know how our Savior was talked about, and aside 
from a rebuke He did nothing. At least, He never sought 
redress through any legal agency. 

R5782 : page 303 

I despise the clerical profession, because I know them to 
be liars and parasites, who suck a fat living from the parish; 
that is, a good part of them. Of course, there are many noble, 
misled men amongst them; and I am sure they will be rewarded 
for whatever good they may have done. 

Please, dear Pastor, will you not answer one who is sorely 
troubled— one who believes your work the grandest ever 
undertaken, and who loves God and His people, although he 
feels himself an unworthy sinner— one who hates to think 
of one who is doing so grand and noble a work for Jesus, as 
not walking in His footsteps in every respect? 

Yours sincerely. A. WOODS. -New York. 

REPLY BY EDITOR 

We are not certain that we did the wisest and best thing 
—the thing most pleasing to the Lord in the matter mentioned. 
However, the suit against Rev. Ross was not 
undertaken without consideration of the Lord's will and of 
the precedents of the Bible. 

Amongst Bible students, informed respecting the Divine 
Word and its requirements, Matthew 18:15-17 is the accepted 
standard of action:— 

(1) Private conference; 

(2) If necessary, taking a couple of brethren in a further 
endeavor to get at the right and to stop what is believed to 
be the wrong; 

(3) In the event of the concurrence of the brethren that 
the wrong is being done, and of the refusal on the part of 



the wrong-doer to desist, the third step is to bring the matter 
before the Church. If the Church agrees, then the wrong-doer, 
if he still refuses to desist from the wrong course, is to 
be disfellowshiped— to be barred from any office or service 
of the Church— treated as an outsider— "like a publican." 

We could not see how this rule could be applied to Rev. 
Ross; for so far as we have knowledge he would have no 
regard whatever for such proceedings and could not be debarred 
finally from fellowship, because he recognizes no such 
fellowship. We felt, therefore, that any proceedings against 
Rev. Ross must be along the lines which he himself would 
recognize. He, like other ministers, recognizes the governments 
of this world as being parts of Christ's Kingdom; and 
their courts, therefore, as being parts of the Divine Institution. 
For this reason we felt that we were approaching the 
subject from a just and Golden Rule standpoint in appealing 
to the courts of justice, which Rev. Ross recognizes as being 
The Divine Institution. In other words, we attempted to 
meet him on his own grounds. 

As for Scriptural precedents: Jesus did not need to take 
His case before the courts, because His enemies did that 
—taking Him before the chief priests and the Sanhedrin. 
They condemned Him in the Jewish courts. When before 
His judges, Jesus offered no resistance, in the sense of 
using His power, either of eloquence or of Divine energy, to 
resist their unjust decisions. He merely submitted Himself 
with the complaint, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness of 
the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?"— John 18:23. 

The Apostles, Peter and John, brought before the Sanhedrin 
court, made their defense. So also did St. Paul. On 
one occasion, because he thought he was not getting justice, 
he appealed to Caesar's court for whatever the Roman law 
might provide. Similarly I appealed to the court having 
jurisdiction of Rev. Ross, having in mind to stop him from 
doing evil and from opposing the Message of the Lord, which 
I am seeking to bear to all people. My attorneys, of course, 
were obliged to bring their action in harmony with the laws 
of the land. While the case was still pending, I wrote Rev. 
Ross, assuring him that I had no unkind intention, and proposing 
that I would discontinue the suit if he would promise 
to discontinue his injurious, slanderous course. 



R5783 : page 303 

ENJOYING THE SPIRITUAL FOOD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am reading about ten pages in the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES daily. Several times I have tried this plan, but 
did not continue. This time I am keeping to my lesson as 
outlined in the Berean Questions. 

I have read the volumes several times, but by this method 
I am surprised at the results. Every day I have a definite 
study before me, and have more desire for the spiritual food 



than for the natural. I find it the best way to cultivate love 
in thought, word and deed. Daily I ask the Father to help 
me, and daily I render my account. I come far short, but 
can see progress. Praise His name! 

I am speeding along in the race, trusting in every promise 
and "looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our 
faith." I am content, and am watching THE WATCH TOWER 
for the "light that shineth more and more unto the perfect 
Day." How it rejoices my heart to know that the time is 
near when the faithful will partake of the best wine and 
earth's festivities begin! Much Christian love to yourself 
and all the family, in which my husband joins. 

Your sister in Christ, 

MRS. W. W. GOODWIN. --Rhode Island. 

EDITOR'S REPLY TO ABOVE 

I rejoice with you, dear Sister, in the blessing you are 
now having from systematic study of the Bible through the 
daily reading of the volumes, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and the Scripture references which they bring to your attention. 
With the multitudinous affairs of life pressing us, we 
need to order our lives intelligently in the interest of our new 
natures. Otherwise, the cares of this life and the deceitful 
lure of earthly riches would hinder us from obtaining our 
spiritual food, rest, refreshment and strength— thus incapacitating 
us for our spiritual blessings and development, 
and leaving us unfit for a share in the Kingdom. 

I think the plan you have adopted of taking the Berean 
Questions and the portion which they represent as your daily 
lesson is a good one. As you know, some five years ago many 
of THE WATCH TOWER readers began systematically to read 
twelve pages or more every day. Such as have been following 
this course report splendid success, and show it in their 
spiritual development. However, I think that your plan of 
using the Question Books and taking a special lesson for 
each day is still better. Often the lesson, however, would 
run over only one page or two; and in such event you, of 
course, can readily take in several lessons for one day. 

The advantage of the Question Books is that they promote 
study. One of the most important things for people in every 
walk of life is to learn to think. We have all done very little 
of this in respect to religion in the past. One of the mistakes 
which some of the Brethren make in leading Berean Study 
classes is that they talk too much. The successful Bible 
Class leader is the one who does comparatively little talking, 
except in an emergency, but who stimulates thought in the 
Class through the Questions and through the interrogative 
form of suggesting answers when necessary rather than giving 
the answers directly. Bible classes are specially profitable 
because of the thinking on Bible topics which they arouse. 

You do not mention it, dear Sister, but doubtless yourself 
and husband are getting great blessings from the use of the 
MANNA Book every morning. It surely has brought a great 
deal of blessing to many. The text and the comment are quite 
brief, requiring only a few minutes; then, where there is a 



considerable number at the table, a further discussion of the 
text is often very illuminating. Thus the day is well started 
with helpful thoughts. 

I am glad to know that the Morning Resolve and the evening 
self-examination at the Throne of Grace are also comforting, 
strengthening to you. You do not mention the Vow. 
I remember that you and your husband informed me long 
ago that you had taken it. Nothing that we ever had, I 
think, has accomplished more of blessing for the readers of 
THE WATCH TOWER. We have heard from about fifteen thousand 
that they have taken the Vow, but we doubt not that the 
number is much larger than this, as continually the dear 
friends remark to us that they took the Vow years ago, but 
did not think to mention the fact in writing to us. We are 
always glad to know of your welfare, and believe the Vow is a 
special feature of blessing the Lord has ordained for our day. 
Besides this, it constitutes the most wonderful prayer-circle 
that was ever known in the world— fifteen thousand or more 
pledged to each other and to the Lord that they will remember 
each other and the Harvest work every day in prayer. 



FROM BATTLE-TORN RUSSIA 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

This is to inform you that I fell into Russian captivity, 
and after a long journey was brought here to Jelabuga, 
Russia. I could not bring any religious tracts with me, and 
now I feel their lack very much. Therefore I earnestly request 
you to send me your complete works in the German 
language free of charge. Of course, I will thankfully reimburse 
you for their expense when we, with God's help, 
return. At the same time I would request you to send me 
some Hungarian literature and include with the others. 

Please write me a few lines of comfort, and also something 
regarding conditions existing in the United States. 
With loving greetings, 

Your brother in the Lord, F ALUVEGI DEUES . 



page 304 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 305 
