Joys of Auxiliary Pioneer Service
THE apostle Paul stated the principle that “if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.”​—2 Cor. 8:12.
This principle may be applied to the amount of time Christian ministers are able to devote to their preaching and teaching activity. Some, whose circumstances permit, serve as special pioneers, devoting 140 hours a month to the ministry. Others are able to devote 90 hours and so serve as regular pioneers. And for those not able to devote 90 hours each month to such sacred service, but who are still able to do more than the average Kingdom publishers, provision was made for the auxiliary pioneer service, which requires that a person devote 60 hours a month to the ministry. This has been a refinement of the vacation or temporary pioneer service, and it is being greatly appreciated, as can be seen in that more are now sharing in it and receiving blessings.
One such Witness in Barbados wrote: “In 1976 an announcement was made at the ‘Sacred Service’ District Assembly that a new feature of the preaching work was available​—the auxiliary pioneer service with the monthly goal of 60 hours. I was overjoyed because I felt I could attain this goal of Kingdom service. The many blessings I have experienced during these thrilling years have certainly outnumbered the many problems I have encountered.” She then goes on to tell how she obtained an enjoyable home Bible study with a mother and daughter. Already these have begun attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall.
A 15-year-old Witness schoolgirl tells of using her two-week spring vacation to share in the auxiliary pioneer service, and says: “I can really see the difference; an improvement in conversation. My results were outstanding, and I was able to hold many more conversations with people at the doors.”
Another Witness writes: “I would like to express to you my appreciation for the auxiliary pioneer arrangement. As a housewife and mother, I have been able to enjoy auxiliary pioneering and it has been spiritually upbuilding to me and my family.”
Then there is the 81-year-old auxiliary pioneer in Virginia. In eight months of this activity he was able to place over 4,200 magazines. Because of his age, managers of chain stores allow him to sit on a chair inside their stores offering the magazines.
A brother from California tells of arranging his secular work so as to spend a month as an auxiliary pioneer, and states: “I could almost write a book on the many experiences I had: 60 hours, 130 magazines, 6 bound books, 6 return visits, and one new home Bible study. All praise to my heavenly Father for granting me, a 65-year-old man, to work 40 hours a week and do 60 hours a month of service!”
An eight-year-old daughter of a sister serving as a pioneer decided she wanted to meet the auxiliary pioneer requirements for one month. She devoted 61 hours, placed 3 books, 7 booklets and 140 magazines, obtained two subscriptions and started one home Bible study. In another congregation young Kingdom publishers not yet baptized were encouraged to meet the hour goal for auxiliary pioneers. Eleven responded and, of these, five made the 60-hour quota, one missed by four hours, and the rest exceeded their entire previous year’s activity. Three new ones joined them in sacred service and kept up that service. All together the group of 14 placed 121 books and 264 magazines and averaged 41 hours each in talking about God’s kingdom to others.
Another auxiliary pioneer wrote: “I now work from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. This means I have the whole day off, except for sleeping. So I decided to auxiliary pioneer a few times. Meeting the auxiliary pioneer hours after eight hours of secular work is not easy, but it’s not too hard either, if one is willing to make sacrifices. Auxiliary pioneering has caused me to develop more love in my heart for the dying human race. I’m learning to be more conversational and versatile when talking to people. I guess the one blessing I’m most enthused about is that in the seven months that I have served as an auxiliary pioneer Jehovah has blessed me with 12 home Bible studies.”
No question about it, many are the joys of those who arrange their affairs to serve as auxiliary pioneers. If you are not in the full-time service​—although not a few of those serving at Bethel homes also auxiliary pioneer from time to time—​could you be enjoying this privilege? Remember, “he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.”​—2 Cor. 9:6.

