
STUDY ARTICLE 19
How Can We Strengthen Our Faith in Jehovah’s Promise of a New World?

“When [Jehovah] says something, will he not do it?”​—NUM. 23:19.
SONG 142 Holding Fast to Our Hope
PREVIEWa

1-2. What do we need to do while waiting for the new world?
WE TREASURE Jehovah’s promise to replace this system of things with a righteous new world. (2 Pet. 3:13) Although we do not know just when that new world will become a reality, the evidence indicates that we do not have much longer to wait.​—Matt. 24:32-34, 36; Acts 1:7.
2 Meanwhile, no matter how long we have been in the truth, all of us need to strengthen our faith in that promise. Why? Because even strong faith can grow weak. In fact, the apostle Paul called a lack of faith “the sin that easily entangles us.” (Heb. 12:1) To prevent our faith from weakening, we need to review regularly the evidence that proves that the new world will soon be a reality.​—Heb. 11:1.
 3. What will we discuss in this article?
3 In this article, we will discuss three ways that we can strengthen our faith in Jehovah’s promise of a new world: (1) by meditating on the ransom, (2) by contemplating Jehovah’s power, and (3) by spending time in spiritual activities. Then we will discuss how Jehovah’s message to Habakkuk strengthens our faith today. First, though, let us consider some situations we may be facing right now that require strong faith in the promise of a coming new world.
SITUATIONS THAT REQUIRE STRONG FAITH
 4. What decisions require strong faith?
4 Every day, we make decisions that require strong faith. For example, we make decisions involving our associations, entertainment, education, marriage, children, and secular work. We do well to ask ourselves: ‘Do my choices show that I am certain that this system is temporary and will soon be replaced by God’s new world? Or are my choices influenced by people who live as if death were the end of everything?’ (Matt. 6:19, 20; Luke 12:16-21) We will make the best decisions if we strengthen our faith that the new world is close at hand.
5-6. Why do we need strong faith in times of distress? Illustrate.
5 We also face trials that require strong faith. We may face persecution, chronic illness, or other things that can cause us to become discouraged. At first, we might meet our trial with determination. But if it drags on​—as trials often do—​we will need strong faith in order to endure and to continue serving Jehovah with joy.​—Rom. 12:12; 1 Pet. 1:6, 7.
6 When undergoing a trial, we may feel that Jehovah’s new world will never come. Does this mean that our faith is weak? Not necessarily. Consider an illustration. In the middle of a brutally cold winter, we may feel that summer will never come. And yet summer does come. Likewise, when we are deeply discouraged, we might feel that the new world will never come. If our faith is strong, though, we know that God’s promises will be fulfilled. (Ps. 94:3, 14, 15; Heb. 6:17-19) With that confidence, we can continue putting our worship of Jehovah first in our life.
 7. What attitude must we guard against?
7 Consider one more area in which strong faith is required​—the preaching work. Many people to whom we preach feel that the “good news” about God’s coming new world is too good to be true. (Matt. 24:14; Ezek. 33:32) We never want to allow their skeptical attitude to rub off on us. To prevent that from happening, we must keep strengthening our faith. Let us consider three ways we can do that.
MEDITATE ON THE RANSOM
8-9. How can meditating on the ransom affect our faith?
8 One way we can strengthen our faith is by meditating on the ransom. The ransom is a guarantee that God’s promises will come true. When we carefully reflect on why the ransom was provided and what it involved, we strengthen our faith that God’s promise of endless life in a better world is sure to be fulfilled. Why can we say that?
9 Well, what did the ransom involve? Jehovah sent his beloved firstborn Son, his closest companion, from heaven to be born as a perfect human. While on earth, Jesus endured all kinds of hardships. Then he suffered and died a painful death. What a high price Jehovah paid! Our loving God would never have allowed his Son to suffer and die just to provide a better but very brief life for us. (John 3:16; 1 Pet. 1:18, 19) Having paid so high a price, Jehovah will see to it that unending life in the new world becomes a reality.
CONTEMPLATE JEHOVAH’S POWER
10. According to Ephesians 3:20, what is Jehovah able to do?
10 A second way to strengthen our faith is by contemplating Jehovah’s power. He has the power to fulfill everything he promises to do. True, the fulfillment of the promise of unending life in a new world may seem impossible to humans. But Jehovah frequently promises things that humans could never accomplish. He is, after all, Almighty God. (Job 42:2; Mark 10:27) Would we expect him to make ordinary promises?​—Read Ephesians 3:20.
11. Give an example of one of God’s extraordinary promises. (See the box “Some Extraordinary Promises Fulfilled.”)
11 Consider some of the seemingly impossible things that Jehovah promised his people in the past. He assured Abraham and Sarah that they would have a son in their old age. (Gen. 17:15-17) He also told Abraham that his descendants would be given the land of Canaan. During the many years that Abraham’s descendants, the Israelites, were slaves in Egypt, it must have seemed as if that promise would never come true. But it did. Later, Jehovah announced that elderly Elizabeth would have a child. He also told Mary, a virgin, that she would give birth to his own Son, whose arrival Jehovah had promised thousands of years earlier in the garden of Eden​—another promise fulfilled!​—Gen. 3:15.
SOME EXTRAORDINARY PROMISES FULFILLED






Promise
Abraham and Sarah would have a son in their old age.​—Gen. 18:14.
Why It Seemed Impossible
Sarah was past the age of childbearing.​—Gen. 18:11.
Fulfillment
Gen. 21:1, 2







Promise
Abraham’s descendants would make their home in Canaan.​—Gen. 17:8.
Why It Seemed Impossible
The Israelites became slaves in Egypt.​—Ex. 1:13, 14.
Fulfillment
Josh. 11:23







Promise
A descendant of David would sit on Jehovah’s throne forever.​—2 Sam. 7:8, 16.
Why It Seemed Impossible
There were no more Judean kings after Zedekiah died.​—Jer. 52:11.
Fulfillment
Luke 1:32, 33







Promise
Jerusalem would be restored after the Israelites spent 70 years in Babylonian captivity.​—Jer. 29:10.
Why It Seemed Impossible
Jerusalem was desolate, and Babylon was known for never releasing its captives.​—Isa. 14:17.
Fulfillment
Ezra 1:1-3; 2:1







Promise
The Assyrians would not defeat Jerusalem.​—2 Ki. 19:32-34.
Why It Seemed Impossible
The Assyrian army was great and had already captured many Judean cities and towns.​—2 Ki. 18:13.
Fulfillment
Isa. 37:36, 37







Promise
Elizabeth would have a son, and Mary would give birth to God’s Son.​—Luke 1:13, 31.
Why It Seemed Impossible
Elizabeth was barren and well along in years. Mary was a virgin.​—Luke 1:18, 34.
Fulfillment
Luke 1:57; 2:7



12. Of what do Joshua 23:14 and Isaiah 55:10, 11 assure us about Jehovah’s power?
12 We strengthen our faith in Jehovah’s power to bring about the new world by reflecting on his record of making and fulfilling his promises. (Read Joshua 23:14; Isaiah 55:10, 11.) That makes us better prepared to help others appreciate that the promised new world is no dream, no fantasy. Jehovah himself declared with regard to the new heavens and new earth: “These words are faithful and true.”​—Rev. 21:1, 5.
FILL YOUR LIFE WITH SPIRITUAL ACTIVITIES




CONGREGATION MEETINGS
How can this spiritual activity strengthen your faith? (See paragraph 13)



13. How can congregation meetings strengthen our faith? Explain.
13 A third way we can strengthen our faith is by spending time in spiritual activities. Consider, for example, how we benefit from our congregation meetings. Anna, who has spent decades in various features of the full-time ministry, says: “Meetings keep my faith solidly anchored. Even if the speaker is limited in his teaching ability or does not impart anything new, I will often hear something that leads me to a better understanding of a Bible truth, and that strengthens my faith.”b No doubt we also appreciate faith-building comments from those in the audience.​—Rom. 1:11, 12; 10:17.




FIELD MINISTRY
How can this spiritual activity strengthen your faith? (See paragraph 14)



14. How does the ministry strengthen our faith?
14 We also strengthen our faith when we participate in the field ministry. (Heb. 10:23) Barbara, who has been serving Jehovah for over 70 years, says: “I have always found the preaching work to be faith-strengthening. The more I talk to others about Jehovah’s wonderful promises, the more my faith is kept alive and strong.”




PERSONAL STUDY
How can this spiritual activity strengthen your faith? (See paragraph 15)



15. How does personal study strengthen our faith? (See also pictures.)
15 Consider another spiritual activity that strengthens our faith: personal study. Susan finds it helpful to schedule her study sessions. She says: “On Sunday, I study for the next week’s Watchtower Study. On Monday and Tuesday, I prepare for the midweek meeting. On the remaining days, I work on a personal study project.” By maintaining a consistent schedule for study, Susan continually builds her faith. Irene, who has served for decades at world headquarters, has found it faith-strengthening to study Bible prophecy. She says: “I find it amazing that Jehovah’s prophecies are fulfilled to the smallest detail.”c
“IT WILL WITHOUT FAIL COME TRUE”
16. Why does Jehovah’s assurance to Habakkuk have meaning for us today? (Hebrews 10:36, 37)
16 Some of Jehovah’s servants have been waiting for the end of this system of things for a long time. From a human standpoint, the fulfillment of God’s promise might seem to be delaying. Jehovah addressed that concern when he assured the prophet Habakkuk: “The vision is yet for its appointed time, and it is rushing toward its end, and it will not lie. Even if it should delay, keep in expectation of it! For it will without fail come true. It will not be late!” (Hab. 2:3) Did God provide that assurance for the benefit of Habakkuk only? Or do His words have meaning for us today? Under inspiration, the apostle Paul applied those words to Christians, who are in expectation of the new world. (Read Hebrews 10:36, 37.) Yes, we can be sure that even if our promised deliverance seems to delay, “it will without fail come true. It will not be late!”
17. How did one sister apply the counsel Jehovah gave to Habakkuk?
17 Many servants of Jehovah have applied Jehovah’s counsel to “keep in expectation”​—even for decades. Louise, for example, began serving Jehovah in 1939. She says: “At that time, I thought Armageddon would come before I finished high school. That didn’t happen. Over the years, I found it helpful to read what I call ‘the waiting accounts’​—the Bible narratives of Noah, Abraham, Joseph, and others who had to wait a long time before receiving the promised reward from Jehovah. Remaining in expectation has kept me and others focused on the certainty of the nearness of the new world.” Many other longtime worshippers of Jehovah agree!
18. How can observing creation strengthen our faith in the coming new world?
18 True, the new world is not yet here. Note, however, some of the things that are here​—the stars, the trees, the animals, and your fellow humans. No one would doubt that all these things are real, even though there was a time when they did not exist. They are now here only because Jehovah created them. (Gen. 1:1, 26, 27) Our God has also purposed to establish a new world. He will fulfill that purpose. In the new world, people will enjoy endless life in perfect health. At God’s appointed time, the new world will become as real as the universe around us today.​—Isa. 65:17; Rev. 21:3, 4.
19. How can you strengthen your faith?
19 In the meantime, use every opportunity you have to strengthen your faith. Build appreciation for the ransom. Contemplate Jehovah’s power. Fill your life with spiritual activities. By doing so, you can be among “those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”​—Heb. 6:11, 12; Rom. 5:5.

HOW CAN WE STRENGTHEN OUR FAITH BY . . .
  meditating on the ransom?

  contemplating Jehovah’s power?

  engaging in spiritual activities?




SONG 139 See Yourself When All Is New
a Many today do not believe in the Bible’s promise of a new world. They think that it is only a dream, a fairy tale, too good to be true. However, we are certain that all of Jehovah’s promises will be fulfilled. Even so, to keep our faith alive, we must continue strengthening it. How? This article will explain.
b Some names have been changed.
c Many articles on Bible prophecy can be found by looking under the subject “Prophecy” in the Watch Tower Publications Index. For example, see the article “What Jehovah Foretells Comes to Be” in the January 1, 2008, issue of The Watchtower.

