Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Jehovah ‘Makes It Grow’ in Fiji
JEHOVAH’S blessings are manifest on the faithful Kingdom proclaimers on the beautiful islands of Fiji. There are now 1,049 witnesses of Jehovah on the islands, a 10-percent increase over the previous year. They have planted and watered, and God has made things grow.a​—1 Corinthians 3:6, 7.
The Watch Tower Society’s branch office states that “unexpectedly people are taking an interest in Bible study.” Members of one congregation worked an isolated village where they had previously been poorly received. But on this occasion the village head announced that all villagers should stay home to listen to Jehovah’s Witnesses and that afterward the ladies should provide refreshments for the brothers at the community hall. On returning two weeks later, a regular pioneer found 28 people ready to study the Bible. Since then, this village has been visited with the good news every two weeks to assist the interested ones. On each visit “additional ones are added to the studies.”
One of the 68 new ones baptized at a recent district convention had been a Sunday-school teacher for nine years. He was from a very religious family. He was contacted by two Witnesses in their house-to-house ministry, and “after long discussions and many return visits, a study was finally started.” After two months of Bible study, he resigned his position as Sunday-school teacher, took his stand for the truth, and was baptized after a year. Paraphrasing the words of the apostle Paul, he said: “You may have heard of my zealous work in false religion when I was very zealous for the traditions of my fathers. But now I have found the truth, and I am glad to be serving Jehovah with you.”​—Compare Galatians 1:13, 14.
In 1984 Fiji had two district conventions for the first time. Twenty-two elders from the main island offered, at their own expense, to give program support to the second smaller convention on another island. The branch office arranged travel and expected 90 brothers to attend from the main island. However, 115 traveled by special plane and 320 by chartered ship. Because of the Witnesses’ fine conduct, one airline pilot stated: “I am amazed at their conduct, being ready to comply with directions. When I announced that they had to deplane because of a mechanical fault, they quietly got off the plane without a murmur or complaint. On reboarding, they did so happily, quietly, without bickering. I wish all airline passengers were like you people.”
The chief engineer of the chartered ship commented: “It’s good to have you people as passengers, for you’re totally different from the Christian youth group we just transported to another island. . . . You are a clean and easy-to-get-along-with people.” A fellow passenger said: “I have seen something I have never experienced before . . . I was sleeping on a cold deck when one of your sisters gave my wife and me her mattress to sleep on. I have been searching for a religion like this.” This person attended the convention to see and learn more.
Actually, the fine conduct of all these brothers is what one should expect from true Christians. Jesus said: “Every good tree produces fine fruit.” (Matthew 7:17) It is a joy to see the increase Jehovah is giving to his faithful worshipers in Fiji. And no doubt many more will respond to the good news as they listen further and continue to observe the fine conduct of Jehovah’s people.
[Footnotes]
Undoubtedly, Jehovah will bring greater increase as the Witnesses now conduct 1,107 home Bible studies, a 42-percent increase over last year.

