Chile
CHILE is a land rich in contrasts! It stretches along the western coast of South America for 2,650 miles (4,265 km)​—more than half the Pacific coastline of the continent. This makes it a land of unlimited variety, from the torrid deserts of the north to the fjords and glaciers of the south. Within this area lie rugged mountains rich in mineral ore, desert plains utterly barren, fertile valleys, forests, myriads of shimmering lakes and isles, and glacial areas hemmed in by a thundering ocean on the west and the formidable Andes Mountains on the east. Its elevation runs from sea level to the flanks of the highest mountain in the western hemisphere, Mount Aconcagua, which towers about 23,000 feet (7,000 m) on the Chilean-Argentine border.
Chile’s northern sector is, more than any other part of the earth, nearly an absolute desert. Why, there are points in the Atacama Desert where not a drop of rain has fallen in 20 years! Yet in the southern part of the country there is an annual rainfall of over 100 inches (250 cm).
Though largely composed of mountains, the country has a central zone where about 67 percent of the people live. It is one of the garden places of the world. The central zone has a climate similar to that of California and favors the growing of fruits such as apples, pears, peaches, apricots, plums, cherries, grapes, figs, oranges and lemons.
In the south of the country is the lake region. Here is found the famous Lago de Todos los Santos, also called Lake Esmeralda. Theodore Roosevelt once called this lake “the most beautiful lake I have seen in all the world.” It lies nestled between mountain peaks, and its emerald-colored waters are disturbed only by waterfalls that plunge down the mountainsides into this placid lake.
In addition to the mainland, Chile has a number of islands: The Juan Fernández Islands are situated 365 miles (587 km) west of the city of Valparaíso. Among these islands is found the famous Robinson Crusoe Island. Easter Island is located some 2,000 miles (3,200 km) from the coast of Chile and its people are of Polynesian origin. Here are found hundreds of monstrous, eyeless stone statues that have long perplexed archaeologists.
Spanish is the language of Chile, and its people are largely of Spanish background, though influenced greatly during the last 100 years by the Germans, the British and the Americans. About a third of the population have mixed Spanish and Indian ancestry. The Indians gave Chile its name, calling the region chilli, meaning “place where the land ends.” That is precisely how it must have looked to early natives as they gazed out at the apparently endless reaches of the Pacific Ocean.
THE “GOOD NEWS” REACHES CHILE
The preaching of the good news of God’s kingdom began in Chile with the arrival of Richard Traub. Brother Traub had learned the truth in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and had dedicated his life to Jehovah in 1925. While he was pioneering in Argentina near the Andes Mountains, a desire grew within him to open up the preaching work in Chile. Brother Juan Muñiz, the then branch overseer in Argentina, agreed that it seemed to be a good idea. Brother Traub was assigned to Chile.
He arrived in Santiago on the evening of April 30, 1930. Of course, there was no one to meet him at the train station, and that night he stayed at a nearby hotel. The next day he rented a room. Brother Traub tried to cash a check that had been given him to help him to get started, but he could not get the money immediately, since the bank had to find out if there were funds to cover the check. In the meantime his money and gifts of food ran out, and our self-sacrificing pioneer brother went for eight days without eating!
Although he had no literature to offer, on May 4, 1930, he began to work from house to house. It was with full confidence in Jehovah and with a true missionary spirit that Brother Traub began his work as the first Witness among the 4,000,000 people living in this land at that time.
The Roman Catholic religion had been the state religion until the year 1925 when a new constitution, separating Church and State, was adopted. While working from house to house, Brother Traub was questioned by the police, but when he explained the nature of his work he had no difficulty whatsoever. He found there truly was freedom of worship.
Brother Traub described his feelings during those early times this way: “Each Sunday as the hour of the Watchtower study drew near I would walk to Mount San Cristóbal and under the shade of the trees immerse myself in study and prayer. Yes, I felt very lonely and had a consuming desire to talk to another brother about the truth, but following my private study I felt strengthened and was filled with the realization that I was not alone. I was ready for another week’s work.”
INTERESTED PERSONS ARE FOUND
While witnessing from house to house, Brother Traub met a God-fearing man by the name of Juan Flores. He accepted literature and asked many questions. At the time he was being visited by the Seventh-Day Adventists. However, after listening to a discussion between them and Brother Traub, Flores decided to study the book The Harp of God.
“Thereafter,” Brother Traub relates, “I rented an apartment and began to invite people to a public Bible lecture and Bible study each Sunday. Juan Flores, the first person who responded to an invitation, asked: ‘And the others, when will they come?’ My answer was: ‘They will come.’” And within a short time they started to come.
In the area called the Quinta Normal, Brother Traub found a man who accepted literature and who then invited him to give Bible talks at his evangelist church. Juan Flores accompanied Brother Traub and listened to him share the Kingdom message with those gathered. They were invited to return. The evangelical preacher was happy because attendance was up and the collection plates full after a visit from Brother Traub. Brother Traub did not agree with the collection plates, so he gave a talk at the church based on John 10:12 and the “hired man.” With that the majority of the churchgoers, among them a young lady, Consuelo Galvez, began to attend the meetings conducted by Brother Traub. In time the evangelist preacher was left alone, his group having disappeared.
Juan Flores invited Brother Traub to live at his home on Concón Street and to use it as a meeting place. (It has since been enlarged, and to this day it is used as a Kingdom Hall.) After a little more than 10 months of activity the time had arrived for the interested ones to be baptized. So Brother Traub wrote Brother Muñiz and asked if he might come for that historic occasion.
On February 13, 1931, the first baptism in Chile was conducted by Jehovah’s Witnesses with Brother Muñiz giving the talk. The eight persons baptized on that occasion were Juan Flores, his wife Teresa, his mother Delfina Villablanca, Juan Castillo, Pedro Ortiz, Roberto Rojas, Margarita Sandoval and another Sister Flores. According to Brother Traub, all eight continued faithful. Sister Villablanca became a pioneer and served as such until her death. Juan Flores helped to organize a small congregation in Illapel. But there was more to come!
On March 29, 1931, five more were baptized, among them Consuelo Galvez, who was to become Sister Traub and his faithful companion until her death. In less than a year 13 were baptized.
Meanwhile, other new ones were taking their stand for true worship. The work in Santiago was taking hold, but what about scattering the seeds of truth in distant places?
ANOTHER ENERGETIC PIONEER ARRIVES
One of the early pioneers to come to Chile was Kathe Palm, and she played a dramatic role in answer to the above question. We will let her tell us something about her zealous work in the Chilean field. Sister Palm writes:
“Hilma Sjoberg sent money to the Watch Tower Society headquarters in November 1934 to pay for a trip from the United States to Colombia by ship. The Society asked me if I wanted to help Sister Sjoberg in South America. What a wonderful provision! So by December I arrived in Buenaventura, Colombia. Sister Sjoberg arrived from Ecuador. We went to Bogotá for about a year and placed cartons of books. Then Sister Sjoberg had to return to Texas. She advised me not to stay alone in Colombia and suggested that I write to a brother who had opened up the work in Chile.
“Finally, the invitation arrived to come to Chile, as Brother Traub’s home was open for a pioneer. The whole country was the territory! How to get there? The best way was by ship, so back to Buenaventura. The port captain told me of a Chilean ship that was to arrive shortly. So the door was opened.
“‘Yes, we will take you,’ said the captain of the freighter. ‘No,’ he said, ‘I will not take the only money you have ($15), although I’ll accept some of those books that you have there. Now go ashore and get your things, and I’ll show you to your cabin.’ After 17 days of a wonderful voyage with lots of witnessing to the crew and a few passengers, we arrived in Chile. Brother Traub was waiting for me at Valparaíso. That was in February of 1936.”
In Santiago Sister Palm especially enjoyed the sight of the snow-covered mountains in the background and an entire avenue of pink Japanese cherry trees in bloom. What scenery! But on with her story:
“The first territory that Brother Traub gave me was the center of Santiago. Here were the government palace, government buildings, all offices and businesses. I placed many books in this territory, often entire sets of all the current books published by the Watch Tower Society. As for the government palace, no one objected in office after office except one, the telegraph communication​—they must not be disturbed. On the last floor I found the palace library. The librarian recognized the books at once and told me the titles of all that he already had, so I left him Vindication, (Book One) in both English and Spanish, as these were the newest then, and he was very pleased to get them. One man even told me that he would like to change places with me as far as government was concerned, for he recognized the far superior value of working for the theocratic government.
“While working the business district in 1936, I met a jeweler with a German name. So I witnessed to him in German and showed him the Vindication book. When he saw Jehovah’s name in it, he turned white and shouted at me to get out of his place, otherwise he would get his revolver and kill me. Shouting, he shook his fist at me and then banged it down so hard on the showcase that he broke the glass and cut his hand! By that time I had my book bag ready and made a prompt departure. Trembling on the street, I went next door to a German art shop. ‘No,’ they said, ‘we do not wish to comment on this man, for we only know that he is a fanatic Nazi.’ Those were the days prior to World War II.”
PORTABLE PHONOGRAPH APPRECIATED
Before the war broke out, Sister Palm relates, Brother Traub was able to get one of the Society’s portable phonographs, with short recorded Bible lectures on 78-rpm discs. How delighted he was with it! “Why,” says Sister Palm, “he even managed to copy the phonograph so that quite a few of the Chilean brothers could have their own Chilean-made model.
“Years later, the second officer of the ship that had brought me to Chile went to the Watchtower headquarters on one of his visits to New York. There at 117 Adams Street he contacted Brothers Fred Peach and Harry Pinnock, who sent me the newest vertical-type phonograph with more records and newer ones too. This one could readily be used at the doorsteps, and, oh, what attention it gained, for nobody had ever seen anything like it! Also the one-hour recorded talks were used on the Santiago radio stations. A few years later they were heard on almost all the radio stations of the main towns of the provinces.”
SPREADING SEEDS OF TRUTH UP NORTH
Brother Traub thought it would be well for Sister Palm to spread the seeds of truth in the northern part of the country. “He assigned me to start working the farthest north in Arica and up the fertile valley of Azapa,” she reports. “So I worked from door to door in each town and always tried, and generally succeeded, to place the entire set of those beautiful, rainbow-colored books in the public library, school libraries and union halls.
“Every mining camp, every nitrate camp, every company town, large or small, as well as big copper- and iron-mining towns, was witnessed to from door to door. It was necessary to have cartons and cartons of books sent ahead to each new address. Almost all my witnessing work was done on foot. I found a saddlebag like one used on burros and would fill it on one side with about 30 books and on the other side with some 150 to 200 booklets. Then I would carry it on my shoulders, using another full handbag of literature for use at each call. It was also necessary to carry a blanket, a toothbrush, and so forth, as one usually found lodging each night where one stopped.
“In Copiapó I found a sulfur mine high on the slopes of the Andes Mountains. Here lived about 30 to 40 workers and the families of the administrator and his assistant. They were surprised to have a woman visit them. How did I ever get there? I happened to find a man who was driving to the mine, and he was glad to take me along. ‘Yes,’ he stated, ‘I will see to it that one of the two ladies up there will give you lodging.’
“Then everybody at the mine told me: ‘We don’t use money here; all our wages are paid to us in the town office when we get our leave.’ So the administrator authorized everyone to take what literature he wanted and just sign his name and the amount on a list. I placed all the literature I had and took orders for much more. This I delivered to the office in town. All the workers seemed anxious to read the publications, and they were ever so pleased with the ‘good news.’”
In 1939 Sister Beta Abbott, who had been serving in Cuba, sent word that she would be coming to Chile. Sister Abbott was assigned to witness to the Americans who were working high up in the copper mine of “El Teniente,” just south of Santiago. She was able to work there only a short time, as the altitude was too much for her. But the town at the base of the mountains, Rancagua, was fine.
There at Rancagua Sister Lucila Reyes offered her lodging in her hotel. She stayed there several years. Sister Reyes and her husband had found the truth a few years before, when Brother Traub explained the “good news” to them. Before this, an evangelical pastor often visited the Reyes family. This clergyman insisted that if they wanted to obey God they had to get rid of all the hotel’s supply of wine (which provided quite a good business). Well, poor Mr. Reyes poured all his chuicos (10-liter jugs) of wine into the sewer! Then Brother Traub came and explained Bible truths. “What!” Mr. Reyes said, “wine is not forbidden?” Oh, that was music to his ears, as Brother Traub proved it with their own family Bible. The Reyes home and hotel were always open for any and all Witnesses.
In 1949 we had a national convention in Rancagua, and Sister Reyes, now a widow, emptied her hotel to have it ready for as many assembly delegates as she could. A “sandwich parade” (a parade of brothers with big placards on front and back advertising the main lecture) was held in the center of Rancagua. There were problems, though, when the school director refused to allow the brothers to use the school’s hall, even though the Ministry of Education had authorized its use for our convention. When Mr. Daniel González, a judge of the appellate court, heard about this, he took a trip to see this director and asked him why some weeks earlier he had authorized a Catholic function in his school’s hall. Being confronted with this fact, he could hardly continue to refuse. A marvelous assembly was held in Rancagua.
Years later Sister Abbott moved to Santiago. Since she had always maintained herself with her excellent sewing, she found it easy to get work from ambassadors’ wives and others in prominent positions. This gave her the opportunity to witness to these people. She often remarked that it must be the hand of Jehovah, because when Witnesses called at these elegant homes, the maids would never let them in to speak with the owners. After many years of faithful service, Sister Abbott died in 1975 at the age of 93.
COVERING THE SOUTHERN REGION
Since the southernmost province of Chile, Magallanes, can best be worked in the summer months, Brother Traub had Sister Palm travel by boat to Punta Arenas. Ten cartons of books were sent there for her use.
In contrast to the dry north Sister Palm now found herself among greenery, rowboats, sailboats, launches, small steamers, islands and more islands. How enjoyable! Finally, after several days of travel through fjord and glacier country, the town of Punta Arenas on the Strait of Magellan was reached. Sister Palm continues:
“Of all the Chilean towns, I always liked it the best. It has no flies, no fleas, no bedbugs and no beggars, and one sleeps more soundly and wakes more refreshed than in any other place I have visited.”
Witnessing in Punta Arenas required having literature in more than the Spanish language. There are many people of Yugoslav descent, and one could find many estancias (large sheep ranches) administrated by Englishmen. The estancias can have as many as 80,000 sheep on 250,000 acres. Till this day it makes for a picturesque scene to see the sheepherders riding their horses, accompanied by their well-trained dogs, against a backdrop of majestic mountains covered with glaciers that come down to the edge of beautiful lakes.
The people in this isolated region of Punta Arenas and Puerto Natales are well known for their friendliness and hospitality. Upon coming to an estancia, one is immediately invited into a large kitchen where a pot of coffee or of a mate (herb drink) is ready along with some bread. At mealtimes there is always a cordero asado (roast lamb) with as much as you want to eat. Much interest was found, and the response to the preaching work was good.
From Punta Arenas one can travel to Tierra del Fuego​—Land of Fire—​the name Ferdinand Magellan gave this island in 1520 while passing through the strait named after him. Sister Palm reached the small town of Porvenir on this island and had the privilege of spreading the seeds of truth in this distant part of the earth. A kind Estonian family gave her lodging for several weeks so that she could visit all the estancias in that region.
BACK NORTH
Winter was approaching, so it was time to head north by steamer. Sister Palm’s return trip took her to Chiloé Island. She writes: “As I went on to smaller ports on the island I found kind people. They always listened and had many questions and wondered how it could be possible to have been lied to for so many years about purgatory and hellfire. They nearly always took some literature.
“Near one small port the priest had managed to spy on my work. So when I did not watch closely enough, one of his dupes stole my saddlebag filled with books, also my handwoven, bright-colored Bolivian blanket. On reporting it to the police, they just shrugged their shoulders. But as I went on that day with what I had in my handbag a man came along the road. He had already heard of the theft and he wanted me to know that he and his wife and others were sorry. ‘Please come with me to my home,’ he said, ‘for my wife has a new blanket for you [handmade, of course] and please spend the night with us.’ So I went. It was an even better blanket; a larger poncho. I bought it at once; it was quite reasonable. I stayed the night with them, answering many of their Bible questions.” (After more than 35 years of use Sister Palm still has her Chiloé poncho.)
Moving north as instructed by Brother Traub, Sister Palm visited Osorno. The governor of this province was pleased to receive her. He showed her the book Government, which he had read and enjoyed. Then he promised that in Osorno no one would hinder our work, and that proved to be true.
On to the province of Valdivia. Here Sister Palm went to the seaport of Corral. She relates: “I found a union hall to play our one-hour lecture ‘Face the Facts’ and the hall was filled with the people I had invited. They even brought some of that beautiful national flower, the copihue, along with fern leaves to decorate the hall. So as to banish the smell of stale cigarette smoke in the hall I got some eucalyptus leaves to burn and it helped scent the air. A young girl went up to the gallery to look down on our decorations and said: ‘Hum, just like Atkinson’s perfume.’ (A famous English perfume in Chile.) Did I laugh! After the discourse the visitors took along their gifts of booklets and magazines and asked when would they hear more of those good things.”
ANOTHER ZEALOUS PIONEER
This account of scattering the seeds of truth along the length and breadth of Chile would not be complete without telling about another zealous pioneer, Theodore Laguna, who came here from the United States. Brother Laguna attended the 1935 convention in Washington, D.C., and heard the stimulating discourses of Brother Rutherford urging the Lord’s people to consider the possibility of carrying the good news of the Kingdom to South America. Brother Laguna was fired with enthusiasm and made plans to move. On arriving in Chile in 1936, he took up the preaching work in the city of Concepción. After several years of pioneering, Brother Laguna married and began to raise a family in the city of Chillán, where he helped the spiritual growth of the congregation there.
These self-sacrificing pioneers, before the arrival of graduates from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, played an important role in those early days of the preaching work. Many seeds of truth had been scattered from Arica to Punta Arenas and even to Tierra del Fuego. Though lying dormant until more preachers of the “good news” could reach them with additional waters of truth, they were planted and were awaiting the moment to blossom and grow to Jehovah’s praise.
FIRST KINGDOM HALL​—FIRST CONVENTION
In 1944 construction began on the first Kingdom Hall to be built in Chile. A sister donated the property in Santiago, and the brothers went to work with brick and mortar. It was finished in August of that year, in time for the first convention ever held in Chile.
The public talk was “Peace​—Can It Last?” with 250 persons in attendance. Four radio stations carried the lecture, and two of them continued to broadcast the Society’s programs for the rest of the year.
MISSIONARIES AND A BRANCH OFFICE
The first Gilead-trained missionaries arrived in Chile in 1945. They were Brothers Joseph Ferrari and Albert Mann. There were then only 65 publishers in Chile.
The Society had arranged for a convention that was to include the first visit of a president and a vice-president of the Watch Tower Society to Chile, namely, N. H. Knorr and F. W. Franz. On March 25, 1945, the public talk, “One World, One Government,” was given to an audience of 340 persons. Five persons were baptized at this convention.
During his visit Brother Knorr arranged for a branch office to be set up with Brother Joseph Ferrari as the branch overseer. Up to this time the work had been directed from the Argentine branch.
In addition, Sister Palm was asked about taking up the special pioneer work. She responded: “I’ll try, Brother Knorr.” So Sister Palm became the first special pioneer in Chile. After so many years of constantly moving from one place to another with the Kingdom message, she was to settle down in Santiago and learn how to conduct home Bible studies. The book “The Truth Shall Make You Free” had been translated into Spanish and it had a question booklet that helped in this work.
BIBLE STUDY WORK
Shortly thereafter a sister invited Sister Palm to come with her to try to start a home Bible study. “Did I tremble!” recalls Sister Palm. Can you imagine! She had spoken with provincial governors and others in important positions, but now she trembled at the thought of conducting a home Bible study with an interested person!
She continues: “So we went, made the call, placed the book with the family and made arrangements for the Bible study. Thereafter, the children were well prepared for the study, as was the young mother. Only the father refused to share in the study. And so it was that the first person with whom I studied the Bible came into the truth, the children growing up and dedicating themselves to Jehovah as well.
“As I lost my fear of conducting home Bible studies I found that one could get many more studies than one could care for. But we were instructed to spend only half of our time in conducting studies. I enjoy it more than any other kind of witnessing.” Yes, from fear to enjoyment, that is progressing with Jehovah’s advancing organization!
MORE MISSIONARIES ARRIVE
At the close of the year 1945, 10 more missionaries arrived: Louise and Frances Stubbs, Stella Burton, Stephania Payne, Elsa Sutton, John and Louise Baxter, Clara Giza, Lydia Walther and Lola Buntain. Everything was new to them​—the language, the customs and the habits of the people. But they found that with hard work they were able to communicate with the people, who are patient and kindly disposed to help newcomers learn their language.
This group of missionaries had the privilege of setting up the first missionary home at 3004 Lyon Street in Santiago. The branch office was also a part of this home. Since the original congregation was at the opposite side of the city, it was decided to combine the dining and living room areas and form a new congregation. So in 1946 the second congregation was formed in this metropolis of Santiago with its 1,500,000 inhabitants.
FIRST CIRCUIT OVERSEER
In July 1946 Brother Albert Mann, one of the first two missionaries to come to Chile, was assigned as the first circuit overseer in the country. There were just nine congregations, with a total of 93 publishers in such places as Chillán, Concepción, Rancagua, Melipilla, Illapel and Santiago. Brother Mann’s example of faith and devotion has been a wonderful stimulus to many young people, as well as older ones, in the truth.
When he began as a circuit overseer, accommodations were scarce in the small congregations. This meant sleeping in hotels. Sometimes it was a case of trying to sleep, as the barroom or entertainment hall would be noisy all night long. Two weeks were spent with each congregation, allowing time for teaching the brothers organization and, primarily, training them for the field service as publishers of the “good news.”
MISSIONARY WORK IN VALPARAISO
In November of 1946 nine new missionaries arrived. A missionary home was established in the port city of Valparaíso, and the witness work was begun in Chile’s second largest city, which is built on 41 hills clustered, crescent-like, around a broad, open bay. Though aided by the 16 cable cars on different hills, it was tiring work climbing those hills to talk to the people.
One of the first persons to respond to the truth in Valparaíso was Aida Guzmán. She attended the meetings held in the living room of the missionary home in 1948. She remembers that because of a shortage of chairs full cartons of literature were distributed about the room and wooden planks were placed across them to form benches.
Meanwhile, the missionaries were busy. Sister Elsa Sutton, who later married Hollis Smith, found a young man who desired to study the Bible. This young man, Alberto Muñoz, was opposed by his mother, so the study was carried on in one of the public parks. He repeated all he learned to his two younger sisters and also to a neighbor, Sergio González. The girls, in turn, repeated all of it to their mother. Due to the loving persistence of the two girls the mother finally asked for a family Bible study. The son and the two girls entered the pioneer work and later the girls, Graciela and Elena Muñoz, received invitations to attend Gilead School. The neighbor, Sergio González, accepted the truth and he became one of the early special pioneers in Chile.
The work started in Valparaíso by the missionaries has certainly prospered over the years, and now there are nine congregations here.
CONTINUED EXPANSION IN THE CAPITAL
In 1946 four missionaries were assigned to Santiago: Larry and Margaret Laing, Dorothea Smith and Dora Ward. As with all new missionaries, amusing incidents are related with regard to learning the new language. For example, off to the meat market a missionary went one day to ask for a pound of pulpa, or meat. The butcher and others in the shop had hearty laughs when the missionary asked for a pound of pulpo, or octopus!
In 1948 an 11-year-old girl took hold of the truth. This little girl, Gladys Ramírez, worked as a vacation pioneer and enjoyed being trained by the missionaries. She dreamed of the day when she too could be a missionary and so began to study English. Some 10 years later she was able to fulfill her ambition when she was invited to attend Gilead School, graduating in the year 1958. She is still faithfully serving Jehovah as a regular pioneer in the city of Valparaíso.
And what about our dear Sister Palm? She had been assigned to work on the north side of Santiago as a special pioneer. Due to the hard work of the brothers a third congregation was formed in Santiago in 1948. A brother gave up his garage. It was painted and renovated for use as a meeting hall. The Independencia Congregation has grown and been divided many times over; in fact, there are now 12 congregations in that part of the city and 79 in all Santiago. With the formation of this congregation Sister Palm returned to work with the original Quinta Normal Congregation. But, as she relates, she still had a longing for opening up the work in new places, as is evidenced by her following remarks:
“Every Monday I took a day off [to rest? No.] to go out of town, for I missed witnessing in the country. I took a bus as far as it would go and worked the small fruit or vegetable farms all around Santiago, returning late at night, beginning the town territory and studies again on Tuesday. On those Mondays I could place plenty of magazines, also books and booklets, as many as I could carry, and usually come back with my book bag and extra shopping bag filled with fruits and vegetables.
“Sometimes I returned with chickens that Sister Traub always was glad to add to her flock in the hen house. Once I brought a young pig and she was really happy about that! Why? Well, the 1953 New York International Convention was announced, and Brother Traub wanted to go to it. So this pig would grow and be fattened and then sold to help with the travel expenses. Also, Sister Traub bought a lot of very small pullets to raise and sell.
“After some weeks Sister Traub came to my room early one morning with a worried look. Now what? She had found several of the grown broilers dead​—a plague! She came the following two or three mornings to tell me how many more had died during the night. The time to go to New York was much too short to start all over with new pullets, so what could we do now to help our oldest Witness brother in Chile to get to the convention? Sister Traub said to me: ‘Why don’t you write a letter to Brother Knorr and tell him about it?’ That I did. As a result, Brother Traub was called into the branch office and asked how much was lacking. Jehovah made the trip possible, and what a delight it was for him to tell us all about it when he returned to Chile!”
A JUDGE LEARNS THE TRUTH
Meanwhile, the work was growing, and more and more people were being reached with the Kingdom message. In 1946 John Baxter, a missionary who had been in the country for only a few months, contacted Judge Daniel González, president of the appeals court in Santiago. A study was started and this man began to attend meetings. He was very helpful in securing different places to hold assemblies, such as the School of Law of the University of Chile and other schools.
In 1953 Judge González suffered a brain hemorrhage, and for several weeks he was unconscious much of the time. He gave strict instructions to his wife that no priest was to be allowed to see him, only Jehovah’s Witnesses would be welcome. Even prominent Chilean Cardinal José María Caro Rodriguez was denied the opportunity to see him. When he died, Mrs. González asked for a Witness to give the talk at the funeral. There were more than 600 people present, including the minister of justice, members of the cabinet, various members of congress, as well as the president of the Supreme Court. After some of these dignitaries had expressed themselves, one of our missionaries gave a discourse entitled “The Hope of Our Friend, Judge González.” He explained the wonderful hope of the resurrection that Judge González had embraced. An outstanding testimony was given to these high-ranking officials of the government, and many of them talked with the speaker after the discourse, expressing appreciation for the things heard.
BRANCH CHANGES
In 1949 Brother Ferrari, for health reasons, could no longer continue as branch overseer, so he was invited to help with the work in Concepción. Brother Albert Mann took charge of the branch office, a post that he filled for 10 years. He was advised to begin looking for a new location for the branch office and missionary home nearer the center of the city. One was found at 2390 Moneda Street, just a few blocks from the busy center of Santiago.
MORE WORKERS ARRIVE
By the year 1949 there were 25 missionaries working in Chile. The results of their work could be seen in that there were 211 publishers in the country. This was a fine increase from the 65 publishers in 1945 when the first missionaries arrived. But there was still only one Witness for every 20,000 persons, a clear indication of the desperate need for help. The big question in the minds of the brothers was not, “When will Armageddon come?” but “How are we going to get the ‘good news’ preached to all the people before the end comes?”
Help was coming: At the close of the year 20 new missionaries arrived as graduates of the 13th class of Gilead, and what a wonderful lift they proved to be for the organization! Six brothers, John and Harry Williams, Charles Corey, Raymond Tubbs, Daniel Davidson and Boyd Collins, were assigned to work in the city of Temuco. There was not one Witness in Temuco when they arrived, but by August of 1950 there was a congregation of 30 Kingdom proclaimers. A second group of brothers was assigned to the steep hills of Valparaíso. These were Harold Jackson, Dewaine Graber, Robert Knight and George Wilkes.
PRIESTS OPPOSE​—BUT LOSE INFLUENCE
In those days it was still commonly believed that the Bible was a Protestant book and thus prohibited to Catholics. One of the missionaries placed his first Bible in the country with a friendly householder, but later a priest came and tore it up in the face of the people.
At some doors just the mention of the word “Bible” would trigger the response, “We are Apostolic Roman Catholics” and a rapid closing of the door would follow. So we used the term “Sacred Scriptures,” which sounded more like the sacred history taught in the schools, until there was enough interest to explain that this was another term for the Bible.
The Catholic Church had widely circulated in Chile a new Mass book, Oremus. This had a small paragraph stating that the Bible was a Catholic book and should be read by all the faithful. Very few noticed this. So when anyone objected to the Bible, we quickly asked: “But did you read the Oremus?” “Oh, yes,” they would reply. “Then let us see just what it says on page 21.” This method opened many a person’s eyes and the door was kept open.
The Roman Catholic Church in Chile has never really presented violent opposition to our work as it has in other lands. Pamphlets and even a book have been published against us; loudspeakers have been used, but they have never incited the people to riot against us. When they have spoken out against us, it has boomeranged, as the Chilean is a patient and kind person who appreciates freedom of worship. Due to the conduct of the priests some have little respect for what the priests say. This is seen, too, in that very often the people tell us: “I am a Catholic, but I do not believe in the priest” or “I am a Catholic, but in my own way.” These people readily discuss the Bible, and only lack of time limits the number of Bible studies one can conduct.
GROWTH IN CONCEPCION AREA
Of the group of nine missionaries that arrived in 1946, five were assigned to the city of Concepción in the south. They were: Robert and Vora Hannan, Dorothy Brehmer, Willie Brown and Joan Brown. Joan became seriously ill and returned to the United States where she died in 1950, but her faithfulness is remembered by the many people with whom she studied the Bible.
Thanks in great part to the missionaries spearheading the work, the Concepción area had begun to grow. In 1949 Vora Hannan called at the home of Armando Badilla, who happily received the book “The Truth Shall Make You Free.” He told his fellow workers what he was learning in his Bible study. Soon Sister Hannan had two other studies. From these few persons there were later produced seven publishers, three of whom became special pioneers. Brother Badilla progressed to the point of becoming a congregation servant and now serves as an elder in one of the three congregations in Concepción.
There are many problems as well as many joys in the missionary field. Sister Hannan had an anthrax infection and later came down with a high fever. Because of this she was unable to make a return visit on a German lady who had fled Nazi Germany some years before. Notified by Brother Hannan of her condition, the German woman, remembering her first days in a foreign land, immediately visited Sister Hannan and offered to send her doctor to treat her. With the help of this lady Sister Hannan spent two months in a private room in the Regional Hospital, attended by one of the chief physicians, without it costing her one cent. Her illness caused her to lose her hearing and she had to make a new start in the witness work. She found the patience and friendliness of the Chilean people a great help in overcoming her handicap.
After having worked in Concepción for a time, special pioneer Sergio González was assigned to work in the mining town of Coronel. There he found sincere miners who quickly realized the difference between the teachings of the evangelical churches and the more exact teachings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He urged them to travel the 17 miles (27 km) by train to attend the meetings in Concepción when their work shifts permitted it. Struggling to make a living for their families, these men worked under difficult circumstances, having to travel several miles under the ocean floor to arrive at the mine face, where they were digging coal. Despite their lack of this world’s goods, they made many sacrifices for the Kingdom work. When the congregation in Coronel was formed in 1954, these six brothers paid for the rent of the Kingdom Hall out of their meager earnings and were glad to do so.
COURT CASE PROVIDES BASIS FOR FUTURE EXPANSION
By the year 1952 there was a total of 831 publishers in the 15 congregations in the country. Because of the increasing activity, opposition came from the Seventh-Day Adventists. The Adventists were distributing their magazine El Atalaya, and we were distributing the magazine La Atalaya, and they were arguing that the name of our magazine was similar to that of theirs. Since they had registered their name in Chile, they believed that they had the right to stop the circulation of ours. The following is part of a letter written on February 7, 1952, to a representative of their organization by President N. H. Knorr:
“As I said to you when you called on me here at 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, La Atalaya is published in Spanish, printed in Brooklyn, and circulated worldwide in all Spanish-speaking countries. It has become known the world over among Spanish-speaking people as a publication of the Watchtower Society. The title of your magazine is entirely different. Your magazine El Atalaya means ‘The Watchman.’ The title of our magazine, La Atalaya, means ‘The Watchtower.’ There is certainly a great difference between a man, a human, and a stone structure. I do not see how they can be confused. It is not our fault that the Spanish words look alike; they certainly do not have the same meaning.
“The Society has no intention of changing the name of our Spanish magazine. It is an American publication and may be mailed to any part of the world or distributed anywhere in South America. As I recall our conversation, you have used different names for your magazine in Mexico and other countries. If the matter is confusing, then why don’t you become uniform and use the same title for your magazine all over the world? Of course, I have no right to suggest a change in your magazine. You have the right to use whatever title you want, and you have chosen the title El Atalaya, ‘The Watchman,’ a human creature. La Atalaya, ‘The Watchtower,’ is a stone structure. Certainly Spanish-speaking people do not confuse these two things. Furthermore, the magazines are entirely different in appearance. I believe the intelligence of the Spanish-speaking people is sufficient to discern the difference between the two titles.”
Despite such reasoning with them, the Adventists pressed the matter into the Chilean courts. On March 10, 1953, the trial court’s decision showed that much more was observed by the judges than a difference in name. It was held that the subtitle “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom” was a distinguishing feature of our magazine. So the court ruled it was not convinced that a fraud had been produced, causing damage to the rights of the Adventists. The case was appealed by them to a higher court, and, on reviewing the case, that court observed that our magazine, La Atalaya, was much older than the Adventist magazine. Therefore, the court upheld the trial court’s decision, giving us a clear-cut victory with our most important Bible study aid.
JOYFUL EXPANSION
Brother Knorr made a visit to Chile at the end of 1953 to attend a district assembly. He also made arrangements for the purchase of the property at 1710 Moneda Street that had been rented in 1951 and that was being used as the branch office and missionary home. Further, he made arrangements to send missionaries out to more distant parts of the country to open up the preaching activity. Much stress was placed upon the special pioneer work so that more local brothers could likewise share in the privilege of going to outlying towns and cities.
Sister Kathe Palm was invited to move to the provinces and was assigned to San Antonio. Many magazines could be placed in this fine territory along the coast, where, in the summer, vacationers enjoyed the sandy beaches and hotels. With the help of two pioneers, Olga Chiffelle and Gladys Ramírez, a congregation was formed in San Antonio in the year 1956. Since San Antonio was a port and the branch had many cartons of literature in several languages, Sister Palm was asked if she would like to find ships with crews that could read some of these languages. She got her authorization card from the port authorities and participated in this different aspect of the work until the end of 1959.
How joyful all the publishers throughout the land were when it was announced in 1954 that the long-hoped-for figure of 1,000 publishers was attained! A peak of 1,018 shared in the field service.
AT LAST​—THE TIP OF SOUTH AMERICA!
It was in 1956 that six missionaries were first sent to Punta Arenas, at that time a city of some 40,000 inhabitants on the Strait of Magellan. Sister Stella Semczyszyn, one of the original group, tells the following story: “We got there in June of 1956. There had just been a flood and the weather was cold and wet. We found a lot of interest in the truth, placing between 60 and 70 books a month. Most of the people had never even seen a Bible, as reading it was prohibited by the priests.
“We started out in a small five-room home with a room set aside for meetings. In March of 1957 the first seven publishers reported. In a little over a year a group of 15 were working with us, and in October of that year we needed a larger missionary home with a larger room for the meetings. Eventually that proved to be too small and we used three of our rooms as a Hall. However, in 1967 the congregation rented another Kingdom Hall and the growth has been marvelous.” Yes, indeed! There are now two thriving congregations with over 200 publishers, and they share their own large Kingdom Hall.
Another city at this southern tip of the continent is Puerto Natales. It is the capital of the district called “Ultima Esperanza,” or Last Hope. Large sheep ranches are located in this part of the country, and the town is populated by workers employed in coal mining on the Chilean-Argentine border. Here there are gale winds that relentlessly sweep across the country. Trees barely grow more than a few feet high and they tilt because of the 60-mile-per-hour (96-km/​h) winds that blow from September to March during the summer season. The plants crouch against the earth in what can be a land of terrifying loneliness.
The Kingdom publishers, however, bend with the wind and keep on preaching. Off and on during the years missionaries or special pioneers have been sent into the area to strengthen the congregation. Sister Palm had originally spread the seeds of truth here in the early 1940’s, and now, thanks to Jehovah and the hard work of many different brothers, there is a congregation with its own pioneers.
WITH THE MISSIONARIES IN CALAMA
In 1957 Sisters Daphne Crum, Olga Rodríguez and Louise and Frances Stubbs were assigned to the northern part of the country. Though there had been no Witnesses in the city of Calama when they arrived, they had 100 persons present at the first meeting held in the missionary home.
While Sister Louise Stubbs was working in Calama, Professor Gallardo, a subscriber for the Watchtower magazine, invited her to teach the religion class in a new school that had been opened. He said to her: “You can use your own books and arrange the course in the way that is convenient for you. What we want is the Bible taught to the students.” She began her course with the book “Equipped for Every Good Work” and later she used From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. In course of time the local Catholic priest wanted to conduct the class, but Professor Gallardo told him that they wanted the Bible taught, not the Catholic religion, and Jehovah’s Witnesses were the only ones capable of teaching the Bible. Sister Stubbs taught for two years and then Daphne Crum taught for a year, resulting in a marvelous witness in that section of the country. This was one of the ways the preaching work got a firm hold in Calama.
Sister Olga Rodríguez was a member of this group of four missionaries, and the way she became imbued with the missionary spirit is interesting. Her mother, Sister Ana Rodríguez, related: “The principal help that I have been able to give to my daughter has been that of building up in her the missionary spirit. After a year as a publisher following her baptism she entered the regular pioneer work. I urged her to be orderly and to persevere in the service and not remain home when it rained or when it was hot or when she had some little pain. I tried to help her appreciate that the service of God is the most important thing in life.
“Later came her invitation to the special pioneer work, which meant we were to be separated. Many tried to discourage Olga, saying that she had the responsibility to stay home and look after her aged mother. Even some of the Witnesses stated the same. However, I said to her: ‘Are you my only child? Don’t I have five other children who have the same responsibility? Think of the mothers of the missionaries who have come from the United States, Canada and Europe!’ After this conversation she was much encouraged and went on to become not only a special pioneer but also a graduate of Gilead and has been a source of joy and happiness to me.”
The people of the city of Calama and its environs were very devoted to the worship of the virgin of Ayquina. In the desert some 60 miles (96 km) from Calama the Catholic Church built a temple in her honor, and the people go to pay homage to her. The principal holiday is celebrated with special dances. Each group of dancers has a captain who trains his group not only to dance well but also to dance for hours on end in an effort to outlast the other dancers. The music is a simple melody played on a wind instrument and accompanied by the beat of a drum. Each group has its own dress, some Chinese, others Spanish, Indian, Bolivian, and so forth, with their grotesque carnival masks.
When the special day arrives the devotees honor the virgin, paying their vows by pinning money gifts on her dress. Meantime the dancers are in constant movement, each group trying to outlast the other. When the dress of the virgin is covered with money another replaces it. The money is gathered into sacks and the bishop then takes it away in his car. Many former devotees of this virgin are now Jehovah’s Witnesses and are rendering their homage and worship to the living and true God​—not to a man-made image.
A DETERMINED SISTER IN A MINING TOWN
In 1957 Sister Evelyn MacFarlane had the privilege of opening up the work in the mining town of Pedro de Valdivia. On arriving there, she could not find a house or even a room to rent. Instead of becoming discouraged and leaving, she contacted a lady whom she had known in another city and who lived there. Although this woman was not interested in the truth, she permitted Sister MacFarlane to sleep on the floor of her home. She then cooked her meals in the home of another woman who likewise had no interest in the truth.
During the first month of her work Sister MacFarlane started 10 Bible studies on one street. Thereafter, she got them together in order to begin a Watchtower study in one of their homes. Later, with the help of some of the interested ones, she was successful in obtaining the workers’ union hall to use for the meetings. The result was that soon all the meetings were being held, and the new ones were growing in knowledge of Jehovah and his purposes.
Sister MacFarlane wrote: “You can imagine my joy when, though beginning the work in May of that year, I was able to have 25 of the new ones accompany me in the field service the following December 25th!” Shortly thereafter the mining company supplied the building materials and property so a Kingdom Hall could be built.
BROTHERS TO TAKE THE LOAD OF RESPONSIBILITY
During this period some men came into the truth who were to play a remarkable role in the advancement of Kingdom interests in Chile. The names of some of them are Carlos Núñez, Osvaldo Bello, Willy Ramírez, Lucio Ríos and Manuel Wong. These brothers and others such as Ernesto Ots and Sergio Gonzáles have become known practically from one end of the country to the other.
In 1959 Brother Fred Wilson, a Gilead graduate, became the branch overseer in Chile, replacing Brother Albert Mann, who continued to serve his brothers as a traveling overseer. Brother Wilson had given up a promising career as a nuclear physicist to dedicate his life to Jehovah and to enter the pioneer service. At the time that Brother Wilson became branch overseer there were 56 congregations in Chile with a peak of 1,879 publishers.
A MIGHTY EARTHQUAKE SHAKES CHILE
The year 1960 will long be remembered in Chile as the year of the four great earthquakes. Never will the survivors forget the terrible forces unleashed when the earth shook for several minutes with such violence that it was impossible to remain standing. In addition, Jehovah’s Witnesses will remember the marvelous demonstration of love and unity by their brothers, in the face of calamity.
Within a few days after the earthquake, cables, telegrams and letters began arriving at the branch office from all parts of the globe with words of sympathy and offers of help. Several thousands of dollars were received from the Society in New York, from the congregations in Chile and from individuals in other countries. In addition, more than one ton of clothing was sent from Brooklyn to be distributed among the needy ones. Arrangements were made for an equitable distribution of the relief supplies among the families of 500 brothers affected by the quakes.
The branch overseer, Fred Wilson, made a trip to the largest cities affected by the earthquakes and reported the following: “The first stop was in Concepción. The buildings that suffered the worst damage were those of brick and adobe structure. Many wood frame houses had fire walls of brick, and in many cases these caved in on the house, smashing the wooden wall and killing the people. The only known casualty among those associated with Jehovah’s Witnesses was an elderly woman who was studying the Bible. She was a paralytic whose heart succumbed under the tremendous shock of the second earthquake, which lasted several minutes.
“The next day I took the one-hour plane flight south to Valdivia, which was 50 percent destroyed by the earthquake and the terrifying tidal wave. Entire blocks of houses were flattened as though a gigantic hand had dashed them to massive piles of rubble.”
Esther Perkins, one of the missionaries in Valdivia at the time, reported: “We were just preparing to leave for the Watchtower study when we felt a strong tremor, and in 15 minutes more the beginning of a long series of earthquakes rocked the city. Houses began to tumble like a pack of cards. All but four of the homes on our street of 25 houses were destroyed or made uninhabitable.
“The husband of one with whom we were studying had taken his little girls for a boat ride in his rowboat just before the big quake and the resulting tidal wave. The boat was carried to the top of the huge tidal wave that came up the river, and he immediately pushed the two children to the bottom of the boat and tried to guide it to shore. Happily the wave threw them upon the shore. Immediately he snatched the two children and ran to higher ground. He was much more fortunate than many other persons who did not live to tell the story. None of the 26 publishers in the congregation were killed, for which all gave thanks to Jehovah.”
Esther Perkins and Lorraine Selesky, the two missionaries, had the opportunity to leave the devastated area and go to Santiago if they wished, but they wanted to stay and try to help the brothers as well as interested persons in this their time of greatest need. The girls lived in the street for two days and then moved into the garage of the owner of the missionary home. Each day during this period there were as many as 200 to 300 tremors, which kept their nerves on edge.
During those terrible days the sisters tried to find the persons with whom they were studying the Bible. But in some places they could find no sign of the home, in others just a pile of rubble. In still others the home was there but the people were gone. Various persons sought out the missionary sisters to talk to them, asking many questions and a good witness was given. The owner of the missionary home told the sisters: “My wife and I have really appreciated having you here during these terrible days. It seems that you were about the only ones who kept your cool and did not become frantic. It has helped us a great deal.”
In the city of Puerto Montt on Sunday, May 22, 1960, it was a quiet, peaceful afternoon. The people were still talking about the terrible earthquake and the many dead in Concepción. Nothing like that had ever happened in Puerto Montt, but how wrong they were in thinking it could not happen! At two minutes to three o’clock the first evidence came by way of a strong tremor. Then 15 minutes later it began again, but this time they could not even stand on their feet. Houses collapsed before their eyes.
The four young missionary girls had the terrifying experience of seeing the wall of their home fall outward on the street! In the resulting confusion bricks fell on the foot of Sister Elena Muñoz, one of the missionaries, and though she did not realize it at the time several bones in her foot had been broken. Within half an hour the brothers of the congregation arrived and immediately gave the girls the help they needed and took them to their homes. Meantime, the people had fled into the surrounding hills while tremors continued throughout the long night.
LEGAL CORPORATION FORMED
During the year 1960 steps were taken to form a legal corporation of the Society in Chile. In view of the conditions existing in the country it was the wise thing to do in order to buy property for the construction of Kingdom Halls. On September 29, 1960, the Ministry of Justice approved the formation of the legal corporation called “La Comunidad Religiosa Testigos de Jehová” (The Religious Community of Jehovah’s Witnesses). The Chilean corporation permits the Society to enjoy tax exemption and other benefits granted to all religious organizations registered in the country.
The Memorial attendance in 1960 reached an outstanding 5,995! What a remarkable increase since the arrival of the first missionaries, when, just 15 years earlier, there were only 103 persons in attendance at the Memorial!
CHILOE ISLAND
In 1963 special pioneers were first sent to the island of Chiloé, just off the coast of southern Chile. You will recall that Sister Palm visited Chiloé in the early 1940’s. Now the time had finally come for a thorough witness to be given. Sister Evelyn MacFarlane, by this time better known in Chile as Bunny Valenzuela, and her husband had the privilege of working there as special pioneers. This couple searched diligently to find a place to stay without any success, so they decided that if they were going to get the work done they would have to build a little home. Having very little money, they bought just the barest necessities to begin their building. For some time their little place did not have electricity, running water or even windows; but they did have a place to stay and keep warm and, above all, a place from where they could begin their pioneer work.
In this territory they encountered much prejudice, superstition and also spiritism, and the people were under the control of the Catholic Church. The increase began to come, however, and in the first year they had six persons sharing with them in field service. An isolated group of brothers was organized. Since that time congregations have been formed on this beautiful island in Ancud, Castro and Linao.
CONVENTIONS STIMULATE GROWTH
By the year 1965 Jehovah’s people in Chile enjoyed some outstanding increases. Memorial attendance jumped to 9,522 with 21 partaking of the emblems. While the number of publishers had made a fine gain to a peak of 3,758, it was very clear that there was a tremendous work to do since the Kingdom proclaimers in 89 congregations conducted 3,917 home Bible studies.
In January of 1967 Chile’s first international convention was scheduled for Santiago. This “God’s Sons of Liberty” International Assembly brought 300 travelers from the United States, Canada, Central America and Europe, and the Chilean brothers greeted them enthusiastically at the airport, singers and dancers in native costumes putting on a welcome performance.
The convention site was the new Velodrome. Until a few weeks before the assembly its construction was not even completed, and the brothers had to do a gigantic cleanup job so that everything would be in readiness for the opening day of the five-day convention on Saturday, January 7, 1967. The 441 persons baptized represented a greater number of persons baptized than in any one year previously in the history of the work in this land.
The New World Translation of the Bible in Spanish was released at the assembly and the brothers were overjoyed. One overseer wrote: “Thanks to Jehovah and his organization for this marvelous aid. What a joy it is to be able to use the new Bible and its excellent Concordance and Appendix of Texts, etc. Thank you, brothers!” We have never seen a release received with such heartfelt appreciation.
From then on up to and including 1980 the branch office has shipped out 350,000 of these Bibles ​—a clear indication that the Chilean brothers enthusiastically use it and find many people who want to read and study it.
The momentous convention seemed to mark a new era in the expansion of Kingdom interests in Chile. For example, in 1968 a total of 1,034,871 hours were devoted to the field service by the 5,805 publishers. In addition, 15,405 people attended the Memorial; that was nearly three times the number of publishers. There were now seven circuits with 103 congregations; it had been a fine year of activity.
In 1968 the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life was released at the “Good News for All Nations” District Assembly. The 11,369 in attendance at the five district conventions throughout the country got to work, and since the time of its release, up to and including the 1980 service year, the Chilean brothers have placed more than 670,000 copies of this book! It is almost impossible to keep it in stock at the branch office.
A NEW BRANCH OFFICE BUILDING
The year 1968 proved to be a notable year in yet another way. The government notified the Society that property on which the branch office was located was being expropriated to permit the construction of the new Pan-American Highway. In December of 1968 Brother Knorr visited Santiago to select another site on which to build a new branch building. A fine location was found in a quiet residential section situated near the towering Andes Mountains. Thereafter we held a special meeting, and the word spread to all parts of the country so that 4,083 converged on Santiago to hear Brother Knorr speak. During his talk he announced the plans for building a new branch office, and the brothers received this news with hearty enthusiasm.
Early in 1969 word was received that Brother Fred Wilson, the branch overseer, was being transferred to Brazil to serve there in that privilege of service. It was a sad day for many local brothers as hundreds of them went to the airport to bid good-bye to Brother and Sister Wilson who, after 20 years as missionaries in Chile, had become very dear to their Chilean brothers. Gilead graduate Pedro Lovato from Argentina was appointed as the new branch overseer.
The construction of the new branch building began in August of 1969. The Society was pleased to hire brothers to do most of the work so that few outsiders had much to do with the building. In all, 35 brothers worked on the structure. In addition, the congregations in Santiago were invited to contribute their time and talents to forward the construction, and they responded in a fine way. For example, La Cisterna Congregation hired a bus to bring the brothers of the congregation to the job site, where the sisters set up a field kitchen so the brothers would have a good meal and be able to work all day. The volunteer workers devoted a total of 3,124 hours to the construction.
The building, set back 35 feet (11 m) from the street, is a white, two-story structure with a wide flagstone entrance flanked by spacious lawns. The front of the building is partially faced with a green tile that softens the startling brilliance of the white cement. The main entranceway is framed in dark marble that stands in sharp contrast with the aluminum framed glass doors and presents a pleasing contrast.
The dedication of this building took place on November 21, 1970, with 255 persons in attendance. In his dedication discourse the branch overseer, Pedro Lovato, showed that a building in itself is not the important thing; rather, it is the use to which the people put the building that is valuable in the eyes of Jehovah. The building has a lovely spacious Kingdom Hall, sufficient facilities for the office and shipping department, as well as living quarters for 16 persons.
VISITING SHIPS IN VALPARAISO
Early in 1960 Sister Palm was transferred from the seaport of San Antonio to the main port city of Valparaíso. She witnessed aboard ships in the mornings, and in the afternoons she worked with groups from house to house and conducted Bible studies. She recalls:
“I had received several cartons of foreign literature from the Society, among which were English Bibles. I wondered how these could be placed. Then an African ship came in from Ghana with the entire crew from that country. On that ship everyone was anxious to get an English Bible. They all spoke English besides their own Ewe and Ga, so I had to go back three times and even asked a young sister to help me carry more than 30 English Bibles aboard. In addition I placed subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! with the first officer. What a blessing for them as well as for me!”
After 35 years of pioneering in many parts of Chile, she met the former second officer of the ship that originally brought her to Chile in 1936. He had become an independent shipowner now and mentioned that he was glad to see her, for he had thought of her recently. How? Why? “It seems his ship travels in the Puerto Montt region and he needed a captain, a man he could trust,” she explains. “One was found and on asking for his recommendations he was told, ‘Oh, this man is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.’ That was the very best recommendation one could have, the man said. ‘If you have not done anything else Kay,’ he continued, ‘in all your years of Watchtower work in Chile I have at least this good man because he is a witness of Jehovah, one to be trusted.’” You can imagine how our sister felt upon hearing those words! Yes, her heart was overflowing with thanks and gratitude to Jehovah!
The thrilling story of this dynamic missionary continues. She is now 78, yet she zealously carries on in her theocratic activity. Although handicapped by a bad leg because of a fall in the hills of Valparaíso, during the 1980 service year she averaged 132 hours, 168 magazines, 56 return visits, 5.6 studies, and placed 24 books each month. Her astonishing energy along with her unconquerable faith and devotion have been a source of encouragement to all who know and love her. What a privilege for the first missionaries, where circumstances permitted them, to remain in Chile along with the earliest publishers and to observe the wonderful growth abundantly blessed by Jehovah!
A MARXIST GOVERNMENT COMES TO POWER
The year 1970 got off to an excellent start with 19,850 attending the Memorial, and we reached a new peak of publishers in April with 7,422​—twice the number of publishers just five years previously!
In September of 1970 the Christian Democratic Party was removed from power with the election of the Unidad Popular, a combination of several political parties. With the nationalistic cry, “Chile for the Chileans,” the new Marxist government fully nationalized the large copper mines that had been controlled by foreign investors; landowners had their large farms expropriated and turned over to the poor people. Some of the poor grew impatient and with the force of arms drove the owners off their farms and took over the property. Many vacant lots in the cities were taken over unlawfully by people simply erecting a Chilean flag on them and then building a little house.
As could be expected, the wealthy class of people were bitterly opposed to the Marxist government, and many left the country; still others were ready to leave. Strenuous efforts were made to fight the changes and this led to violence and bloodshed.
While groups were moving to opposite poles in the political realm, Jehovah’s people maintained a neutral course. Tempers were growing to the danger levels, and hate and fear were beginning to make themselves felt in this once tranquil country. Yet, amid these turbulent times the work of directing people to the Kingdom continued to gather momentum. For example, the following year saw a new peak of 22,918 at the Memorial and a 13-percent increase in publishers, with an average of 7,810.
THE ARAUCANIAN INDIANS
Numbered among these publishers were newly baptized ones of the Araucanian Indians. The Araucanians were supposedly the fiercest and most valiant fighters that the Spanish conquistadores had ever met. Spanish historiographers say that the conquest of these Indians cost more in time, blood and money than that of the rest of South America. Only after two centuries of continual fighting were the Spaniards able to subjugate the Araucanian chiefs and warriors. The conquering weapon was not firearms but, rather, the white man’s vices. These so corrupted the Indians that they were totally demoralized, losing their will to fight.
Many thousands of Araucanians still live according to their own social laws on the reservations set aside for them by the government. In appearance they look very much like the Eskimos, but their origin has never been satisfactorily traced. They have no written alphabet of their own, so their religious beliefs are not very definite. Generally they believe in the immortality of the soul and reincarnation. Interestingly, they have their own legend about a global flood and the survival of a few.
There are a number of these people who are adjusting their lives to live in harmony with the standards of the Bible and are dedicating their lives to Jehovah. These are attending the Temuco Congregation. We sincerely hope that these new brothers and sisters show the same tenacity of spirit and valor as their forefathers, not in fighting anyone of blood and flesh but, rather, in fighting the god of this world, Satan the Devil, and his demon forces by proclaiming the good news of the Kingdom.
KINGDOM PREACHING DURING POLITICAL UNREST
The election of the Marxist government and the subsequent events caused an earthquake of sorts, shaking up many people and softening the barrio alto, or upper-class, section of Santiago. Whereas many of the economically impoverished people were looking to Salvador Allende to solve their problems, many sincere people at the other end of the socioeconomic scale began to wonder where their future lay. They had labored and sacrificed for years, and now all was being threatened. Could there be something better than material possessions to provide a secure future? Satisfying answers were provided by energetic preachers of the “good news.”
To illustrate the growth in the barrio alto, in September of 1971, there were six congregations with territories in that part of the city, and in that month 324 publishers reported activity. There are now 11 congregations and they recently reported 990 publishers​—a 206-percent increase!
Not only were the verbal accusations and political violence becoming everyday events, but long lines were common as people searched for food. Many housewives had to spend an average of three hours a day, sometimes as much as six hours, to buy bread and other food for the family. How did our sisters react to this time-consuming situation?
Some made it a habit to take literature with them, either for personal reading or for use when doing informal witnessing. In one block-long line a lady was complaining about having to lose so much time. A sister nearby commented that man is not able to solve his problems and proceeded to share the Kingdom message of hope. Since she manifested interest, the sister made arrangements to visit her at her home and in time a study was started. Now this woman is an active publisher and her daughter is a regular pioneer.
Many sisters, well known for their preaching activities and respected for their conduct, were saved from the daily trip to the lines because friendly store owners would let them know what product would be on hand and when. Many are the heartwarming experiences that could be related about our zealous sisters who took advantage of the difficult situation to give a Kingdom witness.
The year 1973 brought runaway inflation reaching 330 percent, crippling strikes, food shortages and violence. In the years before the election of the socialist candidate as president, the growth of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Chile had been quite rapid, with increases of 20 percent, 16 percent and 17 percent. Following the election, the growth tapered off with increases of 13 percent, 9 percent and 6 percent. However, as has been mentioned, during this time the barrio alto began to grow.
On the other hand, many humble people caught up in the enthusiasm of the Unidad Popular had their attention directed away from God’s kingdom and to man’s efforts. Many religious leaders even encouraged them to that end. For instance, in April of 1971, 80 priests stated their position in favor of the “participation of Catholics in the construction of socialism.” The religious leaders of the country endorsed the policies of the new government, one saying, “the Kingdom that we hope for begins to take form here, and one of its pillars is justice.” Even prophecies of the Bible book of Isaiah were applied to the new political regime. But would they see their dreams realized?
A SUDDEN CHANGE
The answer came on September 11, 1973, when the Armed Forces toppled the Marxist government. For almost all of us who had never been in a war zone, the revolution was quite an experience. Many brothers unsuspectingly had gone to work early that morning. The Bethel family was busy at work and the missionaries were preparing to go into the field when helicopters flew almost directly over the branch. Looking up, we were surprised to see their doors open with machine guns ready for instant use! “What’s going on?” someone asked. With that a radio was turned on, and the announcement was heard that the Armed Forces were taking over to end the years of hate and fighting among Chileans. Everyone was warned to stay at home and off the streets. There was some heavy fighting in the center of town and in the poorer sections located on the outskirts of Santiago. Needless to say, the missionaries here at the branch became temporary Bethel workers until things cooled down. And what about the brothers who had left to go to different factories early that morning?
Some were arrested and with groups of suspected leftists taken to the National Stadium in Santiago for interrogations. It proved to be a protection to identify oneself as a Witness, for they were among the first to be released.
There is some evidence that extremists had been planning a drastic move before the military takeover, and among those to be eliminated were Jehovah’s Witnesses. If that be the case, we give thanks to Jehovah for his marvelous protection!
During the tense days following the takeover, our well-known neutrality proved to be a blessing and a protection. When the arrest of Communist activists in factories and industries left critical vacancies, Witness employees were often put in key positions. In one case, on the morning of the coup, soldiers arrived at the home of a Witness and asked how long it would take him to put the local oil refinery into operation. No other qualified man could be trusted!
Spot searches for firearms and the like were made in neighborhoods at the break of dawn. Often, known Witness homes were simply passed by. One soldier, taking the publication The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life out of a bookcase, commented: “If everyone read and practiced what is in this book, we would not have to make these searches.”
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
For several months thereafter people were still a bit edgy, and there were sporadic outbreaks of violence. In this environment plans were being made for the “Divine Victory” International Assembly. Though a contract had been signed for the use of Santa Laura Stadium in Santiago, would such a gathering be permitted? Since a state of siege had been proclaimed in September, almost all large meetings were forbidden. Such a gathering at this time would be practically a miracle. But the hand of Jehovah was not too short!​—Isa. 59:1.
As the date for the convention approached, the apprehension increased. Then one week before the convention we learned that permission had been denied. Immediately two brothers went to the Ministry of Defense to explain the arrangements that had been made for the arrival of many foreign delegates, and what a poor impression they would have if such an international convention was not permitted. A colonel then took the problem to his superiors and returned with the answer: “Permission granted!” Our prayers had been answered!
None of the brothers wanted to miss what would prove to be Chile’s biggest convention ever. To finance their trip from the dry and barren north or from the glacier-spotted wilderness in the south, many Witnesses sold furniture, television sets, record players, and so forth.
As mentioned earlier, Chile has a coastline that stretches some 2,650 miles (4,265 km) along the Pacific Ocean, so travel by bus or train makes for a long trip. From Iquique in the Atacama Desert 1,300 Witnesses, including children and babies, came in a special eight-car train. The trip was slow and tiring, but after four and a half days of travel​—much of it through the hot desert—​the grueling journey was completed, that is, almost completed. The train arrived just as the evening curfew was to begin, so the brothers would have to remain in the train for the night!
When the reception committee went to the train station earlier in the day to meet them, they were advised that the train would be late. Knowing that this would mean another night in the train for the brothers, arrangements were made to prepare coffee, purchase boxes of fruit, obtain blankets and make sandwiches. That night 48 brothers volunteered to remain at the Mapocho train station to attend to the arriving brothers. This, of course, was done with the authorization of the military authority supervising the train station. In fact, they were so impressed by the arrangements made that they lent a helping hand. Normally when a train arrived late, the unruly crowd refused to obey the curfew, so the soldiers were accustomed to firing their rifles into the air and then forcing the insulting crowds back into the railroad coaches for the night. In this case with a train full of Witnesses there was no need to shout or repeat an order. One soldier commented: “Jehovah’s Witnesses have demonstrated that they are correct and orderly people.”
The next morning after the delegates had had another round of coffee the brothers from congregations in Santiago came to the train station to take them to their rooming accommodations. How grateful the delegates were for the loving-kindnesses extended to them, and for the willingness of their brothers to spend the night in that cold, dark train station! Truly a fine example of self-sacrificing love in action!
The long-awaited day was at hand, and the foreign delegates, among them Brother Knorr, arrived. Enthusiasm was running high. What an encouragement it was for the brothers and for the new ones who symbolized their dedication to Jehovah with water baptism​—1,502 of them! Attendance was the highest for any one convention site​—21,321! We thank Jehovah for opening the doors and making it all possible.
RAPID GROWTH RESUMES
The events in Chile during 1973 illustrated the point of Psalm 146:3 about not putting our trust in “earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” Those who had put their trust in their now dead president were left disillusioned and without hope. Thanks to Jehovah and the energetic work of his people many right-hearted ones accepted the message of the Kingdom as mankind’s only hope and took a stand for true worship.
In October of 1973, just one month after the change of government, Chile passed the 10,000 mark in publishers for the first time with 10,119. Then came our international convention and with it momentum for future increases, for we finished the service year with a 22-percent increase and an average of 10,962! Thirty-two new congregations and two new circuits were organized with a peak of 12,491 publishers and a total of 2,660 baptized. In the following year the increase was even larger​—30 percent, with an average of 14,220 in the field. An amazing number of 3,842 were baptized!
The rapid growth and the favorable comments on our well-publicized conventions did not escape the notice of our religious enemies who became more active. They began to work behind the scenes, using their peculiar relationship with Caesar to their advantage. We were accused of being infiltrated by Communists, and on more than one occasion we had to demonstrate that it was not so and explain the “screening” process that one goes through before baptism. This seemed to satisfy the authorities and the matter was apparently shelved​—but not forgotten.
When Brother Knorr visited us for the international convention he had given us the green light for a small printing operation. Prior to January of 1975 we had been receiving the Kingdom Ministry and Written Reviews from Argentina, but due to the heavy snows in winter in the Andes Mountains, many times during the year they would be received too late. Now we had our own printery to supply the brothers’ needs in the way of forms, handbills, programs, copies of Kingdom Ministry and Written Reviews.
CONVENTION AT NATIONAL STADIUM
Back in 1949 when Brother Knorr visited Chile at the time of a convention, Sister Digna González had jokingly asked why we did not use the National Stadium. Now, much to her delight, the time had come to do just that. In January of 1976 we had the privilege of using the stadium for the “Divine Sovereignty” District Assembly, and 15,619 from the greater Santiago area attended. Due to the end-of-year play-offs among the professional soccer teams, we were advised that we would have to close the sessions at an earlier hour so the games could take place in the evenings. We accomplished this without difficulties. Commented one of the Santiago daily newspapers: “Jehovah’s Witnesses in a matter of three hours had to get everything out of the stadium and then put it all back. There was no problem whatsoever, because everyone collaborated without difficulties and they accomplished the miracle of changing the playing field to a religious site and vice versa.”
INFLATION RESULTS IN NEW CURRENCY
All during this period inflation spiraled. To illustrate: In August of 1970 one U.S. dollar was worth 14 escudos in Chilean currency; just five years later one U.S. dollar was worth 6,000 escudos! In September of 1975 the government converted 1,000 escudos to one peso in the new Chilean currency, establishing the official exchange rate at six pesos to the U.S. dollar.
MARVELOUS EXPANSION
In spite of hardships caused by inflation and increasing unemployment, enthusiasm for sharing the “good news” continued. During the 1976 service year an all-time peak of 16,862 publishers was reached with 2,782 baptized. While the number of publishers was growing tremendously, obviously it was not so easy to develop elders at the same pace. In September of 1972 there were 131 congregations and in just four years that number grew to 269​—more than double! Due to the formation of new congregations, many that once had three or more elders now had one or two with almost the original number of publishers.
Yet, things were moving smoothly with new peaks in publishers, new congregations and circuits being formed, circuit assemblies and district conventions being held with total attendances that surpassed 30,000, and the highest ever Memorial attendance with 46,940. Obviously, Satan was not pleased by all this theocratic expansion, so the “roaring lion” began to do his best to frighten the newly gathered “lambs.”
OPPOSITION TO THE WORK SURFACES
Before our summer months of December through February, plans are made for the district conventions. All was progressing well until word was received that the military authorities would not give permission for a small assembly for the three isolated congregations located near the Strait of Magellan at the tip of South America. But in view of the fact that the brothers enjoy a good reputation and that a colonel personally knew several Witnesses, the general permitted the assembly. He gave nothing in writing, however, and requested that there be no publicity.
After that, district conventions were held in the provinces without difficulties. Soon the zone overseer would be with us, and plans were made for him to give a talk at the Velodrome, attended by all the congregations of the greater Santiago area. At the last moment we were caught by surprise when permission was denied. We appealed the decision, to no avail.
Then the military authorities canceled the district convention we were to have at Santa Laura Stadium; they stated that no large meetings were being permitted because of the state of emergency. They denied our appeals and our attempted interviews. What could we do not only for the brothers in the 100 congregations in and around Santiago but also for the brothers from Argentina who had arranged to travel to Chile to take in the assembly program?
We quickly made arrangements for the four-day program to be reduced to two days with about 70 percent of the material to be presented in eight of the larger Kingdom Halls in Santiago. More brothers were assigned talks so that we could have four groups of speakers rotating among the halls. Only publishers were invited due to the limited space, and after five weekends, 10,209 had attended. The Kingdom Halls had been packed! Many were the expressions of appreciation for the hard work done by so many to present the program, dramas and all!
Thereafter the authorities refused to grant any permission for circuit assemblies in the Santiago area, so we made arrangements for one-day programs containing about 90 percent of the information. We asked the brothers to travel outside the capital, and because of the limited number of facilities, we would have one circuit on Saturday and another on Sunday.
This procedure produced fine results from 1977 to June of 1980. Then two places that previously had authorized assemblies now denied permission. So two Santiago circuits have had to plan their circuit assembly programs in the larger Kingdom Halls within their circuits. Although this creates extra work and some inconveniences, the important thing is that the brothers receive the spiritual food prepared by the “faithful and discreet slave.”
The Ministry of Justice then requested that the directors of the local corporation appear for an interview. For the most part the interview dealt with the neutrality issue. There was a somewhat antagonistic and tense atmosphere during most of the interview, but when the opportunity was provided and the Bible was used in response to inquiries, the atmosphere changed from one of hostility to one of respect.
As a result of that interview and a subsequent written statement explaining our neutral position, no further action was taken. Thanks to Jehovah our enemies had been thwarted!
GOOD COUNSEL FROM THE GOVERNING BODY
We can preach the “good news” and meet in our Kingdom Halls without interference, and we are thankful for that blessing. Of course, the matter of meeting in larger groups continues to be a problem. But thanks to Jehovah and the fine counsel given to us by the Governing Body with regard to “acting with discretion,” our spiritual paradise continues.​—Ps. 47:7.
For example, at the time Brother M. G. Henschel was with us on a zone visit in 1979, Kingdom Halls were closed for a brief period in such places as Vallenar, Punta Arenas and Puerto Natales. We were counseled to be “cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves” and not to make an issue of the matter until we had exhausted all possibilities. (Matt. 10:16) It was not long before the local officials were changed or forgot the matter, and now all the congregations are functioning as before.
In fact, with the change of a general in Punta Arenas, the brothers requested an interview. When the brothers explained that they had been denied permission to have their meetings in the Kingdom Halls and that discussion with the previous general had not been conclusive due to his transfer, the new general responded favorably. When told that, in harmony with Romans chapter 13, the authorities would have no problem with Jehovah’s Witnesses, he replied: “Yes, I know them quite well and I know that they are very good citizens. If you would like, I see no reason why you can’t begin having your meetings immediately.”
The surprised brothers replied with a grateful sí and requested that the same permission be granted to the congregation in Puerto Natales. Request granted​—and just in time for the Memorial. What a joy to have 448 present in Punta Arenas for that important celebration in 1979! Since that time the brothers have even had the privilege of holding circuit assemblies and district conventions in their new Kingdom Hall.
When the problems started in 1977 it was difficult to find appropriate assembly sites. It was then in the province of Valparaíso that Jehovah opened the door for us. A brother approached the mayor of a city where there was a small stadium just right for our assembly program. The mayor agreed, and because the brothers left the site in excellent condition, we have had several assemblies at this same place.
A DECREASE IN PUBLISHERS
When our problems first started there were many rumors among the brothers. Perhaps due to these difficulties and the fear of man, along with the economic pressures of continuing inflation, many began to slow down. In 1977, for the first time since 1942, there was a decrease in the number of publishers, with a drop from 15,947 to 15,339. What could be done to meet these challenges and encourage the brothers to keep growing in faith and to make expression of it?
BRANCH ORGANIZATION STRENGTHENED
The Governing Body advised all branches on December 10, 1975, of new organizational arrangements that would be patterned after the six committees of the Governing Body. The resulting Branch Committees began to function on February 1, 1976. The Chilean Branch Committee appointed by the Governing Body was one of international flavor: one Argentinean (Pedro Lovato), one Canadian (Thomas Jones), one Chilean (Fernando Morrás), two Americans (Albert Mann and Richard Traverso).
Regrettably, late in 1975 Brother and Sister Jones had to return to Canada to check into the poor health of Sister Jones, only to discover that she had a terminal illness. Our dear sister Flora died in February 1976, after 41 years of dedicated service to Jehovah. Brother Jones remained in Canada and is now a member of the Canadian branch family. They had been in Chile since 1964 and had accomplished a wonderful work, gaining a warm spot in the hearts of their Chilean brothers. Another Chilean brother, José Valiente, was appointed to take the place of Brother Jones. Among the five current members of the committee there is a mixture of youth and experience with a total of 131 years of dedicated service to Jehovah.
BIBLE TRUTHS PRODUCE GREAT CHANGES
During this period of great influx in Chile, especially since 1973, people of all sorts were coming into the truth: university students, nuns, spiritists, disenchanted political people and a soccer star, to name a few. All had to make changes in their lives to please Jehovah and meet his standards.
For example, a soccer star and captain of his team gave up the fame that the world offered for the joy that Jehovah gives those who serve him. At first the directors of his professional team were pleased with his studying the Bible because his conduct improved and he was no longer an undisciplined player often evicted from the game. But when the moment finally came for him to hang up his shoes in the locker room for the last time, they were not pleased. Even so, when they were finally convinced of his determination, they offered to make his last game “his game” and honor him as an excellent player. He politely refused such honors, got baptized and now serves as a ministerial servant in one of the congregations in Rancagua.
What a privilege it is to work with these brothers from such different backgrounds! And how encouraging it is to see how Jehovah is using these and others to reach people of similar background!
DOCTORS AIDED BY “BLOOD” BOOKLET
One of the highlights during the 1978 service year was the distribution of the tract and booklet on the blood issue. One missionary wrote that several doctors admitted that they always give blood to Jehovah’s Witnesses, although they tell them otherwise before the operation. The booklet was just what we needed for them with its arguments about ethics and the need for trust between doctor and patient. They were pleased to have more information on the subject.
Another missionary reports what one surgeon told her: “I am totally in agreement with you. I congratulate you for your position. In the past we have made much use of transfusions, but each day we are using them less.” Numerous were the expressions by doctors, such as: “Just what we needed.” “This really interests me.”
“VICTORIOUS FAITH” CONVENTIONS
The “Victorious Faith” International Convention made the year 1978 even more outstanding. Thanks to the generosity of our brothers worldwide the missionaries and other full-time ministers were to attend that faith-strengthening convention. There were 99 delegates from Chile who traveled to the United States or Europe, and another large group traveled to Lima, Peru. Many were the enthusiastic comments about the program and the love of the brothers. Yes, what a privilege to belong to this international family of true worshipers!
Since the authorities would not allow us to have an international convention in Chile, in January of 1979 we began a series of small district conventions with the same theme. The cost of hotels is beyond the means of most of our brothers, who have perhaps already made great sacrifices to be at the convention site, so the majority of the delegates stay in the homes of their spiritual brothers.
At one convention the rooming department was having some difficulty finding enough accommodations, so the convention committee made arrangements to give brief talks in the congregations to stimulate the brothers in the way of hospitality. After giving an enthusiastic talk the speaker asked for a show of hands to see how many could offer rooms to the visiting delegates. No hands went up. After a pause, a young boy about seven years of age raised his hand and offered to give up his bed so that a married couple could have his room. That melted the ice so that a flood of offers came in. In fact, when the rooming work was finished, it became evident that of all the congregations that offered rooms, this congregation offered the most.
ANOTHER YEAR OF SIFTING
As in 1978, the 1979 service year saw a further decrease as those who had not taken steps to nourish their faith regularly from the Word of God tired out. Apparently a sifting work was being accomplished among Jehovah’s people, for even though many new ones were being baptized, there were no numerical increases. In the three years of decrease 3,357 were baptized. Obviously there was a great need to help the new ones to become stabilized in the faith.
PROSPECTS BRIGHTEN
As we moved into the 1980 service year things began to look up. In October of 1979 we were permitted to hold the Annual Meeting of the local corporation for the first time since 1976. What a joy it was to share in the meeting with mature brothers who traveled from afar to be here!
Then came the summer months of January and February and our “Living Hope” District Conventions. We had a very good total attendance figure of 25,544. As the months moved on, from all appearances we were getting back on the right track. For the service year we had a 5-percent increase, averaging 15,081. In addition, a new all-time peak attendance at the Memorial celebration was attained with 50,508 (only to be surpassed in 1981 with 54,796 in attendance)!
REACHING THE ENDS OF OUR TERRITORY
Chile has an extensive territory that includes Easter Island and Robinson Crusoe Island in the Pacific Ocean. Is the good news of the Kingdom reaching these faraway places also?
For a time we had an isolated publisher on Easter Island. She was helped spiritually through correspondence with a missionary sister at the branch. Though she has since returned to the mainland, we do have record of Watchtower subscribers on the island. Much to our surprise, in April 1980 we received a long-distance telephone call from an interested person wanting to know when to celebrate the Memorial. Then later on in the same year a married couple from Valparaíso moved there, and they have been conducting Bible studies with interested persons. In April of 1981 a Memorial meeting was held on this island for the first time, there being 13 persons present. How pleased we are that the “good news” is penetrating this isolated area!
And the famous Robinson Crusoe Island? An elder from Valparaíso was sent to this island in connection with his secular work toward the end of 1979. He took along a good supply of literature. While on a tour of the island, he asked the guide about the religious inclinations of the people. The guide replied that the Catholic priest comes only once in a great while and the Protestant minister had left permanently. “But that doesn’t affect me,” he explained. “I’m one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” Can you imagine the surprise of our brother? He thought that he was going to be the first to bring the “good news” to this island.
The story goes like this: A lady was studying in Santiago when she moved to the island because of her secular work. While in Santiago she had progressed to the point of sharing in the field service. She continued sharing the “good news” there on the island, starting Bible studies with a number of people. Our brother was overjoyed to meet them and to help them arrange a book study group, as well as organize an informal arrangement for gathering together in a group of five to read the one copy of The Watchtower that was being received.
Several expressed a desire to be baptized, so Brother Sergio Pulgar, upon returning to the mainland, wrote to the branch for instructions, since he would be returning to the island about five months later. When he returned he reviewed the 80 questions with the candidates and three were baptized. He also conducted the Memorial with 11 in attendance. Since March of 1980 we have been receiving field service reports from this isolated group, and there are currently four reporting.
While talking about the far ends of our territory let’s not forget the Antarctic. Yes, the “good news” has reached that far end of the world. An electronics expert was sent to work at a scientific base located in that frigid region. While preparing his suitcase, his wife slipped in a Bible and a Truth book. The base consisted of 12 men completely isolated from the rest of the world and the only recreation was reading. After a few days the husband took out his literature and began to read. Passing by, another member of the base exclaimed: “Hey, I know that book, too!” The two men formed a friendship and were together at every available opportunity to study the Bible. Through them Bible literature in Russian was placed at another nearby scientific base. One of these two men is now a ministerial servant in a Santiago congregation. No matter how distant or isolated the place, the powerful “good news” is penetrating those regions with its message of hope.
NEW BIBLE AIDS​—A GREAT SUCCESS
The brothers in Chile have had some remarkable experiences with the book My Book of Bible Stories. One has to do with a special pioneer from the south who, while in Santiago, came to the branch to pick up a few copies to take back to her assignment. Since she arrived at the branch just as it was closing, she took the eight books without having them wrapped. With the books in her arms, she got on a bus. A child saw the books and cried out to his mother: “That lady has the book you said you would buy for me. Tell her to give you one!” The mother inquired about it, and the sister gave her a witness and placed the book with her. Those seated nearby overheard the conversation and asked to see the book. Before even getting off the bus, the sister placed all eight books! So before returning to her assignment she went back to the branch for more copies​—this time having them well wrapped.
Another sister placed a Bible Stories book with a lady who, in turn, lent it to her son’s schoolteacher. The schoolteacher then phoned the local congregation and asked if someone could bring her two copies of the book. This was done. The schoolteacher showed the book to her priest who stated that this was just what was needed to teach the children the Bible. She took the recommendation seriously, telephoning to ask for seven more books. The sister who delivered the books to the school, while waiting, talked to another lady who commented on the violence in school. Our sister talked to her about the Bible’s solution to the matter. With that the lady asked the secretary to make an appointment for our sister to return and talk to her. The lady was the school director.
Our sister returned for her appointment with the director, as well as to deliver another 14 books. Before meeting with the director she spoke with five schoolteachers. They requested 24 more copies and five Youth books. One of them asked: “What do you have for me?” She subscribed for the Awake! magazine. On to the director. There the sister placed two Bible Stories books and one Youth book. She later returned with the requested 24 copies, and, once again, was asked if she could bring another 14 the following week. The first schoolteacher is now studying with our sister during her lunch break. So far 88 Bible Stories books and 27 Youth books have been placed with the schoolteachers for use in teaching religion, and the experience continues as the word spreads about these books.
Energetic pioneers and publishers, such as the aforementioned, have taken part in an extensive distribution of our Bible literature, as is evidenced by the total number of books placed during the 1980 service year: 264,317! Self-sacrificing pioneers have used these publications to open up new territories and establish the foundations for future congregations in such places as Carahue, Fresia and Panguipulli. What a pleasure to put to use ‘every good thing that Jehovah has equipped us with to do his will’ as we unitedly work to expand our spiritual paradise!​—Heb. 13:21.
FAITHFUL SERVANTS STICK TO THE WORK
As we progress into the 1982 service year, it is wonderful to see the faithful missionaries continuing in their assignments. Brother Albert Mann now has 36 years of foreign service, and, along with his wife, Gladys, serves at the branch. Louise Stubbs was also one of the first missionaries to come to this land, arriving at the end of 1945. She has served in the hot, dry, arid desert of the north, as well as in the south with its abundant rainfall. She has had the privilege of helping 74 persons to dedication and baptism. Brother and Sister Hannan, during 35 years of missionary work, have seen the first congregation in Concepción grow to 15 congregations with some 1,000 publishers. They have personally helped 181 persons to take a stand for true worship. Sisters Dorothea Smith and Dora Ward have been partners throughout their 35 years in the missionary field, and between them they have helped a total of 100 persons to reach the point of dedication and baptism. Since they came to this land in 1946 they have seen the organization grow from its infancy when it had only 93 publishers.
John and Harry Williams (not fleshly brothers) came to Chile in 1949 as graduates of the 13th class of Gilead. Each of these brothers has played an important part in the expansion of true worship in this land as circuit overseers and congregational elders in different parts of the country. How much such faithful brothers are appreciated can be demonstrated by the love, comfort and help that Brother John Williams received during the final months of his terminal illness. The local brothers responded to the situation just marvelously and amply demonstrated our wonderful international brotherhood. (John 13:34, 35) Right up to the last he kept up his living hope and served as a source of encouragement to all who visited him. He died with 31 years of faithful service in the missionary field. His wife remains in her missionary assignment.
Miriam Sumen and Evelyn MacFarlane also came in 1949 from the same class of Gilead. Sister Sumen has helped to open up the work in various places in southern Chile and has done excellent work as a stalwart fighter for true worship, with the added joy of having helped 45 onto the road to life. Sister MacFarlane (Bunny Valenzuela), who married a Chilean brother, died of cancer in 1978. How happy she will be as a faithful resurrected one on earth to greet the 113 persons she had helped to a knowledge of the truth!
At the present time there are 13 missionaries in Chile with 20 or more years in the missionary field. They have seen the blessings of Jehovah on the organization and have been able to share in the amazing expansion that has taken place. In all Chile there are at this time a total of 37 Gilead graduates busy in some form of full-time service, working shoulder to shoulder with their Chilean brothers to expand our spiritual paradise.
Much more could be said of the many other missionaries who have been in this assignment, but space does not allow for it. Since 1945, when the first Gilead missionaries arrived, a total of 194 missionaries have worked here. Eleven of these same missionaries have been Chilean, who have gone to the Watch Tower Bible School of Gilead and returned to their homeland.
Most of the old-timers that came into the truth in the 1930’s have died: the first Chilean to respond favorably and among the first eight to be baptized back in 1931, Brother Juan Flores; Sister Delfina Villablanca (1931), the first Chilean pioneer; Sister Consuelo Traub (1931), who provided the land for Chile’s first Kingdom Hall; Brother Manuel Durán (1935) with his happy face and disposition; and Brother Richard Traub, who died in April of 1979 after 54 years of service in Argentina and Chile. They have all gone on to their heavenly reward and undoubtedly are interested in the work being accomplished in Chile as they continue busy in Jehovah’s service.
Among other old-timers are Max Zimmer (1934), Sebastián Inninger (1936), Eduardo Venegas (1940), and the nephew of Brother Juan Flores, Serafin Flores (1942). They continue to serve Jehovah as their health permits and thus provide fine examples as fearless proclaimers of the Kingdom good news. In fact, the four above-mentioned brothers all serve as elders in their congregations.
What a far cry these days are from the days when Brother Traub arrived in 1930, and, as the first Witness in Chile, began preaching and teaching! Remember, Juan Flores, the first person who attended a Bible discourse, had asked, “And the others, when will they come?” Brother Traub’s reply? “They will come.”
And come they have by the hundreds and thousands​—happy, lovable people who have found rest and peace in Jehovah’s organization. There are now 280 congregations, and isolated groups, with well over 16,000 publishers spreading the seeds of truth from the arid north, where there is a superb ratio of publisher to population, to the luxuriant south, where there is much work yet to do. As long as Jehovah keeps the door of opportunity open, the Chilean brothers, by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, are determined to accomplish the work yet to be done, to His praise and glory.
[Graph on page 103]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
INCREASE IN PUBLISHERS
16,000
                                                          15,081
                                                    14,220
12,000
 8,000
                                             6,923
 4,000
                                     3,370
                             2,025
                     1,034
               361
         65
0       1945  1950    1955    1960    1965    1970    1975  1980
[Map on page 39]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
CHILE
Arica
Calama
Pedro de Valdivia
Copiapó
Vallenar
Illapel
Valparaíso
San Antonio
Melipilla
SANTIAGO
Rancagua
Concepción
Chillán
Coronel
Carahue
Temuco
Valdivia
Corral
Osorno
Fresia
Puerto Montt
Ancud
Castro
Puerto Natales
Punta Arenas
Porvenir
Robinson Crusoe Island
JUAN FERNANDEZ ISLANDS
EASTER ISLAND
PERU
BOLIVIA
ARGENTINA
ATLANTIC OCEAN
PACIFIC OCEAN
[Picture on page 41]
Juan Flores, the first Chilean to respond favorably to the truth, asked: “And the others, when will they come?”
[Picture on page 49]
Kathe Palm, who arrived in Chile in 1936, energetically spread the seeds of truth from one end of the country to the other
[Picture on page 57]
Richard Traub, who opened up the preaching work in Chile, and his wife Consuelo
[Picture on page 71]
All that remained of the Puerto Montt missionary home after the 1960 earthquake
[Picture on page 79]
Branch building in Santiago, Chile
[Picture on page 81]
Evelyn MacFarlane (Bunny Valenzuela), who, before her death in 1978, had helped 113 persons to accept the truth
[Picture on page 105]
Robert and Vora Hannan, who, during their long missionary career, have helped 191 persons to learn the truth

