Yeartext for 1982
“Become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.
This inspired admonition of the apostle Paul is especially meaningful to us at the present time. Whether we have been long in the truth or have recently entered the race for life, all of us need to be “steadfast,” firm in our stand, solid in the faith. We need to be “unmovable,” unwavering in our loyalty to Jehovah. Never should we allow doubts to creep in and undermine our integrity or cause us to be delinquent in observing Jehovah’s commandments.​—Eph. 4:14; Jas. 1:6-8.
One of the greatest aids to being steadfast and unmovable in our loyalty to Jehovah is “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” The idle, slothful or lazy person is neither loved nor blessed by Jehovah. On the other hand, a person may be very industrious and energetically busy with his own schemes and programs—’doing his own thing.’ Or he may be burdened down with the cares of this life and the anxieties of this system of things to the extent that he has no time for “the work of the Lord.” This, too, is something to guard against. Under the pressures of the hurried way of life in this 20th century, we must not allow the everyday anxieties to overwhelm or distract us. Why were we called out of darkness into the marvelous light of Jehovah’s favor? That we might show forth the glory of his name and kingdom. Let us make sure, then, that we do not miss the purpose of God’s undeserved kindness, yes, make sure that we have “plenty to do” in serving the Kingdom interests.​—2 Cor. 6:1; 1 Pet. 2:9.
There is certainly “plenty to do” in the present Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. Jesus said that this good news “has to be preached first” in all the world before the end of this present Satanic system of things.​—Mark 13:10.
How privileged we are to have any share in this divinely directed work! Let us therefore work whole-souled as unto Jehovah, knowing that our labor “is not in vain in connection with the Lord.” And not just during 1982. Let us work with all eternity in view​—when the Kingdom rule is extended to the limits of all the earth, when the earth is made a paradise and the dead are resurrected. As we thus work, we will be happy and contented and above all, Jehovah’s word and name will be honored and praised.

