Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Kingdom Truth Blossoms in Sri Lanka
SRI LANKA, meaning “Resplendent Land,” is the ancient name restored to this lovely island still known to many by its colonial name, “Ceylon.” Because of its location in the Indian Ocean, it is also called the Teardrop of India; but the tears have not all been those of joy as in recent times ethnic violence has erupted, making news headlines worldwide.
Yet, here too Kingdom truth blossoms. Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim, Parsi, and nominal Christian are being taught that only Jehovah’s Kingdom by Christ Jesus can bring lasting healing to the ethnic and political wounds dividing the communities. The following experiences show the blossoming of Kingdom truth in this “Resplendent Land.”
□ Salimoon was brought up to believe that the Qurʼan is God’s Word. But he could never fully accept that an all-merciful God would torture people in a burning hell. One day Jehovah’s Witnesses invited him to a meeting. Recognizing the truth at once, he has never looked back, and he now serves happily as an elder in the Christian congregation.
□ Harry, a lifelong Buddhist who had demonstrated his religious faith by walking on burning coals, was unable to follow the principles contained in the Buddhist teaching of an eightfold path: (1) right understanding; (2) right thought; (3) right speech; (4) right action; (5) right livelihood; (6) right effort; (7) right mindfulness; and (8) right concentration. These should fill every part of a person’s life. Although he thought of himself as a good Buddhist, his smoking, drinking, and other improper conduct created problems with his family. Finally, he decided to study the Bible. Yet, no one offered to study with him. He heard that Jehovah’s Witnesses might be willing, so he attended a meeting at the Kingdom Hall, and a study was arranged. One of the Witnesses from a Muslim background helped him learn what the Bible teaches. Now, at last, he has found the strength from Jehovah to follow successfully a path of right principles. He is rejoicing to serve as a ministerial servant and is making plans to enter the pioneer ministry.
So Kingdom truth blossoms in Sri Lanka, and now there are 1,086 Witnesses in this beautiful land. This growth means that larger branch facilities are needed, and a location for this is being sought. The brothers are also building new Kingdom Halls. In Puttalam a congregation made up of ten families decided to build a Kingdom Hall and to build it large enough for circuit assemblies. The hall was finished in time for the circuit assembly, where 107 attended. Now the congregation has nearly doubled, with over 75 attending the meetings held in both Tamil and Sinhalese. And still there is plenty of room for further growth.
Fulfilled Bible prophecy points to the fact that very soon every tear of sadness will be wiped from all eyes as God has promised. Even thoughts of ethnic violence will no longer come up into the heart. (Revelation 21:4; Isaiah 65:17) And in this lovely “teardrop” of an island, tears of joy will be shed as the effects of the peaceful fruitage of God’s Kingdom continue to be enjoyed for all eternity.

