Directing Interest to the Organization
1 Your own experience in the truth has no doubt made you aware of how much we need the congregation for our proper spiritual growth and stability in the faith. (Heb. 10:24, 25) So it follows that you should be deeply concerned with imparting to your Bible students not only a clear understanding of doctrinal matters but also a similar deep appreciation for the organization Jehovah is using. (Luke 6:40) Our new brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide can assist you in this.
2 People who are studying need to appreciate that the structure and methods used by Jehovah’s organization are rooted in the Scriptures. In order to progress, they must also see that they are gaining insight into Jehovah’s ways, as reflected by his organization, and not just getting acquainted with another religion.
USE OF NEW BROCHURE
3 Early in the study arrangement, the student should be provided with a copy of the Doing God’s Will brochure and be informed in advance as to what sections will be reviewed as part of his weekly lesson. Thus he can prepare for the study. As you prepare, give thought to the student’s former or current religious affiliation so you can better show the contrast with Jehovah’s Bible-based organization. Oftentimes a lesson in contrast will help make the distinction in the student’s mind. Look up key cited texts, and use the review questions appearing at the end of most of the 15 sections of the brochure. In this way you will help the individual gain a clearer view of Jehovah’s organization.
4 As an example, in covering the section “Congregations for Building Up in Love and Unity,” you might ask the student how the religious leaders of his church are put in office and viewed. Then you could proceed to examine Scripturally how this contrasts with what is seen and done in Jehovah’s organization. The same approach could be taken in covering the section on how the work is financed, beginning on page 28. This will help the student appreciate Jehovah’s way and motivate him to respond favorably.
5 Keep in mind also that you do not have to cover all the material in any given section on just one study but, depending on its length, may spread it over several studies. Only five or ten minutes need be taken after each study, using the review questions pertinent to the portion of the material covered, as these highlight the main points.
6 Call attention to the pictures and illustrations that serve to impress the thoughts of the text on the mind of the student. Many of the pictures portray the international scope of Jehovah’s organization and the unity that exists among God’s people, without regard for race, social background, or nationality. Only such an organization can truly fulfill the commission Jesus gave to preach the good news worldwide.​—Matt. 24:14.
7 People must choose between Jehovah’s organization and Satan’s. Their lives are involved. (Acts 26:18) We can help them make the right choice by fully utilizing the fine instruments Jehovah has given us to direct interest to his organization. We should plan on doing this at each Bible study. They can thus “pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call upon the Lord out of a clean heart.”​—2 Tim. 2:22.

