Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MARCH 1
Song 151
10 min: Appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Suggest points from the Live Forever book that can be used in field service this weekend. Show how these can be tied in with the Topic for Conversation. Congregations that have a supply of the tract A United, Happy Family​—What Is the Key? will use these in the field during March.
20 min: “Publicly Declaring Our Hope.” Discussion with audience participation. Emphasize importance of starting studies in Live Forever book. Interview someone in congregation whose interest was first aroused by study in Live Forever book. Mention what in book kindled the interest.
15 min: “Can You Auxiliary Pioneer?” Talk. Encourage all to give prayerful consideration to being an auxiliary pioneer. Give special encouragement to do so in April. Mention May and August as months that have five full weekends, and encourage all to determine if they could share one or more times in auxiliary pioneering this year.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 8
Song 191
10 min: Local announcements. Give accounts report. Call attention to any contribution congregation gave to Society Kingdom Hall Fund and express Society’s thanks for all such contributions that enable congregations in need to build Kingdom Halls. (If other contributions have been acknowledged on a Society statement, mention these too.) Outline field service arrangements, putting special emphasis on this Saturday’s magazine activity.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Using Features of the Reasoning Book.” Questions and answers. In connection with paragraph 4, have a publisher demonstrate how to use the feature “If Someone Says—.”
15 min: “Do You Have an Inquiring Mind?” Talk on article in February 1, 1987, issue of The Watchtower. Make local application of points in accord with needs of congregation.
Song 42 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 15
Song 166
12 min: Local announcements. Encourage weekend activity offering Live Forever book. A selected recent brief experience placing the Live Forever book may be used. Remind brothers to invite all interested people to hear the special public talk “What Is Your Relationship With God?” to be given in most congregations on March 29. If the talk is to be given at a later date, make appropriate comments regarding local arrangements.
20 min: “Directing Interest to the Organization.” Discussion with audience participation and demonstrations. One publisher can use the first point in paragraph 4 after the study. Then the same publisher can demonstrate the second example in paragraph 4.
13 min: Local needs. Unless there is a more pressing need, develop need in the field service called to congregation’s attention by circuit overseer during last visit.
Song 113 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 22
Song 105
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Have a demonstration of a magazine presentation that can be used in magazine work this Saturday. Encourage all to arrange to participate in field service this weekend.
20 min: “Preparation for a Special Occasion.” Talk by presiding overseer. Announce time of Memorial and review local arrangements. Mention last year’s attendance and whom especially we might invite in the days remaining.
15 min: Invite People to the Memorial Celebration. Service overseer to arrange demonstrations of how to invite people to Memorial. Have one publisher demonstrate inviting current Bible student who has not attended before. Stress importance we put on Memorial of Christ’s death. Describe how the meeting is conducted, especially explaining that few, if any, partake of the emblems, stating this will be one of the main points explained by the speaker. Have another publisher demonstrate how to invite a close relative to the Memorial. Both demonstrations should use the invitations printed by the Society for this purpose. Service overseer should conclude by stressing that attendance at the Memorial has been just the spiritual uplift some have needed to make progress or to start having a Bible study. All should keep in mind that lives are involved.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
Song 205 and concluding prayer.

