Presenting the Good News​—By Using Features of the Reasoning Book
1 The June 1, 1985, Watchtower promised that the “Integrity Keepers” Convention would provide “what will prove to be long-lasting assistance to reason with others from the Scriptures.” That promise was fulfilled in a grand way with the release of the book Reasoning From the Scriptures. Now that nearly two years have passed, have we become more familiar with the book’s outstanding features? Are we taking it with us in the field service, using it at every opportunity, and training newer and less experienced ones to use it?
2 To increase our effectiveness in using this fine publication, it will be beneficial to review some of the features of the book and consider how they can be used. Please note the section “How to Use Reasoning From the Scriptures” (p. 7). The first three paragraphs contain motivating material that reminds us to reason with people who have sincere questions or those who are willing to listen to a different point of view. (Acts 17:2, 3) The remaining paragraphs in this section provide a helpful step-by-step outline of how to use the book to the greatest advantage.
HANDLING OBJECTIONS
3 For example, suppose the householder makes the observation, “I believe there is good in all religions.” Rather than using a thought or scripture that you have used in the past, often you will find it more tactful and more effective if you tell the householder that you would like to show him something interesting that you have on the subject. Draw the Reasoning book out of your briefcase and open it to the main heading “Religion” on page 322. As you quickly scan the boldfaced questions, you will notice the question on page 323, “Is it true that there is good in all religions?” as the one closely related to the householder’s observation. You could read some of the comments directly from the book.
4 You could also have turned first to the end of the subject “Religion” (p. 330). There you will find the valuable feature “If Someone Says—.” The comment on page 331, “All religions are good; you have yours, and I have mine,” is closely related to what your householder has said. Then you could read appropriate points under this statement.
5 The Reasoning book may also help you learn to initiate conversations. Each week before you go into field service, try to review one or two points from the section “Introductions for Use in the Field Ministry” (p. 9). Use a variety of these introductions in the field service. Vary them according to the Topic for Conversation and the territory to be worked. In a short time you may find that you are more versatile and effective in starting conversations.
6 Have you ever felt ill at ease when a householder used a scripture and misapplied it? Remember, the Reasoning book might help with its feature on page 445, “Scriptures Often Misapplied.” There page references are given for enlightening comments on 85 of the most commonly misapplied passages.
7 When those with whom we study ask Bible questions, we can help them find the answers with the aid of the Reasoning book. So if we place a copy of this book with each one, we can help equip them to answer many of their own questions, as well as questions that friends and relatives may ask them. We thank Jehovah for this beautiful treasure that can have such a tremendous impact on our activity in the field ministry. May we use it to the full to praise his glorious name.​—Ps. 66:2, 8.

