Publicly Declaring Our Hope
1 Jesus is our model in declaring our Kingdom hope. He said: “I have spoken to the world publicly. I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together; and I spoke nothing in secret.” (John 18:20) How can we imitate him?
2 Like Jesus, we want to take advantage of every appropriate occasion to talk to people about the Kingdom and about our hope for the future. Paul urged: “Let us hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering.” (Heb. 10:23) We do this because we want people to know about the goodness of Jehovah, who gives us our hope. We also do this because we want people to gain salvation.​—Rom. 10:13, 14.
3 The month of March brings us into the 1987 Memorial season, a time of increased theocratic activities for all of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many will be auxiliary pioneering. In addition to our regular public ministry offering the Live Forever book and starting home Bible studies, we will have in mind inviting people to hear the special public talk on the subject “What Is Your Relationship With God?” that will be given in most congregations on March 29. Also, there will be much to do in getting ready for the Memorial celebration on April 12.
EFFECT OF LIVE FOREVER BOOK
4 The Live Forever book is one of the finest books we have ever had to help people understand the Bible. It provides help for effectively declaring our hope, and we should be enthused about using it during March. Thus far 30 million copies have been printed in 71 languages. How many will we be able to place with interested ones? It may help us if we thoughtfully make a list of the opportunities to place this fine publication.
5 House-to-house work will no doubt be the main way we offer Live Forever books. Can you schedule more time during the month to share in this work? Our success in placing the Live Forever book may be determined to a great extent by our effectiveness in using the current Topic for Conversation and tying this theme in with the book. Is there something you can do to improve in this regard? Some will be able to have family practice sessions. What can those who conduct meetings for field service do to assist? Romans 12:8 urges such ones to preside “in real earnest.”
6 In what other circumstances might we place the Live Forever book? One truck driver offered the book to people he came in contact with during his travels. His presentation was simple. He showed people the book and explained that he had learned many wonderful things from it and that what he learned had actually changed his life. During a three-month period, he placed 200 Live Forever books through this informal method. A brother who worked at an airport placed 120 books simply by leaving a copy on his desk open to the illustration on pages 12 and 13. People who saw it took the initiative to ask for copies. What can you do to use the Live Forever book in publicly declaring your hope at work, in school, in your travels, or elsewhere?
BIBLE STUDIES IN LIVE FOREVER BOOK
7 One publisher who started three home Bible studies by following through on Live Forever book placements wrote the Society: “I cannot say ‘Thank you’ enough for making Bible studies easy to conduct as well as covering every essential aspect needed by the student for gaining a lasting and heartfelt appreciation for Jehovah and his organization.” It is encouraging to note that our Bible studies in the United States have increased from a monthly average of 344,493 in 1982, the year we received the Live Forever book, to an average of 486,426 each month during the 1986 service year. This is an increase of 41 percent!
8 So let each of us pray for Jehovah’s help so that we can seize every appropriate opportunity to declare our hope publicly. Seek ways to use the Live Forever book to assist others to take steps to share with us in publicly praising our God. Jehovah will bless our efforts.

