





Finding Peace Despite War and Violent Conflict

“Before studying the Bible,” says Gary, who formerly served in the military, “I had no idea why there was so much cruelty, injustice, and trouble in the world. But now I have peace of mind. I know that Jehovah God will make the world a safe place.”
Gary is not alone. Consider how the Bible has helped others.



THE BIBLE SAYS: “You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive.”​—Psalm 86:5.


HOW THIS HELPS: “This verse assures me that Jehovah is merciful. I know he is willing to forgive me for all that I did in the past when I participated in war.”​—Wilmar, Colombia.


THE BIBLE SAYS: “I am creating new heavens and a new earth; and the former things will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart.”​—Isaiah 65:17.


HOW THIS HELPS: “I suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder and depression because of my experiences in the military. But this scripture reminds me that soon Jehovah will hush my disquieting thoughts and end the nightmares that I have. They will no longer reside in my mind or heart. What a gift!”​—Zafirah, United States.


THE BIBLE SAYS: “In his days the righteous will flourish, and peace will abound until the moon is no more.”​—Psalm 72:7.


HOW THIS HELPS: “I often think about those words. Soon the nightmare of war will be over, and we won’t have to worry about the safety of our loved ones anymore.”​—Oleksandra, Ukraine.


THE BIBLE SAYS: “Your dead will live. . . . Awake and shout joyfully, you residents in the dust!”​—Isaiah 26:19.


HOW THIS HELPS: “Almost all of my family members were killed during the genocide against the Tutsi. But this verse assures me that I will see them again. I look forward to hearing their happy voices when they are resurrected!”​—Marie, Rwanda.


THE BIBLE SAYS: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more . . . But the meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”​—Psalm 37:10, 11.


HOW THIS HELPS: “Although the war has ended, there are still injustices and evil people. These verses have been especially empowering for me. Jehovah sees everything and understands my situation. He promises that soon all suffering will end and be forgotten.”​—Daler, Tajikistan.

The individuals quoted in this magazine are among the millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses who have been helped by the Bible to find peace. They have learned how to overcome racial, national, tribal, and personal hatreds. (Ephesians 4:31, 32) Jehovah’s Witnesses are politically neutral and refuse to take part in violence.​—John 18:36.
Jehovah’s Witnesses also find support in their loving worldwide brotherhood. (John 13:35) For instance, Oleksandra, quoted earlier, had to flee with her sister to another country because of war. She says: “When we crossed the border, we immediately saw local Witnesses who were there to welcome us. Their support helped us adapt to living in a new country as refugees.”

We warmly invite you to join us at our meetings where we learn about the Bible’s peaceful message and how to apply it. Visit jw.org to find a location near you or to request a free interactive Bible course with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, using the publication Enjoy Life Forever!


