




Humans cannot end war



How War and Violent Conflict Will End

The Bible reveals that God, not humans, will bring “an end to wars throughout the earth.”​—Psalm 46:9.


GOD WILL ELIMINATE HUMAN GOVERNMENTS
God will end human governments by means of what the Bible calls the war of Armageddon.a (Revelation 16:16) At that time, “the kings of the entire inhabited earth” will be gathered together for “the war of the great day of God the Almighty.” (Revelation 16:14) Armageddon is God’s war to end all wars.
God will replace human governments with his Kingdom, or government, that will rule from heaven and never be destroyed. (Daniel 2:44) God has chosen his Son, Jesus Christ, to be its King. (Isaiah 9:6, 7; Matthew 28:18) This government is the Kingdomb that Jesus taught his followers to pray for. (Matthew 6:9, 10) All mankind will be united under one global government with Jesus as Ruler.
Unlike human rulers, Jesus will not use his authority to advance his own interests. Because he is fair and impartial, no one will have to worry about being overlooked because of his race, nationality, or ethnic background. (Isaiah 11:3, 4) And people will not have to fight for their rights. Why not? Because Jesus will take an interest in the welfare of each person. “He will rescue the poor who cry for help, also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. . . . From oppression and from violence he will rescue them.”​—Psalm 72:12-14.
God’s Kingdom will rid the earth of deadly weapons. (Micah 4:3) It will also remove wicked people who refuse to stop fighting or disrupting the peace of others. (Psalm 37:9, 10) Every man, woman, and child will feel safe wherever they go on earth.​—Ezekiel 34:28.
People will enjoy ideal living conditions under God’s government. It will eliminate the problems that cause people to fight, such as poverty, hunger, and inadequate housing. Everyone will have access to an abundance of nutritious food and will enjoy a comfortable place to live.​—Psalm 72:16; Isaiah 65:21-23.
Under God’s Kingdom, the harmful effects of war will be removed. This includes not only physical wounds but also the mental and emotional anguish that people suffer because of war-related atrocities. Even those who have died will be resurrected back to life on earth. (Isaiah 25:8; 26:19; 35:5, 6) Families will be reunited and the cruel memories of war will be part of “the former things [that] have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:4.
GOD WILL ELIMINATE SIN
God’s Kingdom will unite people in worship of the only true God, Jehovahc, “the God of love and of peace.” (2 Corinthians 13:11) People will learn how to live together peacefully. (Isaiah 2:3, 4; 11:9) All who apply what they learn will be set free from the effects of sin.​—Romans 8:20, 21.
GOD WILL ELIMINATE SATAN AND HIS DEMONS
God’s Kingdom will destroy the instigators of war, Satan and his demons. (Revelation 20:1-3, 10) Without their evil influence, “peace will abound.”​—Psalm 72:7.
You can be confident that God’s promise to end war and violent conflict will come true. He has both the ability and the desire to eliminate war.
  God has the wisdom and power needed to end war and violence. (Job 9:4) Nothing is impossible for him to accomplish.​—Job 42:2.

  God hates to see people suffer. (Isaiah 63:9) He also “hates anyone who loves violence.”​—Psalm 11:5.

  God always keeps his word; he cannot lie.​—Isaiah 55:10, 11; Titus 1:2.



God will bring real and lasting peace in the future.





God will eliminate war



Why has God permitted warfare?
You may wonder why God has allowed wars to continue until now. To answer that question, watch the video Why Does God Allow Suffering? on jw.org.



a Read the article “What Is the Battle of Armageddon?” on jw.org.
b Watch the video What Is God’s Kingdom? on jw.org.
c Jehovah is the personal name of God.​—Psalm 83:18.

