Directing Students to the Organization Behind Our Name
1 “It is a message spoken in more than 200 languages. It is a message heard in more than 210 lands. It is a message delivered personally wherever people may be found. It is all part of the greatest preaching campaign the world has ever known, a message uniting millions earth wide. Jehovah’s Witnesses have been organized to accomplish this work for more than a hundred years!”
2 Thus begins the narration of the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name. It proceeds to answer the questions: Who really are Jehovah’s Witnesses? How is their activity organized? Directed? Financed? It impresses upon viewers the fact that “Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide have been trained as an organization to assist their neighbors to build faith in the Bible,” and it encourages them to see for themselves the organization behind our name. After seeing this video, a woman who was studying burst into tears of joy and appreciation and said: “How can anyone not see that this is the organization of the true God, Jehovah?”​—Compare 1 Corinthians 14:24, 25.
3 Another woman had studied the Bible off and on for a long time, but she could not accept the fact that the Trinity is a false doctrine. Then she and her husband were shown our video. They were very impressed with the presentation and watched it twice the same night. At their next study, the wife expressed her desire to become a Witness. She said she had been focusing on her belief in the Trinity and failed to look at our organization and the people in it. From the video she realized that she had found God’s true organization. She wanted to start preaching from house to house right away. After it was explained to her what the necessary steps are for becoming an unbaptized publisher, she said: “Let’s get busy with it.” She resigned from her church, started in the field service activity, and became proficient at refuting the Trinity.
4 It has been well established that Bible students make better spiritual progress and grow to maturity more rapidly when they recognize Jehovah’s organization and associate with it. Significantly, after the 3,000 were baptized at Pentecost, “they continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to association together.” (Acts 2:42, ftn.) It is essential that we help students to do the same today. How can we?
5 Shoulder the Responsibility: Every disciple maker must realize that it is his responsibility to direct the Bible student to God’s organization. (1 Tim. 4:16) Each study session should be viewed as a stepping-stone toward the happy day when the new one will symbolize his dedication to Jehovah by water baptism. One of the questions that he will be asked during the baptism ceremony is: “Do you understand that your dedication and baptism identify you as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in association with God’s spirit-directed organization?” Hence, it is important that he realize he cannot serve God without actively associating with the true Christian congregation.​—Matt. 24:45-47; John 6:68; 2 Cor. 5:20.
6 Continue to educate the student about the local congregation and the international organization behind Jehovah’s Witnesses. Do this at each Bible study session, beginning with the first one. From the very start, invite the student to the meetings, and keep on inviting him.​—Rev. 22:17.
7 Use the Tools That Are Provided: Our best publications for use in conducting home Bible studies are the brochure What Does God Require of Us? and the book Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life. Both highlight the need for association with the congregation. The end of lesson 5 in the Require brochure states: “You need to keep learning about Jehovah and obeying his requirements. Attending meetings at the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses will help you to do so.” The Knowledge book repeatedly encourages the student to associate at meetings. Chapter 5, paragraph 22, extends this invitation: “Jehovah’s Witnesses . . . warmly urge you to share with them in worshiping God ‘with spirit and truth.’ (John 4:24)” Chapter 12, paragraph 16, states: “As you continue this study and make it your custom to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses, your faith will be fortified even more.” Chapter 16, paragraph 20, says: “Make it your custom to attend the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses.” It adds: “This will help you to understand and then apply the knowledge of God in your life and will bring you happiness. Being a part of the worldwide Christian brotherhood will help you to stay close to Jehovah.” Chapter 17 thoroughly discusses how one finds true security among God’s people. As we study with others, it is our responsibility to emphasize these portions of the material.
8 The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide is a fine tool that has been produced to acquaint individuals with the only visible organization Jehovah is using today to accomplish his will. The detailed information it contains about our ministry, meetings, and organization will encourage the reader to associate with us in worshiping God. Once a Bible study is established, it is recommended that we give the student a copy of this brochure to read on his own. There is no need to study it with him as was done in the past.
9 Some of the videos that the Society has produced are excellent tools for directing students to the organization behind our name. It would be good if they could watch (1) The New World Society in Action, the review of the 1954 film that captured the smooth, efficient, and loving spirit with which Jehovah’s organization functions; (2) United by Divine Teaching, which examines the peaceful unity that has been displayed at our international conventions in Eastern Europe, South America, Africa, and Asia; (3) To the Ends of the Earth, which marked the 50th anniversary of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead and shows the effect the missionaries have had on the worldwide preaching work; (4) Jehovah’s Witnesses Stand Firm Against Nazi Assault, which tells the thrilling story of the Witnesses’ courage and triumph in the face of Hitler’s brutal persecution of them; and, of course, (5) Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name.
10 Set Progressive Goals Regarding Meetings: It has to be explained to students that we need both the private tutoring that is provided in the home Bible study setting and the classroom discussions that are provided at congregation meetings. (John 6:45) A new one needs to progress equally in his understanding of both the Scriptures and the organization. To that end, there is no substitute for attending the meetings. (Heb. 10:23-25) Start inviting the person to the congregation meetings right away. Some newly interested ones start attending meetings even before having a regular home Bible study. Of course, we want to set the proper example ourselves by being in regular attendance.​—Luke 6:40; Phil. 3:17.
11 Share enough information about the meetings and how they are conducted so that the student will feel at ease when attending his first meeting. Since some people are very uneasy when going to new places for the first time, it may be advantageous to accompany the student to the Kingdom Hall when he attends his first meeting. He will feel more at ease if you are with him as he meets members of the congregation. By all means, be a good host to your visitor, making him feel welcome and comfortable.​—Matt. 7:12; Phil. 2:1-4.
12 Encourage the student to attend a special assembly day, circuit assembly, or district convention at the first opportunity. Perhaps you can include him in your transportation arrangements.
13 Instill Heartfelt Appreciation: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry, page 92, explains: “If your own deep appreciation for Jehovah’s organization is reflected in your conversations with interested people, it will be easier for them to grow in appreciation and will move them to make greater advancement in getting to know Jehovah.” Always speak positively, never negatively, about your local congregation. (Ps. 84:10; 133:1, 3b) In the prayers that you offer on the Bible study, mention the congregation and the student’s need to associate regularly with it.​—Eph. 1:15-17.
14 We certainly want new ones to develop heartfelt appreciation for the delightful companionship and spiritual security that are found among God’s people. (1 Tim. 3:15; 1 Pet. 2:17; 5:9) As Jehovah’s Witnesses, let us do all we can to direct students of God’s Word to the organization behind our name.
[Blurb on page 3]
Students make faster spiritual progress when they see the organization for themselves
[Blurb on page 4]
Do not delay inviting students to attend meetings

