Help Inexperienced Ones Understand
1 By means of the disciple-making work, we teach others what God requires of them. (Matt. 28:19, 20) A tremendous effort to do that is being put forth worldwide by more than five million Witnesses. Success is not measured by the hours spent, the literature placed, or the Bible studies started. We achieve our objective when people understand and act upon what they learn.
2 Helping others spiritually involves “making the inexperienced ones understand.” (Ps. 119:130) Hearts are touched and people are motivated only when they “get the sense of it.” (Matt. 15:10) As our work expands and intensifies, we come to appreciate more and more the need to speak and teach with simplicity. That is why the Society has published the brochure What Does God Require of Us? It contains a well-rounded study course that covers the fundamental teachings of the Bible. The lessons are short, the wording is uncomplicated, and the instruction is easy to comprehend, giving the brochure wide appeal.
3 This brochure will be featured along with the magazines during the months of April and May. It is recommended that when you plan your weekly service activity, you arrange to offer the magazines on Saturdays but feature the brochure in your ministry during the rest of the week. Take the brochure to people who have readily accepted literature in the past. Remember that it can be especially useful in teaching children, people who speak a foreign language, and those who have limited reading ability.
4 Use a Simple Approach: When presenting the Require brochure, refer to page 2, where it explains that “this brochure is designed as a Bible study course.” Point to paragraph 3 on page 3 to show why the person needs to study the Bible. Stir his interest with some of the lesson titles that reveal simple Bible truths. Demonstrate how this brochure makes learning a pleasure, and offer to give him personal help.
5 Conduct a Progressive Study: Our goal is to do more than just conduct studies​—we want to make disciples who will become firm supporters of true worship. The brochure can be covered in a matter of weeks and should lead right into a study of the Knowledge book. (See the footnote on page 31.) Right from the start, help the student identify Jehovah’s organization. (See Reasoning book, pages 283-4.) Emphasize the value of congregation meetings, and explain that attending them provides a comprehensive understanding of how to practice true worship.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
6 A full share in this special work during April and May is sure to bring us the joy that comes from helping sincere ones to “acquire understanding” that leads to life.​—Prov. 4:5.

