Multitudes Are Being Added
1 As was true in the first century, the growth that the Christian congregation is experiencing today is phenomenal. (Acts 2:41; 4:4) Last year, 366,579 new disciples were baptized, an average of over 1,000 each day! More than one million were baptized in the last three years. Indeed, Jehovah has kept on adding multitudes of believers.​—Acts 5:14.
2 The many new ones who lack experience in Christian living need assistance and training from those who are strong in the faith. (Rom. 15:1) Among the early Christians were some who, even years after their baptism, had failed to “press on to maturity.” (Heb. 5:12; 6:1) That is why, in his letter to the Hebrews, Paul highlighted areas in which Christians need to grow spiritually. What are these, and how can needed help be offered?
3 Acquiring Good Study Habits: In harmony with Paul’s instruction, being a good student involves actively learning, repeating, and using the “solid food” provided by Jehovah’s organization. (Heb. 5:13, 14; see the August 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 12-17.) By engaging new believers in spiritual conversations and sharing with them precious gems of truth that you have uncovered through personal research, you may stimulate them to acquire good study habits. Perhaps occasionally you could invite a new one to join you in your personal or family study.
4 Attending Meetings Regularly: Your faithful example and loving words of encouragement will help new members of the congregation to avoid another area of concern mentioned by Paul​—“the custom” some have of missing Christian meetings. (Heb. 10:24, 25) Help them to appreciate that the meetings are their spiritual lifeline to the congregation. Take the initiative to make them feel welcome as part of our brotherhood.
5 Approaching Jehovah With Confidence: To overcome fleshly weaknesses and personality flaws, we must seek Jehovah in prayer, expressing to him our deepest thoughts and most intimate concerns. New ones must learn that by supplicating Jehovah for help, as Paul urged, they need not falter. (Heb. 4:15, 16; 10:22) Relating your personal experiences in this regard will strengthen a new one’s confidence that Jehovah hears heartfelt prayers.
6 Allocating Time for the Ministry: Paul also showed that when we “always offer to God a sacrifice of praise,” it is spiritually strengthening. (Heb. 13:15) Can you invite a new publisher to join you in your weekly arrangements for field service? Perhaps the two of you could prepare your presentations or consider a feature of the ministry that the newer one has not yet tried.
7 The multitudes being added are a cause for great joy. Our expending ourselves in training and exhorting new members of the congregation will help them to develop the strong faith needed to ‘preserve alive their souls.’​—Heb. 3:12, 13; 10:39.

