Question Box
▪ What publications should be put in the Theocratic Ministry School library?
An abundance of spiritual publications have been provided for the benefit of God’s people. Since many publishers do not possess all of these personally, the Theocratic Ministry School library at the Kingdom Hall provides means for research in publications that might not otherwise be available. Thus, it should be well equipped with a variety of Bible translations, the current publications of the Society, copies of Our Kingdom Ministry, bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake!, and the Watch Tower Publications Indexes. Additionally, a good modern dictionary should be added. If available, encyclopedias, atlases, or reference books on grammar and history may be useful. However, our primary focus should be on the publications provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.”​—Matt. 24:45.
In some cases it is reported that books of a questionable nature have been put in the Theocratic Ministry School library. It would not be appropriate to include fictional material, Bible commentaries that highlight higher criticism, or books on philosophy or spiritism. The Theocratic Ministry School library should include only material that will enable those using it to make continued spiritual advancement.​—1 Tim. 4:15.
The school overseer is responsible for the library, although another brother can be assigned to help him in caring for it. He should see that the library is kept current, with new publications being added as soon as they become available. Each book should be clearly marked on the inside cover with the name of the congregation to which it belongs. Annually, the books should be checked to see if any need repair or replacement.
Everyone can cooperate in caring for the library. Care should be exercised in handling and using the books. Children should not be allowed to play with them, nor should anyone mark them. A neat sign may be displayed as a reminder that the books are not to be taken from the Kingdom Hall.
With new congregations constantly being formed, it is likely that many libraries are limited in size. Some publishers who own our older publications might consider donating them to the congregation. The elders may want to order the Society’s reprints of Watchtower bound volumes. In these ways, the Theocratic Ministry School library will prove very useful in helping all to uncover the hidden treasures of God’s Word, which give knowledge, wisdom, and understanding.​—Prov. 2:4-6.

