Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 7
Song 100
12 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Mention talking points in current magazines.
15 min: “Multitudes Are Being Added.” Questions and answers. Review key suggestions covered in August 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 12-17.
18 min: “Help Inexperienced Ones Understand.” Questions and answers. Review features of the Require brochure: simplified study method, timely questions, appealing illustrations, abundant Scripture references. Stress the goal of starting studies that eventually lead into the Knowledge book. Have a capable publisher demonstrate how to start a study using the approach outlined in paragraph 4. Encourage all parents in the congregation to study the brochure with their young children.
Song 130 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 14
Song 107
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. As time permits, briefly relate local field experiences about placing the Require brochure or starting Bible studies using it.
15 min: “Directing Students to the Organization Behind Our Name.” (Paragraphs 1-6) Questions and answers. Read paragraphs 5-6 and the cited scriptures. Relate local experiences about the reaction of Bible students to seeing the video Jehovah’s Witnesses​—The Organization Behind the Name.
20 min: “Teach Others What God Requires.” Audience discussion of paragraphs 1-4. Have presentations in paragraph 5 demonstrated, using four different settings​—on the street, at a house, in a business place, and at a park. Remind all to pick up brochures and magazines for field service before leaving the Kingdom Hall tonight.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 21
Song 113
15 min: Local announcements. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application for auxiliary pioneering in May. Review the Question Box, and let the congregation know if certain books are needed to fill out the library in the Kingdom Hall.
15 min: “Directing Students to the Organization Behind Our Name.” (Paragraphs 7-14) Questions and answers. Have a capable teacher demonstrate how to have a kindly heart-to-heart discussion with a student about the need to attend meetings.
15 min: Making Full Use of Our Literature. Talk by an elder. (See September 1995 Our Kingdom Ministry, pages 3-5.) Reports show that congregations often order many more magazines than they actually distribute each month. Up to 50 percent are never reported as placements. (Show what the statistics indicate locally.) What happens to these magazines? Many end up on a shelf or are thrown away. How can this be avoided? Each publisher should carefully estimate his needs and order only what he can place. Make it a practice to offer magazines to all we contact. Do not let older issues go to waste. Share in magazine service regularly. Bear in mind that we need to mention the donation arrangement and to turn in all donations promptly.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 28
Song 121
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in their field service reports for April. Announce the names of those who will auxiliary pioneer in May. Outline the additional arrangements that are being made locally for meetings for service. During May a special effort should be made to follow up brochure placements with the goal of starting studies. Briefly suggest ways we can tactfully request the name and address of people we witness to informally. You could give your name and address first and ask if there is a phone number where they can be reached. Invite audience to offer other suggestions that have worked for them.
15 min: “Why Do They Do It?” An elder discusses article with two or three regular pioneers. (If not available, use ones who enroll often as auxiliary pioneers.) Include highlights from article “Pioneers Bestow and Receive Blessings,” in the January 15, 1994, Watchtower. Have each one explain why he or she has taken up the pioneer service. Ask them to relate experiences showing how they have been blessed for doing so.
15 min: Local needs. Elders may use this time to present information on specific local needs.
Song 129 and concluding prayer.

