From Our Readers
Skin Cancer—How to Protect Yourself (June 8, 2005)  The information in this series is excellent. I am a chief physician at a dermatology clinic. I would like to receive some extra copies so that I can distribute them.
K. W., Denmark
Thanks to this article, I decided to have a growth on my back checked. The doctor told me that it could have turned into a form of cancer called Bowen’s disease. I had surgery immediately. This series helped me to take quick action.
S. M., Japan
The box on page 7 moved me to have a mole examined by my doctor. The diagnosis—malignant melanoma in its earliest stage. As the article pointed out, if the melanoma had not been treated early, it could have been fatal. I am grateful to my doctor and to this Awake! series, which just may have saved my life!
L. S., United States
For Family Review (May 8, 2005)  I used to read only the articles that appealed to me, but after seeing “For Family Review,” I read the whole magazine so that I could answer the questions. It wasn’t long before reading the entire magazine became a habit!
Y. Z., Russia
I was delighted with this page. Besides being fun, it made me realize that I need to pay more attention to what I read!
D. S., Britain
Young People Ask . . . Why Am I Drawn to the Wrong People? (July 22, 2005)  It seems that after ten years of “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” I still did not know how to fix this flaw in my character. (1 Corinthians 15:58) I realized that I was not being emotionally mature, but I did not know how to address the problem. I thank Jehovah for articles like this, which help us to function in this present system.
J. F., United States
In this article mention is made of ‘not completely shunning those who are unacquainted with Bible truths.’ Could you explain more on this? What if a Christian is pursuing a close relationship with a nonbeliever? Should this not be a cause for concern?
D. P., United States
“Awake!” responds: The article was not encouraging Christians to pursue close relationships with nonbelievers. Really, in any circumstance the Bible principle applies: “Bad associations spoil useful habits.” (1 Corinthians 15:33) This does not mean, though, that we completely shun nonbelievers. As pointed out in the article, the Bible urges us to “work what is good toward all”—not just toward those who share our faith. (Galatians 6:10) Indeed, the very nature of our Christian ministry requires that we take genuine interest in people, treating them with dignity and respect. Jesus set a fine example in this regard. In no way did he forge close bonds with those who had no interest in doing God’s will. (John 15:14) At the same time, he approached people and knew how to converse with them and relate to them. As a result, Jesus had opportunity to give an effective witness. (See, for example, the account at Luke 7:36-50.) Like Jesus, we can maintain a respectful attitude toward nonbelievers. Our aim is “to be reasonable, exhibiting all mildness toward all men.”—Titus 3:2.

