Cocos Island—Its Stories of Buried Treasures
By Awake! correspondent in Costa Rica
THERE is an island about 300 miles [480 km] off the southwest coast of Costa Rica that is known for its stories of buried treasure. It is believed by some that Robert Louis Stevenson based his famous book Treasure Island on tales of pirate treasure buried there.
Cartographers and mariners have called the island by different names since its discovery in the 16th century. Among Spanish-speaking natives, the island is today known as Isla del Coco (Isle of the Coconut). Its English name is Cocos Island.
Between Costa Rica and the Galápagos Islands, there is an undersea landmass known as the Cocos Ridge. Volcanic activity on this ridge gave birth to its only island. This rugged speck of land is the only major island in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean that receives sufficient rainfall to support a tropical rain forest. Every year the island gets about 275 inches [7,000 mm] of rain!
The 18th-century English poet Coleridge described the plight of the ancient mariner who had “water, water, everywhere, nor any drop to drink.” However, during the 17th and 18th centuries, the fresh waters of Cocos Island served as an ocean oasis for sailors who were able to find the island.
A Legend of Hidden Treasure
In an era when international communication and commerce were dependent on ocean travel, armed robbery on the high seas, or piracy, was a menace to society. Pirates posed a threat to one another as well.
After a small coastal town or a ship was pillaged, the stolen goods were divided among the crew. Thus, each pirate was faced with the dilemma of how to safeguard his share of the ill-gotten gains against theft by his comrades. The method of choice was hiding the treasure in a secret location with hopes of withdrawing it later. The treasure map, characterized by cryptic directions understood only by its maker, became the key to finding hidden treasure.
One of the legends of Cocos Island has it that successful raids of ships and cities along the Pacific Coast of Central America left one pirate band overloaded with gold and jewels. Because the island had plenty of fresh water and a good supply of meat (pigs were introduced there at the end of the 18th century), the captain of the ship planned to use Cocos Island as his base of operations.
According to one version of the story, dividing the spoils took a whole day. Gold was measured out in potfuls. Driven by the fear of losing their wealth to their greedy comrades, all the pirates opted to bury their share of the treasure somewhere on the island. Using ropes to climb the cliffs that dominate the island’s coastline, each pirate disappeared into the tropical forest. While some trusted their memory, others returned with maps that only they could decipher, which would lead them back to their treasure. However, all this exhausting effort was for naught. The legend continues that after having stashed their goods, the pirates sailed away in their galleon in search of greater gains. When they reached their next port, the captain, fearing mutiny, pulled anchor after sending the suspected rebels ashore. His hope that they would be identified as pirates and hanged was almost realized. What he failed to anticipate was the ability of his two highest-ranking crew members to make a deal with authorities who wanted to capture the captain. The British Navy dispatched a ship in hot pursuit of the galleon, and this resulted in the capture and death of the captain and his crew.
Over the last century, this legend has fueled the hopes of treasure hunters. But, as illustrated by the following account, would-be treasure hunters should think twice before embarking on a digging expedition to Cocos Island. An article published in The New York Times of August 14, 1892, described the quest of Captain August Gisler to discover a treasure of gold, silver, and jewelry, valued at $60,000,000. Gisler’s treasure hunting involved cutting himself off from civilization and submitting himself to the severest of conditions on this deserted jungle island. He spent at least $50,000 of his own money and more than 19 years searching for the treasure. In 1908, Gisler left Cocos Island, bankrupt and broken in spirit, with no treasure to show for all his efforts.
The fact that Gisler failed to discover treasure on the island has not discouraged everyone. There have been more than 500 organized expeditions to the island. According to available information, none have turned up the storied riches.
Nature’s Treasures on Cocos Island
Recently, a different type of treasure hunter has been lured to Cocos Island. Ecotourists as well as naturalists and other scientists have been drawn by the flora and fauna of the island and the treasure trove of marine life in the surrounding waters.
The island is covered with lush tropical vegetation. Some 450 species of insects and arthropods have been identified, although it is estimated that there are over 800 species on the island. There are 28 rivers, which twist around rugged terrain and spill over imposing cliffs as magnificent waterfalls.
One of the 97 species of birds on the island is the white tern. It has the amusing characteristic of hovering in the air just above people’s heads, seemingly unafraid of human visitors to the island. This delightful tendency has given this bird the Spanish nickname espíritu santo, or holy spirit, referring to the Biblical account of Jesus’ baptism.—See Matthew 3:16.
Deep below the waters surrounding Cocos Island is a world teeming with natural treasures. Among the ecotourists that visit the island are scuba divers, who marvel at the high concentration of hammerhead sharks. The hammerhead and the white-tipped shark frequent these waters and have been witnessed traveling in schools of between 40 and 50. Divers are also impressed by the remarkable clarity of the water. They are dazzled by the display of color as tropical fish graze on the algae and plankton.
The country of Costa Rica has traditionally held its biological treasures in high esteem. Currently, 18 percent of its land area is protected in a national park and reserve system. In 1978, Cocos Island was declared part of that park system, which now consists of 56 protected areas in the country. In 1991 the protected area was extended to include a 15-mile [24 km] buffer around the island. Patrolling and protecting the marine environment from commercial fishing presents a challenge. Environmentalists fear that unrestricted fishing may damage the delicate ecosystems in the undersea world surrounding the island.
Down to the present, Cocos Island continues to be known for its stories of swashbuckling pirates and their buried treasure. It still intrigues and attracts treasure hunters from around the world. However, the greatest wealth of the island lies buried in its natural resources.
[Picture Credit Line on page 25]
Pictures on pages 25-6: Courtesy of José Pastora, Okeanos
[Pictures on page 26]
The white-tipped shark (1) and the hammerhead shark (2, 3) travel the waters around Cocos Island in schools of between 40 and 50

