From Our Readers
Heart Attack  I am grateful to belong to an organization that, besides guiding us spiritually, cares about our physical well-being. The series “Heart Attack—What Can Be Done?” (December 8, 1996) showed us how to recognize the symptoms of heart attack. When my father-in-law showed these symptoms, we realized that his condition might be serious and took him to a hospital. He was having a heart attack; but after 24 days in the hospital, he is out of danger.
E. S., Brazil
My father died of an aortic aneurysm in 1995, so when I first saw this issue, I didn’t have the courage to read it. I read it a month later, however, and the articles provided me with comfort, knowing that others have experienced the grief that heart disease can bring to a family.
S. J., Canada
Last July my husband collapsed while in the door-to-door preaching work and had to be rushed to a hospital. Happily, he pulled through. Your articles came out at the right time for us. It made us cry to see the section “Families Need Support,” because that is exactly how we have been feeling.
M. A., Japan
Last Sunday I was feeling a constant pain in my left arm and numbness in my fingertips. I figured it was just normal aches and pains. When I read your articles on heart attack, I became acutely aware that I was suffering those symptoms! I went to a hospital emergency room, and the doctors found that one of the main arteries in my heart was blocked. They performed surgery the next day. It is very possible that if your articles had not been written, I wouldn’t be here to write this thank-you note!
N. S., United States
I particularly appreciated the box “Symptoms of a Heart Attack.” It made me realize that you take a keen interest in our problems and that you give us what we need to cope with them.
M. B., Senegal
Since my father had a heart attack, life in our home has changed dramatically. During these difficult moments, the articles proved to be of great comfort to us.
P. G., Italy
Wifely Subjection  I really appreciated the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Wifely Subjection—What Does It Mean?” (December 8, 1996) My husband is an unbeliever, and it is hard to be in subjection to him at times. I want to set the best example that I can so I can win him over. (1 Peter 3:1) Yet, I want to stand firm in my service to Jehovah. Your article encouraged me, and it made me happy to know that my God is watching over me.
M. S., United States
I found the article to be very enlightening. Since pressures from Satan are mounting, we need this kind of information to stay in the faith. I particularly enjoyed the Bible example of Abigail and the point made that a wife should show discernment and not be made to feel guilty for taking the initiative in certain situations.
D. M., United States
Louis Pasteur  I am 12 years old and wanted to let you know that I appreciated the article “Louis Pasteur—What His Work Revealed.” (December 8, 1996) We are studying about him in my science class. I used this article when preparing a report and received ten points of extra credit!
A. P., United States

