Worship That Is Good for You
“THE drawing near to God is good for me,” declared the psalmist Asaph. He had considered imitating those who become unconcerned about God in order to pursue a life of ease. But then Asaph thought of the advantages of drawing close to God and concluded that it was good for him. (Psalm 73:2, 3, 12, 28) Is true worship good for you today? How can it benefit you?
Worshipping the true God helps you to rise above a purely self-centered way of life. Because of the way we have been made by “the God of love,” those who pursue only their own interests can never find happiness. (2 Corinthians 13:11) Jesus taught a fundamental truth about human nature when he said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (Acts 20:35) That is why we enjoy doing things for our friends and family. But the greatest happiness comes from doing things for God. He is more deserving of our love than anyone else is. Millions of people from all walks of life have found that worshipping God by doing as he asks is deeply satisfying.—1 John 5:3.
Having a Purpose in Life
True worship is also good for you because it gives you a purpose in life. Have you noticed how often happiness is linked to the feeling that you are achieving something worthwhile? Most people have a goal in life, whether related to their family, friends, business, or pleasure. Because of the uncertainties of life, these things often fail to make them happy. (Ecclesiastes 9:11) However, true worship helps you to find a higher purpose, one that continues to be satisfying even when other aspects of life prove to be disappointing.
True worship involves knowing Jehovah and serving him faithfully. Those practicing it draw very close to God. (Ecclesiastes 12:13; John 4:23; James 4:8) You might find it difficult to imagine knowing God so well that he becomes your friend. But by contemplating the record of his dealings with people and by considering what he has created, you really can discern facets of his personality. (Romans 1:20) What is more, by reading God’s Word, you can understand why we are here, why God allows suffering, how he will end suffering and, perhaps most fascinating of all, how you can play a meaningful part in what God is doing. (Isaiah 43:10; 1 Corinthians 3:9) Such understanding can give you a new reason for living!
Becoming a Better Person
True worship is good for you because it helps you to become a better person. As you practice true worship, you cultivate a personality that leads to happier relationships with others. You learn from God and from his Son about acting honestly, speaking kindly, and living responsibly. (Ephesians 4:20–5:5) When you know God so well that you come to love him, you feel impelled to imitate him. The Bible says: “Become imitators of God, as beloved children, and go on walking in love.”—Ephesians 5:1, 2.
Would it not be a delight to be surrounded by people who imitate God’s love? Happily, worship of the true God is not a solitary activity. It brings you into contact with others who love what is right and good. Of course, you may feel uncomfortable with the idea of organized religion. As we saw in the preceding article, however, the problem with most religions is not that they are organized but that they are not organized in the right way and for the right reasons. Many organized religions serve unchristian ends. God’s people are organized by Jehovah himself for a noble purpose. The Bible says: “God is a God, not of disorder, but of peace.” (1 Corinthians 14:33) Like millions of others, you may find that associating with a well-ordered body of Christians has a pleasant influence on your outlook.
Hope for the Future
The Holy Scriptures show that God is organizing true worshippers so that they can survive the end of the present system of things and inherit a new earth in which “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 7:9-17) Worship that is good for you thus provides hope, indispensable to happiness. Some base their expectations for the future on the stability of governments, the prospects for business, or the anticipation of good health and satisfying retirement. But few if any of these things provide a solid basis for looking forward to a happy future. On the other hand, the apostle Paul wrote: “We have rested our hope on a living God.”—1 Timothy 4:10.
If you make a thorough search, you can find true worshippers. In today’s divided world, love and unity clearly distinguish Jehovah’s Witnesses. They come from nearly every nation and background; yet, they are united by love for one another and love for Jehovah. (John 13:35) They invite you to discover for yourself what they have experienced. Asaph wrote: “The drawing near to God is good for me.”—Psalm 73:28.
[Picture on page 7]
You can become God’s friend

