From Our Readers
Cystic Fibrosis  Thank you for the article “Living With Cystic Fibrosis.” (October 22, 1999) Although I am only 17 years old and don’t have any serious problems with my health, Jimmy Garatziotis’ story stunned me. It helped me to think about many things, including how necessary it is to appreciate what you have. In spite of his tormenting sickness, Jimmy continues to be cheerful and to have strong faith in Jehovah’s promises. I pray that Jimmy and Deanne continue to have the strength to cope with their trials.
E. Z., Russia
Superstition  I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but I have been reading your publications for two years. I would like to thank you for the series “Does Fate Control Your Life?” (August 8, 1999) and “Superstitions—Why So Dangerous?” (October 22, 1999) I was once fatalistic and superstitious because of my upbringing. But now I think you are telling the truth regarding true Christianity.
N. D., France
The articles on superstition offended me. I am a devout Roman Catholic, and one of the articles refers to passengers’ making “the sign of the cross” as a superstition. Catholics do so as part of their prayer for a safe journey. This is a core precept of our faith and can hardly be considered a superstition.
S. W., United States
It cannot be denied that many perform the sign of the cross with little thought of religious devotion. When asked why he made the sign of the cross on the playing field, an Australian football player admitted: “I suppose it’s just a superstition in a way.” Not surprisingly, this ritual has had superstitious overtones from the beginning. “The Catholic Encyclopedia” says: “From the earliest period it has been employed in all exorcisms and conjurations as a weapon against the spirits of darkness.”—ED.
Drugs  I want to thank you for the series “Are Drugs Taking Over the World?” (November 8, 1999) Swept along by the influence of friends, my father is enslaved to drugs and alcohol. Home is not a place of refuge but a place where I am often threatened. Despite everything, I will never stop inviting my parents to experience the joys of worshiping God.
M. L., Italy
Once a week a police officer comes to my school and talks about things like drugs and alcohol. I decided that the next time he came to our class, I would give him the articles on drugs. He was very impressed with them and read parts of them to the class. My whole class benefited from the articles!
C. D., United States
Disabled Child  The story of Rosie Major, “We Learned to Rely on God Through Adversity” (November 22, 1999), touched me deeply. We used to live in the city, but I did not like the way it was affecting my oldest daughter. So we found a place in the country. Everything was going great until I lost my $56,000-a-year job. Here we are in the country with three kids and a mortgage to pay. Talk about stress! But after reading Rosie Major’s story, my economic problem seemed so unimportant that I felt ashamed. There are so many people out there who really need God’s help! Can I have a subscription to The Watchtower and Awake!?
M. F., United States
We were happy to fill this reader’s request.—ED.

