Announcements
PRACTICING TRUE LOVE EVERY DAY—1 John 3:18, NW.
All who are in harmonious union with Jehovah God and Christ Jesus practice true love every day. They want to do good to all and seek the best way in which this can be done. To share lovingly with others the very best they have, Jehovah’s witnesses continually go to the homes of people to tell them of Jehovah’s loving arrangements for life in a righteous unending new world of his making. To aid all interested persons during July they will present a Bible study aid book and a booklet for the very small contribution of 50c. Practice true love every day of the month by telling others things you know about Jehovah’s loving arrangements to rescue mankind at this time of their crisis.
THE ASSEMBLIES ARE UNDER WAY!
By the time you read this the June 22-26 “Triumphant Kingdom” assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses in Chicago should be well under way if not already concluded. It will have provided great blessings for thousands of earnest, sincere servants of Jehovah. You did not attend at Chicago? Then there are four more North American assemblies that you still may attend: in Empire Stadium, Vancouver, British Columbia, June 29–July 3; in Wrigley Field, Los Angeles, California, July 6-10; in the Cotton Bowl, Dallas, Texas, July 13-17; and in Yankee Stadium, New York, July 20-24. Take full advantage of the program and spiritual information that will be provided. Go with a determination to learn all you can, to retain as much as possible and to return home filled to overflowing with good information for others who could not go. Now is the time! The assemblies are under way. What arrangements have you made to take full advantage of them?
“NEW HEAVENS AND A NEW EARTH”
God’s promise to create new heavens and a new earth is wonderfully developed in the 384-page book “New Heavens and a New Earth”. It shows that the meaning of this phrase is not literal, but figurative, depicting for us the conditions that will soon prevail on earth and in the unseen heavenly organization that God has purposed for the blessing of all the willing and obedient of humankind. The book gives ample proof that the realization of the promised “new heavens and a new earth” blessings are near at hand “even at the doors.” This fine book and the 32-page booklet “Christendom or Christianity—Which One Is ‘the Light of the World’?” are available on the small contribution of 50c. Write for your copies today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
August 7: Were You Baptized? How? Why? Page 401.
August 14: Christian Baptism for the New World Society. Page 407.

