Announcements
PROVING OURSELVES TO BE THE RIGHT KIND OF MINISTERS—1 Tim. 4:6, NW.
The Bible shows there is a great work, an urgent work, to be done in these last days of the wicked old world. It is the work of proclaiming the truth, the Kingdom message, as the only real hope for the people. Although most people have a copy of the Bible, they need instruction, counsel, help and guidance to know how to use it properly. The Watchtower magazine, as you know, is a real help for all honest-hearted searchers for truth and righteousness. Prove yourself to be a right kind of minister by passing Kingdom truths on to others. This may be done by you during March by assisting others to see how the Watchtower magazine contains information pertinent to the Kingdom that they need. A year’s subscription may be had for only $1. Until April 30 a set of three booklets on outstanding Bible topics is given to each new subscriber. For additional information write the Watchtower Society or contact the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses.
GOOD NEWS FOR ALL
Are you saddened, disturbed or alarmed by the flood of bad news inundating the world? Conditions do not warrant much else—or do they? Could you believe that current events are really good news in the making? The most authoritative source in the world says that they are. That source is the Word of God. If you have never considered such a possibility you will truly rejoice in “This Good News of the Kingdom”. This 32-page booklet takes its title from one of the most encouraging promises ever made to man. That promise of God was spoken by no other than Jesus Christ. He described prophetically the worst conditions that would ever prevail and then foretold the best that were to follow immediately. And then he gave his unconditional guarantee that men throughout the inhabited earth would be made aware of this hope-inspiring message. How present world conditions are to be brought to an end and how the everlasting joy and happiness that Jehovah God has arranged for are to be ushered in is the subject of this timely publication. Obtain your personal copy for only 5c. Better yet, obtain three for 10c or seven for 25c and share “this good news of the kingdom” with your friends and neighbors.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 15: Avoid Sicknesses of Mind and Heart, and Keeping Up with the Truth, ¶1-4. Page 139.
April 22: Keeping Up with the Truth, ¶5-30. Page 145.

