Caring for the Spiritual Needs of the Deaf
1 A growing number of deaf persons are being drawn to the Fine Shepherd and are coming into a dedicated relationship with Jehovah God. (John 10:3, 11) Others in the congregation, especially the elders, must be alert to the spiritual needs of our deaf brothers and sisters.
2 Meeting the Needs of the Deaf: Arrangements are made to interpret the congregation’s meetings into sign language wherever qualified interpreters are available. If no one in the congregation knows sign language, it may be appropriate to direct deaf people to a nearby congregation that can provide this service. Of course, if no such arrangement exists in your general area, it may be possible for designated publishers to take turns sitting beside deaf persons and sharing notes with them on the main points being discussed.
3 Circuit and Congregation Arrangements: Arrangements for sign-​language interpreting at circuit assemblies and special assembly days are coordinated through the circuit overseer. An elder or a qualified ministerial servant may be selected as coordinator. Exemplary qualified brothers and sisters can be assigned to share in interpreting the assembly program. The same principle may be followed in the congregation, ensuring that the needs of the deaf are appropriately cared for.
4 It is preferable for the deaf to be located where they can see the signers and the platform in the same line of vision. This holds true both at congregation meetings and at circuit assemblies. At congregation meetings it is preferred that the signer be seated if the number of deaf attenders is small. The elders would do well to consult a mature deaf brother, if possible, for specific suggestions on appropriate seating arrangements.
5 If a qualified signer serving as an elder or a ministerial servant is available and the number of deaf brothers and sisters warrants it, the elders may decide that some meetings should be conducted entirely in sign language. The Congregation Book Study may well be the first weekly meeting so arranged. If the congregation would like to hold any of the other five weekly meetings in sign language (or in any language other than English), the elders should inform the Society of their desire. It should be noted that American Sign Language is the language preferred by most adult deaf persons in this country.
6 Although communication between deaf and hearing persons may require special efforts on the part of both groups, all members of the congregation should endeavor to get acquainted with one another so that there can be a genuine interchange of encouragement. (Heb. 10:24) This spirit among the brothers will make all new ones feel welcome.

