Do You Reason From the Scriptures?
1 A seasoned soldier going to war will be fully armed and protected. A skilled craftsman preparing to work on a major building project will carry the tools he needs to complete the task. A servant of Jehovah engaging in the field ministry will have his “sword” in hand and will wield it skillfully whenever he has the opportunity. (Eph. 6:17) Is this true of you personally? When you share in the service, do you let God’s Word speak so that holy spirit can touch the hearts of your listeners?​—Prov. 8:1, 6.
2 Preaching is not always an easy task. In some territories people are seldom at home, and those who do answer the door are often busy, offering little opportunity for extensive Bible discussions. Since the Bible is our principal textbook, how can we use it more in the service and allow its inspired message to influence our hearers?
3 At Every Opportunity: At every door, we would like to use the Bible to motivate the householder. We must be prepared to do this regardless of the publication being offered. If the person is busy and there is insufficient time to open the Bible and read a verse or two, can you quote or paraphrase a scripture before offering literature? That alone may cause the person to stop and listen.​—Heb. 4:12.
4 For example, if you are featuring the December 8, 1993, Awake! with the article “A World Without Disease,” after pointing to the illustration on the cover, raise the question, “Do you believe there will ever be an end to disease, a time when everyone will enjoy vibrant health?” Whatever the response, you may be able to read directly from your Bible or paraphrase a scripture, such as Isaiah 33:24 or Revelation 21:4. In this way you let God’s Word do the talking.
5 On Return Visits: We should prepare before making return visits. Frequently, however, subjects that we have not prepared to discuss will arise. This is when Reasoning From the Scriptures can prove to be a valuable tool. Our quoting or reading the supporting scriptures from the Reasoning book will help people see that we are ministers of God and not peddlers of the Word.​—2 Cor. 2:17.
6 When calling back where no specific subject had been discussed, you might simply open the Reasoning book to an appropriate subject, such as “Jesus Christ,” “Last Days,” or “Resurrection,” and use one of the subheadings to initiate the discussion. Householders may be invited to read some of the scriptures from their own Bible. In that way the Bible will come alive to them, and Jehovah’s holy spirit will flow if they are righteously disposed.
7 Our responsibility to preach the good news and warn the wicked is a serious one. It is Jehovah’s message, not ours. Let his Word, the sword of the spirit, help you.

