Service Meetings for November
Week Starting November 1
Song 5
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Commend publishers for part they are having in the Kingdom-​preaching work.
10 min: “Dreams,” Reasoning book, pages 104-6. To be handled as discussion with Bible student. Student asks about wisdom of being guided by our dreams. Discuss danger of this, how it could cause us to fall prey to worldly reasonings and demons. Show importance of being guided by principles of God’s Word.
10 min: Local needs or “Communication​—More Than Just Talk.” Talk based on articles in The Watchtower of August 1, 1993, pages 3-8.
15 min: “The Value of the Bible in Today’s World.” Discussion between service overseer and publisher who wishes to improve his ability in house-​to-​house work. After considering paragraph 3, service overseer asks publisher to try suggested presentation with service overseer serving as householder. After considering paragraph 4, service overseer gives suggested presentation to publisher. Encourage congregation to help interested ones and Bible students appreciate value of New World Translation.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 8
Song 7
10 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate presentation of current magazines, featuring article that can be used in field service this weekend. Call attention to “A Special Month for Field Service,” and invite all to consider seriously the possibility of increasing their field service in December as auxiliary pioneers or by working with pioneers.
15 min: “The Book That Provides True Guidance.” Question-​and-​answer consideration of article. Demonstrate return visit outlined in paragraph 3. Encourage all to be enthusiastic about practical value of the Bible when talking with people in house-​to-​house work and making return visits.
20 min: “Youths​—Make Jehovah’s Heart Rejoice.” Elder discusses with two or three young baptized publishers paragraphs 1-18. Emphasize benefits youths reap by their good example and the value of “Young People Ask . . .” articles. Consider scriptures as time permits.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 15
Song 73
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for financial support of local congregation as well as Society Kingdom Hall Fund and Society’s worldwide work. Outline field service arrangements for world’s upcoming holiday season.
15 min: “Caring for the Spiritual Needs of the Deaf.” Questions and answers. If there are no deaf members of the congregation, focus on not overlooking deaf people found in territory. Be prepared with newly released tracts for the deaf.
20 min: “Youths​—Make Jehovah’s Heart Rejoice.” Question-​and-​answer consideration of paragraphs 19-33 of insert. Interview one or two young publishers. Get comments on how congregation has been helpful in their spiritual development.
Song 90 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 22
Song 74
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Encourage use of current magazines in witnessing this weekend.
15 min: “Help Bible Students Prepare for Their Study.” Questions and answers. Read paragraphs as time permits.
20 min: “Do You Reason From the Scriptures?” Question-​and-​answer consideration by brother who is effective in house-​to-​house and return-​visit work. After considering paragraph 4, demonstrate how a publisher may paraphrase or quote scripture from memory when householder is busy. After demonstration, emphasize value of following this suggestion as we endeavor to “preach the word” in territory where so many people are always busy or preoccupied with daily affairs. (2 Tim. 4:2) After considering paragraph 6, call on publisher who is effective with Reasoning book to relate how he uses it in witnessing.
Song 108 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 29
Song 83
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage those who can to auxiliary pioneer during December.
15 min: “The Bible​—A Practical Guide for Modern Man.” Talk by family head based on article in May 1, 1993, Watchtower. Highlight that applying Bible principles can promote peaceful, loving family atmosphere. Entertain one or two prepared comments from audience showing how counsel from God’s Word has helped a family or an individual.
20 min: Using the Greatest Man Book to Help Sheeplike Ones in December. Audience discussion. Ask such questions as: What one account about Jesus’ ministry or his dealings with others impressed you most? Why did this account impress you? Of what value has this publication been to you? What have you learned about Jehovah by studying it? What point(s) have you featured when presenting it? Have experienced publisher demonstrate presentation of book. Encourage all to share in field service on Sunday.
Song 94 and concluding prayer.

