The Value of the Bible in Today’s World
1 Many today view the Bible as outdated and unrealistic. While it is the most widely distributed and the most translated book in all history, relatively few read it, and fewer still follow its direction.
2 In contrast, we value the Bible as the Word of God. The facts show that it is historically truthful. Moreover, its remarkable harmony, its prophecies, its wisdom, and its having been a power for good in people’s lives all demonstrate that the Bible is “inspired of God.” (2 Tim. 3:16) Our personal experience and our appreciation for this wonderful gift should move us to encourage others to investigate its true value.
3 One approach might be:
▪ “In view of the serious problems facing mankind, many people find it difficult to believe in God, or they question God’s ability to solve the problems we face. How do you feel about that? [Allow for response.] Notice the title of this tract, Why You Can Trust the Bible.” Draw attention to the illustration on the cover, then read the first and second paragraphs on page 2. If the householder demonstrates interest, you may read and discuss the scriptures cited in the second paragraph. Make arrangements to return to consider the tract further​—perhaps using one of the subheadings, in the form of a question, in order to stimulate interest.
4 Another approach might be something similar to this:
▪ “Do you not agree that mankind needs direction in dealing with life’s problems? [Allow for response.] In the past, people often looked to the Bible for guidance, but times have changed. Do you think that the Bible is of practical value today? [Allow for response.] Notice what is stated at 2 Timothy 3:16. [Read.] God’s written Word not only helps us to make wise decisions but also provides a reliable hope for the future.” Read John 17:3. If the householder responds favorably, point out one or two specific points that you have previously selected from the book The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? to illustrate the practical value of the Bible.
5 You may find it helpful to use some of the introductions outlined on page 10 of the Reasoning book under the subheading “Bible/​God.” Additional information is presented on pages 58-68 that may be helpful in answering householders’ questions or in overcoming their objections.
6 Offering the New World Translation: If sufficient interest is stimulated on the initial call or on a return visit, the New World Translation may be introduced. You might ask if the householder has a copy of the Bible and if he finds it easy to read. Depending on the answer, call attention to some of the helpful features of the New World Translation. You could highlight one or two points from pages 276-80 of the Reasoning book.
7 Be alert to opportunities to encourage people to read the Bible. Help interested persons to build respect and love for the written Word of God. By applying its principles in their personal lives and coming to a knowledge of the truth, they will gain many benefits both now and in the future.​—Ps. 119:105.

