Insight on the News
“Seers Are Consistently Wrong”
● Millions of persons follow the predictions of psychics or “seers.” However, Jack Mabley, writing for the Chicago “Tribune,” states: “If you take them seriously, and would buy a stock or sell silver on their say-so, my suggestion is to do the opposite of what they say. The seers are consistently wrong.” Noting 62 of their predictions for 1980 published by a newspaper, Mabley said: “Not one of those 62 predictions was on the mark.”
For example, a California psychic predicted that in 1980 “interest rates will decline as the economy improves.” The opposite happened. Seven psychics predicted that Ted Kennedy would be elected president. He did not even win his party’s nomination. Jeanne Dixon predicted regarding the then president Jimmy Carter: “An attempt on his life, related to a church, will be made in the fall.” She also predicted that scandals would cost him several close, high-ranking officials. None of those predictions came true.
Not human predictions, but the inspired prophecies of God are what come true with unerring accuracy. (Isa. 46:9-11; 2 Pet. 1:20, 21) Hence, God’s Word condemns false foretellers of events.​—Deut. 18:10-12.
“Sexual Revolution” Backfiring
● In recent decades the “sexual revolution” has promoted the abandonment of morality in the name of “freedom.” An example cited by “Maclean’s” magazine of Canada is Sweden, where “prostitution is legal, as is pornography. Abortion is free on demand, courses on sexuality begin with seven-year-olds and contraceptives are given away in numerous youth clinics.” However, after examining the results, the publication reports: “Swedes themselves are confronting a welter of social problems caused partly by the libidinous years: the accounting is not pleasant.”
Swedish sociologist Rita Liljestrom comments: “Sexuality was seen as the key to a different political society. But now there seems to be a new debate: the feeling that we gained a lot but that we lost, too.” She denounced the sexual revolution “as a pseudoliberation that has left men and women even more alienated than before.” Others who formerly had a permissive attitude now find that sex often has become degraded and animalistic, instead of an expression of deep love between married persons who care for each other. Also, they condemn pornography and prostitution, as they feel it has increased rape and has depersonalized sex. Well documented also is the increase that sexual permissiveness has brought in venereal disease, unwanted pregnancies, abortions and broken marriages due to infidelity.​—Heb. 13:4.
Priest Commends Witnesses
● Writing in the Catholic “Herald Citizen” of Madison, Wisconsin priest Andrew Breines said after two of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at his rectory: “I’ve always been impressed by the zeal of [Jehovah’s Witnesses]. No matter how recent their admission to the society, they immediately begin making house calls to spread the ‘Good News.’” The clergyman noted that they “were putting God’s work ahead of their own interests and convenience. God held the first place in their lives.” He asked: “I wonder how many of us [Catholics] . . . can match their tireless zeal for evangelization. They go from house to house because they have accepted God’s call not only for their own salvation but also to share the ‘Good News’ with others.”
Learning that one of the two visiting Witnesses formerly was Catholic and the other was Lutheran, the priest asked them why they had become Jehovah’s Witnesses. “They answered that it was coming to know ‘the truth.’ By that they meant coming to know Jesus Christ personally through faith and the prayerful reading of the Bible.” Then the priest commented: “After my callers left, I couldn’t help wondering if we, in the major religious denominations, don’t often substitute . . . sacraments and programs for doing God’s work of evangelization.” But there can be no true substitute for evangelizing, as this was part of Jesus’ command to those who would be his followers.​—Matt. 10:7, 11-13; 24:14; 28:19, 20; Acts 20:20.

