Do You Remember?
Have you appreciated reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? Well, see if you can answer the following questions:
□ Why is Paul’s expression “ambassadors substituting for Christ” such an appropriate one for anointed Christians? (2 Corinthians 5:20)
In ancient times, ambassadors were dispatched mainly during periods of hostility to see if warfare could be averted. (Luke 14:31, 32) Since the sinful world of mankind is alienated from God, he is sending his anointed ambassadors to inform people of his terms for reconciliation, urging them to seek peace with God.​—12/15, page 18.
□ What are four things that strengthened Abraham’s faith?
First, he demonstrated his faith in Jehovah by paying heed when God spoke (Hebrews 11:8); second, his faith was closely related to his hope (Romans 4:18); third, Abraham often spoke with Jehovah; and fourth, Jehovah gave Abraham support when he followed divine guidance. The same things can strengthen our faith today.​—1/1, pages 17, 18.
□ What is meant by the expression “Do not bring us into temptation”? (Matthew 6:13)
We are asking God not to allow us to fail when we are tempted to disobey him. Jehovah can guide us so that we do not succumb and are not overreached by Satan, “the wicked one.” (1 Corinthians 10:13)​—1/15, page 14.
□ What must one do to receive God’s forgiveness for wrongdoing?
Confession to God must be coupled with contrition and “fruits that befit repentance.” (Luke 3:8) A repentant spirit and a desire to right the wrong would also move one to seek the spiritual help of Christian elders. (James 5:13-15)​—1/15, page 19.
□ Why should we strive to be humble?
A humble person is patient and long-suffering, and he does not take himself too seriously. Humility attracts true friends who love you. More than that, it brings Jehovah’s blessing. (Proverbs 22:4)​—2/1, page 7.
□ What crucial difference is there between the death of Jesus and that of Adam?
Adam’s death was deserved, for he willfully disobeyed his Creator. (Genesis 2:16, 17) In contrast, Jesus’ death was wholly undeserved, for “he committed no sin.” (1 Peter 2:22) So when Jesus died, he had something of enormous value that the sinner Adam did not possess at his death​—the right to perfect human life. Thus, Jesus’ death had sacrificial value in ransoming mankind.​—2/15, pages 15, 16.
□ In Ezekiel’s prophetic vision, what did the city picture?
Since the city lies in the midst of profane (nonsacred) land, it must be something earthly. It appears to picture, therefore, the earthly administration that benefits all who will make up the righteous earthly society.​—3/1, page 18.
□ Why did Jesus wash the feet of his disciples when celebrating the Passover in 33 C.E.?
Jesus was not instituting a ritual of foot washing. Rather, he was helping his apostles to adopt a new frame of mind​—one of humility and a willingness to perform the lowliest of tasks in behalf of their brothers.​—3/1, page 30.
□ In our teaching others, what is more important than natural abilities?
It is the qualities we possess and the spiritual habits we have cultivated that students can imitate. (Luke 6:40; 2 Peter 3:11)​—3/15, pages 11, 12.
□ How can public speakers improve their reading of the Scriptures?
By practicing. Yes, by reading out loud over and over again until they can do so fluently. If audiocassettes of the Bible are available, it is wise to listen to the reader’s sense stress and modulation and to note how names and unusual words are pronounced.​—3/15, page 20.
□ How does ‘the spirit return to God’ when a person dies? (Ecclesiastes 12:7)
Since the spirit is the life-force, it “returns to the true God” in the sense that any hope of future life for that person now rests entirely with God. Only God can restore the spirit, or life-force, causing a person to come back to life. (Psalm 104:30)​—4/1, page 17.

