Meeting the Challenge in Colombia
WHAT challenge? That of declaring the “good news” throughout a country where climate, geography and cultural background present tremendous contrasts. We are talking about Colombia, located at the northwestern tip of South America. Its capital, Bogotá, and many other cities provide excellent territory for spreading the “good news.” But the Kingdom message also is being declared in the extensive rural areas, where unpaved roads, swarms of insects and occasional downpours of rain are a constant challenge.
Here in Colombia temperatures may drop from 28 degrees Celsius (82° F) in the steaming jungles to 12 degrees Celsius (54° F) in the mountain heights. However, the regions in between offer an eternal springlike temperature. The great mountain masses are said to contain inexhaustible reserves of rock salt. And the Zipaquirá mine not only supplies Colombians with most of their salt but also has been converted into one of the greatest works of subterranean architecture. Internationally renowned, the famous Salt Cathedral was carved out deep in the mine.
SPREADING THE “GOOD NEWS”
Colombia is rich in mineral deposits. But far more precious are the God-fearing persons found here. Back in 1922, Heliodoro Hernández, who lived near the towns of Paz de Río and Tasco, started reading The Watch Tower and acquired spiritual wisdom, something of much greater value than gold. (Prov. 3:13, 14) He began to share this newfound wisdom with his fellow countrymen, and by 1924 Juan B. Estupiñán had joined him in spreading the “good news.”
Since 1922, Kingdom proclaimers in Colombia have overcome many obstacles, and their faithful perseverance has been rewarded by steady growth. By 1978, their number had risen to 14,856. Of course, there is still much to be done. For example, Bogotá has an estimated population of around 5,000,000, but there are only about 3,000 Kingdom publishers associated with its 36 congregations.
It is a joy to observe numerous individuals make great changes in order to harmonize their lives with Bible principles, and this encourages others to remain steadfast in the witnessing work. For example, in 1975 a young man preparing to become a priest came in contact with the truth. His family threatened to cut off financial support and said that he would have to leave home if he kept on studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses. At first, he asked to have his personal Bible study discontinued. But after meditating on the Scriptural knowledge he was acquiring, he requested two studies a week. Since he was teaching at a religious school, he then quit his job. He was also forced to leave home. Only one month of study and meditation on the Holy Scriptures produced notable changes in this young man’s life. He stopped smoking, got an appropriate haircut and changed his manner of dress. In fact, the transformation was so remarkable that when he arrived at the Kingdom Hall nobody recognized him. Someone even asked him if he was the visiting public speaker. Since the young man did not have any other responsibilities, he began witnessing every day. Soon he was baptized, later becoming a regular pioneer (a full-time Kingdom proclaimer). Now he serves as a member of the Bethel family at the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Colombia.
Consider, too, the personality change made by a certain man living in the city of Cali. He had been a sailor, musician, ventriloquist and policeman. Since he was very aggressive and always ready for fisticuffs or the use of his gun, his neighbors were afraid of him. He was always drunk over the weekend and the neighbors’ light bulbs served as targets as he practiced his shooting.
In 1971, this individual reluctantly listened to a pioneer who visited his home, and ultimately a Bible study was started with him. Soon, however, he discontinued his study and joined the Pentecostal Church. But later the pioneer called and invited him to examine the Bible to see what was behind the supposed miracles performed by that religious organization. The man wrote down all the texts considered and decided to keep studying with the Witnesses. That very night he went to see the Pentecostal minister to ask him about the texts he had read. When the pastor was unable to supply a satisfactory Biblical answer, not only did this man leave the church but 15 other persons left with him.
Not long thereafter, this man’s mother died and he arranged for a funeral talk in which the resurrection hope would be explained. (John 5:28, 29) This proved to be a test of his faith, for the entire family objected to this decision, to the extent that one of his brothers struck him a violent blow. However, this man’s newly acquired Bible knowledge enabled him to maintain self-control, and he calmly explained the reason for his position. The family was so surprised by his peaceableness that they permitted the Bible-based funeral talk to be given. Not only did his family later start studying the Bible, but his neighbors were so impressed by the change in his personality that eight families from his block began to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. This man offered his house for a congregation book study, later enlarged his home so that a new congregation could meet there, and eventually helped to build a Kingdom Hall. Presently, this individual is serving as an appointed Christian elder in one of the city’s congregations.
REACHING OUT TO NEW TERRITORIES
In spite of the excellent growth experienced in Colombia through the years, there remains the challenge of carrying the Kingdom message into the extensive areas mainly composed of hot, humid, junglelike territories and rural areas. Taking the “good news” into these sections of the country represents a challenge, not only because of the physical difficulties to be faced there but also due to the varied cultures, customs and characteristics of the inhabitants. Getting to understand Colombia’s different cultures and adapting oneself to them has much to do with reaching the heart of these persons with the Kingdom message.
Although most Colombians are Roman Catholics, their ceremonies vary greatly from one region to another. Since their religious guides and publications fail to provide accurate Scriptural instruction, the people tend to confuse religious matters with magical phenomena. Their folklore attributes conscious life to inanimate objects, and the people say that the dead can cure the sick and help the living in other ways. Also, it is quite common to find that the people living in rural areas have a repertoire of prayers to cover their daily problems. For example, they have prayers to cure their cows of worms, to bring prosperity, to free them of their enemies, to heal snakebites and to protect their chickens and cattle.
In Colombian cities, funeral services are similar to those held in most Catholic countries. But in the rural regions things are different. To illustrate: In the region of Jegüita, for nine nights after a death occurs, the local reciter of prayers leads mourners in petitions for the deceased. After about an hour of recitation, he calls upon the “soul” of the dead person to leave the house. That night a glass of water, with a small piece of cotton in it, is left by the coffin. Why? Supposedly, so that the deceased individual’s spirit may quench its thirst. So even though the dead person’s “soul” is ordered out of the house on the first night, the mourners keep praying for eight more nights to make sure that it does not come back and bother them. When they bury the body on the 10th day, the closest relative is not allowed to look at the coffin while it is being lowered into the earth because tradition has it that if he does this he will be the next family member to die. Incidentally, those who participate in the vigil over the deceased must be furnished with food, liquor and tobacco. Consequently, many incur debt in order to feed and entertain those sharing in the nine nights of prayer.
At one time, Alberto Medina was the reciter of prayers in the Jardin region of Córdoba State. But through his study of the Bible he learned that the soul dies, that the dead are conscious of nothing at all and that their only hope is the resurrection. (Eccl. 9:5, 10; Ezek. 18:4, 20; Acts 24:15) Of course, taking a stand for Scriptural truth made it necessary for Medina to face the challenge of pressures from unbelieving relatives and opposition from neighbors who did not want others to abandon the community’s long-standing traditions. Nevertheless, he has been able to help members of his own family and many others to gain accurate knowledge of God’s Word and purposes.
CONTINUING TO MEET THE CHALLENGE
Yes, accepting the Kingdom message presents a challenge. So does declaring the “good news,” especially in remote areas. Here in Colombia, this sometimes requires traveling on horseback, rowing a canoe and enduring swarms of insects. During the rainy season, there are many places in this country where a Kingdom proclaimer must trudge through ankle-deep mud. But such efforts have been rewarded, for there now are congregations in some of these areas.
Those who appreciate their Christian privilege of declaring the “good news” are happy to meet such challenges. And, surely, there is no experience quite as joyful as finding persons who are hungering for the truth, regardless of where they live. At the commemoration of the Lord’s Evening Meal in 1979, a total of 59,383 was present throughout this country. Indeed, the ‘fields are white for harvesting’ and there is yet much to do in promoting true worship.​—John 4:35.
So if you are a dedicated witness of Jehovah, why not make a serious appraisal of your circumstances to determine whether you can increase your efforts or effectiveness in proclaiming the Kingdom message? Perhaps you can serve where the need is great, either in Colombia or in your own country. (1 Cor. 16:9) Whatever your circumstances are, however, prayerfully seek God’s aid in meeting the challenge of Christian life and service to Jehovah.

