From Our Readers
Dinosaurs  I found the February 8, 1990, issue on dinosaurs to be fascinating. Clearly explained, well-argued, understandable to both the knowledgeable and the uninitiated, these articles were captivating. I had thought myself to be quite well-informed on dinosaurs but now realize my knowledge was quite general.
U. A., Federal Republic of Germany
I’ve always wondered in the back of my mind what happened to the dinosaurs. Even though I’m a senior in high school, I’ve never heard such a realistic and believable answer.
S. S., United States
My son, who is only four years old, enjoyed the illustrations very much, since these enormous dinosaurs are of great interest to him. I have been enjoying your fabulous articles since November, when I started studying the Bible. It is a shame that I have missed out on so much in the past!
M. G., Mexico
Baptism  I was grateful for the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Get Baptized?” (March 22, 1990) Susana’s experience at the beginning of the article made my heart well up with emotion. I made a dedication to God when I was in my sixth year of elementary school, and it really helped me to remain strong in faith. Wouldn’t it be marvelous if all Christian youths showed the same devotion as the Ethiopian eunuch and asked, “What prevents me from getting baptized?”​—Acts 8:36.
M. A., Japan
Greenhouse Effect  I am a 15-year-old high school student and would like to express my appreciation for the January 22, 1989, article on the ozone layer and the September 8, 1989, articles on the greenhouse effect. By using the information in these articles, I was able to write an essay on the topic of conservation, for which I was given a high mark.
J. B., Australia
Modeling Careers  Thank you so much for your article on modeling careers. (January 8, 1990) My daughter was a child model before we started studying the Bible. We discussed the article together. It was so true; the effect modeling had on my daughter at that age was to make her feel that she was number one, better than anyone else. Both of us thank you for the article. My daughter is no longer a model, and Jehovah God is number one in her life​—instead of herself.
N. J., Canada
Jeepneys  I have been an Awake! reader for ten years. There is no comparable literature when it comes to choice of material, photographs, and accuracy of presentation. I have wanted to say this for a long time, but after reading the November 22, 1989, article “Jeepney​—The Philippines’ People Mover,” I could restrain myself no longer. It is very interesting to learn how people in other parts of the earth live. The realistic way in which Awake! presents the material not only informs us but transports us to these places!
E. P. S., Brazil
Brain Surgery  I could not hold back the tears when reading the experience of Bethel in the April 22, 1990, issue. I thank Jehovah that she survived her brain surgery. A young girl with such high spiritual goals and firm faith in the face of death merits our admiration. I am the same age as Bethel and have the same goals. And though I hope I never find myself in a similar situation, I hope my faith would meet the test with just as happy results.
T. V., Italy

