Determined to Attend
A mother in Los Altos, California, who is one of Jehovah’s witnesses, explains how Jehovah God blessed her efforts to attend the 1969 “Peace on Earth” Assembly. She writes:
“My husband has always strongly opposed my efforts to continue in God’s truth even to the point of physical and mental abuse and burning my Bible literature. I wanted so badly to be at the assembly but I just didn’t see how I possibly could. First, the assembly site was 400 miles away from my home. Second, I have two small children whom I have never been permitted to take to the Kingdom Hall or to assemblies. And third, my husband adamantly refuses to let me have a penny for anything connected with God’s truth.
“I mentioned this to one of the Witnesses. She informed me that she had reserved a motel room near the stadium, and that I could stay there and travel to the assembly in her car. She suggested that I make this a matter of daily prayer and work at saving my money, as the date of the assembly was still several months in the future.
“I worked at clipping coupons for grocery refunds, which refunds I would carefully set aside each week toward my expenses. In addition, I received some gift money from relatives to spend as I pleased. I arranged for someone to care for our children, since my husband would not permit them to accompany me. About a week before it was time to leave for the assembly, I carefully calculated all my anticipated expenses, and I was disappointed to discover that I was about thirty dollars short.
“The next morning a Witness who knew nothing about my predicament appeared at my door and handed me an envelope that contained a gift from her and her husband for me to use for the assembly. Imagine my joy to find that the amount enclosed was thirty dollars! This to me was such an evidence of Jehovah’s blessings on my efforts to be at the assembly that it gave me renewed courage to continue with my plans in spite of the severe opposition of my husband.
“The morning I was to leave I got up at 5 a.m. It was a moment of great joy to be finally in the car and on my way! This was the start of a week that contained one joy on top of another, and for all of these blessings I am overflowing with thankfulness to Jehovah.”
What about you? Will you be at one of the “Men of Goodwill” District Assemblies being held this summer?

