Look for Oversight of Jehovah as Shepherd
Why is it wise to look for oversight of Jehovah as Shepherd?
Because Jehovah God has a vital interest in mankind’s welfare. He has this interest in spite of mankind’s being born in sin and conceived in iniquity, and even though Jehovah’s lofty throne is apparently countless millions of light-years away from this earth. That Jehovah truly does care for mankind, in fact, has an intense interest in them is clear from what is said of him at Isaiah 40:11: “Like a shepherd he will shepherd his own drove. With his arm he will collect together the lambs; and in his bosom he will carry them. Those giving suck he will conduct with care.” With good reason therefore could the apostle Peter speak of Jehovah as “the shepherd and overseer of your souls.”​—1 Pet. 2:25.a
Who in ancient times looked to Jehovah to be their Shepherd?
While Adam and Eve were desirous of acting independently, their son Abel looked to Jehovah and desired to serve him and to be directed by him. Before the flood of Noah’s day there were apparently few others that did so, among these few being Enoch, Noah and his family. After the Flood mankind by and large rejected Jehovah’s oversight, but notable exceptions were Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. In time Jacob had twelve sons and from these came the twelve tribes of Israel. Moses, who led these tribes out of Egypt, also was noteworthy for his looking to Jehovah as Shepherd, even as were, among others, faithful judges, priests, kings and prophets. All these felt as did King David, who wrote: “Jehovah is my Shepherd. I shall lack nothing.”​—Ps. 23:1.
What principle of oversight that has continued to this day did Moses adopt at the suggestion of Jethro his father-in-law?
Moses took very seriously his responsibility of acting as Jehovah’s spokesman to his people. They came to him to solve their problems in line with Jehovah’s will for them. This required him to serve as judge from morning till evening. Noting this, his father-in-law Jethro counseled him: “Select out of all the people capable men, fearing God, trustworthy men, hating unjust profit; and you must set these over them as chiefs over thousands, chiefs over hundreds, chiefs over fifties and chiefs over tens.” Moses heeded this good advice.​—Ex 18:21-26.
After Moses’ day Israel continued to have such chiefs as judges, heads and officers, and later kings also served as such. Many of these, however, were not capable men, fearing God. This resulted in the nation’s going into Babylonian exile for seventy years. Upon their return such men as Zerubbabel, Ezra and Nehemiah served as faithful shepherds. With the coming of Jesus Christ, Jehovah’s people had the finest of all earthly shepherds. He, in turn, selected twelve apostles as undershepherds. These, together with some others, constituted a governing body that authorized the appointing of still others as shepherds. The qualifications of shepherds were also spelled out by some of these, such as Paul and Peter. These qualifications are given due recognition among the Christian witnesses of Jehovah.​—1 Tim. 3:1-12; Titus 1:5-9; 1 Pet. 5:1-3.
How can those who want to serve God today look for oversight of Jehovah as Shepherd?
To do this they must first of all be diligent in the study of God’s Word. They must find the organization that recognizes Jehovah God as the Chief Shepherd, the organization that has faithful shepherds that are truly interested in caring for the spiritual needs of the “sheep” of Jehovah. (1 Pet. 2:25) Such an organization of Christians is the one that is associated with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. This organization functions theocratically, with Jehovah as the Great Shepherd working through Jesus Christ, his “fine shepherd,” by holy spirit to make appointments of qualified men, fearing God, to serve as shepherds of God’s flock.​—John 10:11.
Then for one to look for oversight of Jehovah as Shepherd means to cooperate wholeheartedly with these undershepherds of his. That means regularly and faithfully attending the congregation meetings and supporting them by taking part in them. It also means giving these undershepherds support by being submissive to them, even as the apostle commands: “Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive.” And it includes giving all such faithful shepherds extraordinary consideration by reason of their hard work.​—Heb. 13:17; 1 Thess. 5:12, 13.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, July 1, 1969.

