Help Others Learn About God’s Son, Jesus Christ
1 December is the month when most professed Christians give more thought to Jesus than at any other time of the year. Thus, it is a fine month to feature the book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. Since this is a valuable publication, we should determine if the householder is genuinely interested in learning more about God’s Son before we offer the book. How can we do that?
2 Try to get directly into a Bible-​based conversation that focuses attention on Jesus.
After greeting the householder, you may say something like this:
▪ “Today we’re asking our neighbors what they think when they read in their Bible about living forever. [Allow for response.] It’s of special interest because the Bible speaks about that possibility some 40 times. What might such life mean for us? Note what Revelation 21:4 says. [Read.] Did you notice what is promised? [Allow for response.] How can we gain everlasting life?” Read John 17:3, and highlight the need to take in knowledge of God and of his Son, Jesus Christ. If the householder manifests some interest, show him the Greatest Man book, using the subheadings in the introduction in order to arouse his interest further.
3 If the householder has demonstrated limited initial interest, offer the current issues of The Watchtower and Awake! or the tract Will This World Survive? Call attention to one or two specific points in the publication presented. Offer to return at a convenient time to continue discussing the subject with him.
4 If the householder appears to be busy, it may be wise to shorten the above presentation. Newer publishers may also find the following presentation easy to use.
After introducing ourselves, we could say:
▪ “Today we’re asking our neighbors what they think when they read in their Bible about gaining everlasting life. For example, note what Jesus said at John 17:3. [Read.] To help people learn more about Jesus Christ and what he taught, this book has been published.” Open the Greatest Man book to some of the beautiful illustrations. Turn to the introduction, and read the second paragraph under the subheading “Benefit by Learning About Him.” If the householder is interested, offer him the publication.
5 If you place the book, lay the groundwork for a Bible study by offering to discuss the first chapter, “Messages From Heaven,” at that time or on a return visit a few days later. Rather than mentioning to the householder a fixed period of time that should be spent on the next visit, simply say that in just a few minutes, he can learn more interesting information about Jesus Christ from God’s Word, the Bible.
6 May all of us use this worldly holiday season to focus attention on the truth about God’s Son, Jesus Christ, in order to help others onto the road to everlasting life.​—Matt. 7:14.

