Service Meetings for December
Week Starting December 6
Song 205
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Help Others Learn About God’s Son, Jesus Christ.” Question-​and-​answer coverage. Demonstrate presentations in paragraph 2 (by experienced publisher) and paragraph 4 (by younger publisher). Encourage all to feature Greatest Man book both from house to house and in informal witnessing when people manifest interest.
15 min: “Set Aside Time for Magazine Activity.” Talk, with audience discussion. When considering paragraph 3, illustrate how various articles in current magazines may be presented to different types of people who may be encountered in local territory.
Song 169 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 13
Song 146
10 min: Local announcements, accounts report, and donation acknowledgments. Commend congregation for generous support of local needs, Society Kingdom Hall Fund, and Society’s worldwide work. Suggest one or two talking points that can be used in introductory comments in field service this weekend.
20 min: “Starting Bible Studies During December.” Discussion with audience. When considering paragraph 4, demonstrate how to start a Bible study on a return visit. Encourage everyone to conduct a home Bible study each month, if possible.
15 min: “The Yearbook​—A Treasury of Encouragement.” Enthusiastic talk highlighting application of cited scriptures. Arrange for well-​rehearsed publishers to relate with feeling the experience in article and experiences found on page 32 of January 1, 1990, January 1, 1987, and January 1, 1986, issues of The Watchtower.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 20
Song 189
 5 min: Local announcements. Mention local arrangements for special witnessing on December 25.
15 min: “Reach the Heart of Your Bible Student.” Questions and answers with demonstration. Emphasize point that all in congregation should work to develop the art of teaching. After consideration of paragraph 3, publisher demonstrates how to reason with Bible student by using questions and scriptures from paragraphs 13 and 14 in chapter 1 of Live Forever book.
10 min: “Sow Bountifully but With Discernment.” Question-​and-​answer discussion. Highlight expressions that would be particularly appropriate in your territory. These suggestions should be reviewed at meetings for field service this weekend.
15 min: “Continued Expansion Increases Need for Kingdom Halls”​—Part 1. Question-​and-​answer coverage of paragraphs 1-10 of insert. Emphasize reasons why elders need to contact Regional Building Committee at the outset when contemplating a Kingdom Hall construction project.
Song 61 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 27
Song 37
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Announce special witnessing arrangements for January 1. Demonstrate how to use literature that will be featured locally in January.
15 min: What’s Wrong With Trying Drugs? Two teenage publishers discuss with an elder the widespread use of drugs in school. They mention that some young people can see nothing wrong with occasional use of drugs. Elder acknowledges that things have deteriorated since he went to school. He points out that substances are not specifically mentioned in Bible, but fine guidelines on use of drugs can be found in Reasoning book, pages 106-12. Youths read scriptures, and elder reasons with them on material as it is covered. Youths offer their own suggestions as to various ways that they may individually resist peer pressure.
20 min: “Continued Expansion Increases Need for Kingdom Halls”​—Part 2. Enthusiastic talk by elder on paragraphs 11-17 of insert. Emphasize need for more volunteers, and have the Kingdom Hall Volunteer Worker Questionnaire forms available at the meeting. As time permits, include appropriate experiences related to past Kingdom Hall construction projects in your area.
Song 120 and concluding prayer.

