Set Aside Time for Magazine Activity
1 Jehovah has determined that there will be ‘peace, a future, and a hope’ for those following his ways. (Jer. 29:11) Information about this prospect is presented in a timely way in The Watchtower and Awake! These magazines can benefit all sorts of people under every circumstance. (1 Tim. 2:4) Do you and your family regularly set aside time for magazine distribution?
2 If your magazine placements have been decreasing, how might this trend be remedied? One essential is to keep alive your appreciation for the contents of our magazines. One man wrote: “Reading your magazines is a genuinely joyful experience. They are not cheap, low-​quality ‘comforters’ but contain guidance and direction on how to make life meaningful.” The Watchtower and Awake! are products of careful research and are provisions of “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45) They are effective tools for reaching the hearts of people.
3 Be familiar with the articles in the magazines you are offering. Look for points that deal with current problems in your community. It is good to prepare for speaking with men, women, and youths that you may meet at the doors or on the street. Be prepared to show how the magazines relate to individuals and to families as a whole.
4 Be Magazine Conscious: Magazine witnessing should occupy an important part of your field service schedule. What are the best times for you to offer the magazines? Have you tried working from door to door for an hour or so in the late afternoon or evening before your Congregation Book Study? Evening witnessing has been very productive in some areas. Saturday is a good day for distributing magazines in various ways, but other days may also be used for this activity. The house-​to-​house and store-​to-​store work should be a regular part of Magazine Day.
5 Each one should have a standing order for a set number of distributors’ copies of each issue of the magazines. When on occasion you have older issues on hand, these may be used to show householders the variety of subjects covered in the magazines. From time to time, a set of older copies may be left at retirement homes, nursing homes, and hospitals where allowed. All such magazines can be counted as placements and are to be reported each month on your Field Service Report slip.
6 By applying the above suggestions, no doubt you will see an increase in the number of magazines you are able to distribute. Honesthearted people who are burdened down with life in the present wicked system appreciate refreshing information such as is found in The Watchtower and Awake! These magazines truly provide the spiritual food needed by those seeking to gain Jehovah’s approval. Therefore, be magazine conscious, and seek out ways to increase the distribution of these valuable publications in your territory.

