The Bible​—What Is Its Real Value?
“THE Bible is a mystery, a book that was not meant to be understood,” claims a householder. Another remarks: “I know that the Bible is an important book, but I don’t know much about it. It’s hard to understand.”
“Many Christians know . . . little about the Bible,” stated The Toronto Star. A Catholic lady commented: “Having a Bible makes me feel good. It brings inner peace.” “The Bible is like a compass that guides one through the rough, stormy sea of life to a place of safety,” says a fisherman. In the words of a former Hindu, “the Bible is God’s Word and a gift to mankind and is medication for spiritual sufferings.”
Opinions on the Bible’s true value are many and varied. What, though, is its real value?
The Bible is the most important and widely distributed book in existence. Within its pages lie the answers to the most perplexing problems that man has experienced or will yet face. The practicality of its counsel is unequaled. The moral standards it advocates are unsurpassed. Its message is powerful and beneficial. This book of incomparable value deserves to be taken off our shelves and given careful attention and scrutiny.
We can open the Bible with full confidence that it is completely accurate, reliable, and authentic. The historical happenings recorded in it are confirmed by secular history. Repeatedly, archaeological findings corroborate that the Bible is factual and truthful. The candor of the 40 or so Bible writers stamps them as men of honesty and integrity. The internal harmony of the Bible indicates that it is not of human origin. The events recorded in it are real. The people it speaks about are real. The places and locations it refers to are real. Furthermore, the Bible contains outstanding prophecies that undeniably identify Jehovah God as the Author of the Bible.​—2 Peter 1:21.
Our Grand Instructor made sure that knowledge of his will and purposes would be available to those who wanted to know of such. In fact, Jehovah tells us in clear language that it is his will that all sorts of men study his Word and “come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Timothy 2:3, 4; Proverbs 1:5, 20-33) This is one of the most important things we can do with our life. It is a challenge we are obligated to face. The early Christians understood this. One of them was moved to say: “This is what I continue praying, that your love may abound yet more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment; that you may make sure of the more important things.”​—Philippians 1:9, 10; Colossians 1:9, 10.
The Bible is the Creator’s prime means of communicating his will and purpose to the human family, and it explains how we individually fit into that purpose. In it are recorded happenings of the past, and it gives a clear vision of the future. The Bible outlines correct doctrine and sets us straight as to what we should or should not believe. (Acts 17:11; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17) It provides rules of conduct by which man should live, and it directs humans in the way of success and happiness. (Matthew, chapters 5 to 7) It emphasizes God’s Kingdom as the only hope for all mankind and shows how his government is the instrument to sanctify his name and vindicate his sovereignty. The Bible explains the course we need to pursue to enjoy a close, loving relationship with our Life-Giver, Jehovah.
Furthermore, the Bible stands alone as the book that will lead you to the greatest prize mankind will ever receive​—everlasting life on a paradise earth as perfect humans. (Romans 6:23) Jehovah’s only-begotten Son tells us: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” (John 17:3) Surely a book of such great value should motivate us to learn what we must do to gain the prize of everlasting life. The Bible is a book meant to be understood, as the next article will show.

