
Questions From Readers



Is the marking described at 2 Thessalonians 3:14 an action taken by the congregation or by individual Christians?

The apostle Paul wrote to the Christians in Thessalonica, saying: “If anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked.” (2 Thess. 3:14) Previously, we said that this was direction to the elders. If someone continued to ignore Bible principles in spite of repeated counsel, the elders might give a warning talk to the congregation. Thereafter, individual publishers would not socialize with the marked one.
However, an adjustment is needed. Paul’s counsel evidently refers to an action that individual Christians should take under certain circumstances. So there is no need for the elders to give a warning talk. Why the change? Consider Paul’s counsel in its context.
Paul noted that some in that congregation were “walking disorderly.” They were disregarding inspired counsel. During a previous visit, he gave this order: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.” Yet, some were still refusing to work to support themselves, although able to do so. Also, they were meddling in the affairs of others. How were Christians to treat such disorderly ones?​—2 Thess. 3:6, 10-12.
“Keep this one marked,” said Paul. The Greek word suggests taking special notice of this person. Paul addressed this directive to the whole congregation, not just the elders. (2 Thess. 1:1; 3:6) So individual Christians who might have noticed a fellow Christian disobeying inspired counsel would choose to “stop associating with” the disorderly one.
Did this mean that the person was treated as someone who was removed from the congregation? No, for Paul added: “Continue admonishing him as a brother.” So individual Christians would still associate with the marked one at meetings and in the ministry, but they would choose not to associate with him for social occasions or recreation. Why? “That he may become ashamed,” said Paul. As a result of the marking, the disorderly Christian might become ashamed of his conduct and change his ways.​—2 Thess. 3:14, 15.
How might Christians today apply this counsel? First, we would want to make sure that the conduct in question is actually “disorderly,” as Paul described. He was not talking about those who differ from us in matters of conscience or personal preference. And he did not mean those who simply have hurt our feelings. Rather, Paul had in mind specifically those who deliberately chose to disobey clear, God-given counsel.
Today, if we notice a fellow Christian who shows such a disobedient spirit,a we will make a personal decision not to associate with him for social occasions or recreation. Since this is a personal decision, we would not discuss it with others outside of our immediate family. And we would still associate with that individual at our meetings and in our ministry. When he corrects his course, we would then resume normal association.



a For example, a fellow Christian might refuse to work to support himself although able, might insist on courting an unbeliever, or might spread divisive talk or hurtful gossip. (1 Cor. 7:39; 2 Cor. 6:14; 2 Thess. 3:11, 12; 1 Tim. 5:13) Those who persist in such a course are “disorderly.”


