





LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
Use Enjoy Life Forever! in Your Ministry




How excited we are to have a new brochure and book for conducting Bible studies! We pray for Jehovah to bless our efforts to make many more disciples. (Mt 28:18-20; 1Co 3:6-9) How do we use the new tools?
Since Enjoy Life Forever!, the interactive Bible course, presents a new way to teach, follow these general guidelines as you prepare for and conduct Bible studies.a
  Read the material, and discuss the questions

  Read the “read” scriptures, and help the student to understand their application

  Play and discuss the videos, using any questions that are provided

  Try to cover each lesson in one session


In the ministry, offer the brochure first to determine a person’s interest. (See the box “How to Offer the Enjoy Life Forever! Brochure on the Initial Call.”) If you finish studying the brochure together and the student wants to continue, then offer the book and start with lesson 04. If you are already studying with someone in the Teach Us book or the Remain in God’s Love book, transfer to the Enjoy Life Forever! book and determine where in it to begin.





WATCH THE VIDEO WELCOME TO YOUR BIBLE STUDY, AND THEN ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS:
  What will students learn from the new book?

  Why should you show this video to new students?

  What goals should you progressively encourage the student to set and reach?​—See the chart “Focus and Goals for Each Section”





NOTE: Although the “Explore” section is optional during the study, take time to read or watch each item as you prepare. Then, you will know what may especially appeal to and help your student. The electronic version includes links to the videos and supplementary material.

FOCUS AND GOALS FOR EACH SECTION



 
LESSONS

FOCUS

STUDENT GOALS


1

01-12

Consider how the Bible can help you and how you can come to know its Author

Encourage the student to read the Bible, prepare for the study, and start attending meetings


2

13-33

See what God has done for us and the kind of worship that pleases him

Motivate the student to share the truth with others and to become a publisher


3

34-47

Consider what God expects from his worshippers

Motivate the student to dedicate his life to Jehovah and get baptized


4

48-60

Learn how to remain in God’s love

Teach the student how to distinguish right from wrong and to make spiritual progress



HOW TO OFFER THE ENJOY LIFE FOREVER! BROCHURE ON THE INITIAL CALL
Similar to our tracts, the back cover of the brochure includes an intriguing question. Try the following:
  Ask the multiple-choice question

  Read the Bible’s answer at Psalm 37:29

  Discuss the points under “What That Can Mean for You.” If time allows, read the scriptures and highlight the artwork

  Offer to answer the question posed near the bottom of the page, and begin discussing the first lesson




