From Ball Park to Kingdom Hall
JEHOVAH’S witnesses have a reputation for accomplishing the “unusual” or the so-called “impossible”. Their assemblies, for example, are a spectacle and a cause for wonderment to those not associated with them. In short order they convert buildings into Kingdom Halls and fairgrounds and ball parks into convention cities.
In July they will transform in a few hours’ time one of the nation’s largest ball parks, namely, Yankee Stadium, New York city, into a thriving city of Jehovah’s witnesses. The mammoth stadium, which covers an area of 10.39 acres, will take on a new appearance. In place of boisterous crowds, coarse words and clouds of smoke that are common to it during ball games, boxing or wrestling matches, the stadium will be filled with happy fathers, beaming mothers and laughing children. There will be words of praise to Jehovah God and songs of thanksgiving for his goodness. The people will be orderly and the air clear. Its spacious corridors will hum with activity. Signs will point to a bookroom, to the advertising counter, and to the territory department. The information desk and rooming department will be alive with action. Above, in the stadium’s more than 67,000 seats, at stated times all will gather as one, and an atmosphere of dignity, solemnity and appreciation will fill the air as attention is focused upon the speakers, who will address the audience from a beautifully decorated platform built on the playing field.
After being edified spiritually, the vast audience will move out orderly onto the stadium’s two large parking lots that cover a space of about six acres. Here will be located the convention’s gigantic cafeteria, where delicious meals will be served. The hum of happy conversations, the joy of meeting old friends and making new acquaintances will electrify the air. No wonder the world marvels at such an accomplishment! It is Jehovah’s doing and it is marvelous in our eyes too. You owe it to yourself and to your family to be blessed with such a treat. Don’t miss it. Remember the days—July 19-26.

