Announcements
◆ Literature offer. For December: New World Translation and Truth book for $1.25. For January through April: Watchtower subscription with three booklets for $1. Awake! may be offered also.
◆ Worldly holidays offer many opportunities for witnessing during December. If possible, organize group witnessing or individual car groups for each day of the holiday season. Encourage children out of school to have a good share in the service during holiday time.
◆ A reminder: If you find it necessary to call the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn, you may use area code 212 and either number 858-1240 or 625-1240.
◆ Pioneers registered with the draft, if they have not already done so, might do well to file with their local boards in support of their claim for exemption and ministerial classification allowed by the draft law and regulations, a photostatic copy of their pioneer appointment letter and, when they qualify therefor, a copy of Certificate for Pioneer Minister provided by the Society.
◆  New publications available:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Bohemian, Ewe, Indonesian, Slovenian, Setswana
“Make Sure of All Things; Hold Fast to What Is Fine”​—Korean
“Your Word Is a Lamp to My Foot”​—Afrikaans, Xhosa
Sermon Outlines​—Korean
Saving the Human Race​—in the Kingdom Way—​Dutch, Finnish
◆ Out of stock in U.S.A.:
Qualified to Be Ministers (unrevised)​—Spanish
When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom​—Spanish
New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures​—German
◆ Overseers: To enable the Society to complete the monthly report, we would appreciate your sending the congregation report to the Society no later than the fifth of the month.
◆ After December 21 congregations may begin ordering the 1970 bound volumes of The Watchtower and Awake! They are available in English, Dutch, French, German, Portuguese and Spanish. Due to the limited demand for Hungarian bound volumes of The Watchtower, the Society will discontinue producing them beginning with the 1971 volumes. The 1970 Hungarian volume of The Watchtower will be available.
◆ The cost for the American Standard Version Bible, pocket edition with a blue leatherette cover (bi22), has returned to its original rate. It is now $1.40 for publishers and $.75 for pioneers. The public rate will be $1.50.
◆ The Society has produced a limited supply of the deluxe songbook. Overseers may submit an order for a supply determined according to the number of requests on hand.

