Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Well, you did it again! The loving service of all you brothers has resulted in another new peak of publishers. It is the sixth peak for this calendar year and the first in the two months of this service year. Isn’t it fine that 394,920 publishers shared in the ministry during October? That is 6,000 more than ever before! And 5,481 have been baptized here in the United States in the first two months of this service year. You are truly living up to our yeartext: “Make disciples . . . baptizing them”!
It is truly amazing to see how much of an increase we have had here in the United States in just the past two years. The fine October report represents an increase of 71,232 over the average number of publishers for 1968, and that is more than enough people to fill the normal seating area in Yankee Stadium. Just think of it!
Surely this fine increase reflects much hard work. In the past, you have sown much seed, and on many occasions you may have felt that your efforts were not meeting with much response. Yet your faithfulness has had an effect on the minds of observers, and now we rejoice in a marvelous ingathering.
You are to be commended too for the splendid work you did with the magazines during October. You placed 9,087,895 copies of The Watchtower and Awake! Your orders made it necessary for us here in Brooklyn to print 5,030,000 copies of just the special issue of Awake! and 4,884,000 copies of the special Watchtower. That is enough magazines so that one out of every five families in the entire country could each have had one. The subscription report too is excellent. It shows more than 5,000 ahead of last year​—a total of 272,605. You have done a wonderful job, brothers, and it makes our heart rejoice.
What will December bring? Well, our service theme is “Teaching All Nationalities with a View to Baptism.” So we plan to be busy, and surely Jehovah will bless our efforts.
Be assured of our warm Christian love for all of you and our prayers on your behalf,
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 4]
Keep seeking first the Kingdom.

