Do You Know Them by Name?
1 Jehovah God knows all the stars in the heavens by name. (Ps. 147:4) Christ Jesus knows all of his followers by name. (John 10:3, 14) Do you know all of your brothers in the congregation by name, or do you know them only by sight? When we are conducting a congregational meeting, do we address the brothers by their names or only by the term “brother” or “sister”? When introducing newly interested persons to others at the meetings, are there some of the brothers we pass by because of not knowing their names? How many in the congregation do we greet by just saying “Hello, brother” or “Hello, sister”?
2 Here are a few suggestions for improving your ability to remember the names of your brothers and sisters as well as undedicated persons. Each week try to arrange to be at the Kingdom Hall for sufficient time before and after the meetings to associate with others. Then make it a practice to learn the name of a person or two that you know only by sight and not by name, possibly writing it down on a slip of paper. Seeing the name helps to impress it on the mind. Introduce yourself to him, or perhaps ask another brother his name to refresh your memory, and then strike up a conversation with that brother. Greet him by name and use his name during the conversation. Associate the name with the individual and learn something about the brother during your conversation with him, such as, where he lives, what congregation book study he attends, etc. Listen to his field experiences and share yours with him.
3 With a national average of 107 percent attending our Watchtower study during the year, there are many newly interested ones at the Kingdom Halls each week. Having this in mind, let us all make a special effort to learn their names and to try to help them. With the newer one, one good method to learn his name is to walk up to him and say: “My name is ​———. What’s yours?” Then, knowing his name, you can continue in an enjoyable conversation that will make him feel welcome at the Kingdom Hall.
4 Though we will never equal Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, who never unintentionally forget names, we can know all in our congregation by name. This will do much to promote the family-like spirit in the congregation.

