Presenting the Good News​—Quick Presentations
1 In this country many people are very busy during the holiday season, but we will not hold back from optimistically presenting the offer. Each publisher can decide what would be the best method of presenting the offer where busy people are encountered. The June 1970 Kingdom Ministry has a number of suggestions and here are more. One might say:
2 “Good morning. I represent an international Bible society which this month has its representatives in more than 200 lands encouraging everyone to consider the Bible. This New World Translation of the entire Bible, in modern, easily understood language, is being distributed with this book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life to help in understanding the Bible. I would like to leave these with you today. A contribution of $1.25 will make it possible to print more for someone else. Already thirteen million copies of this Bible have been distributed throughout the world in several languages giving comfort to people everywhere.”
3 If you meet someone who declines the offer, saying he has a Bible in his home, you might say: “That is good. During our house-to-house visits many people have told us they have a Bible but have had some difficulty in understanding much of it. They have found this small book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life a fine aid to them in using the Bible. If you read this book and then go back to reading your Bible again, you will have a foundation for readily understanding the reason why God gave us His Word of truth. We leave the book for a contribution of 25c.”
4 In some cases you may find it advantageous to lead with the Truth book. During November we became accustomed to presenting the Truth book and the points that you have used can be employed in a brief presentation. Then say: “We place this book along with a modern-language Bible for a small contribution of $1.25. I would like to leave these with you and I am sure that after the holidays, during the winter, you will have good opportunities to read and enjoy them.” If this is not accepted, you can quickly drop to the offer of the Truth book for 25c.
5 If you observe that people are extremely busy and it is not convenient for them to talk, you might simply produce the Bible and the book and say: “I brought these for you and hoped there would be time to explain. Perhaps I can leave them with you now on a contribution of $1.25, and at another time, when you are not so busy, I can explain more about them to you.” That is all one would have to say. Such a presentation may result in placement of quite a number of publications. It is essential to make the offer, otherwise it will not be placed.
6 Wherever anything is placed with busy people be sure to make proper notation so you will be able to return at a convenient time to help those who are receiving the truth, and thus share in ‘teaching all nationalities.’

