Teaching All Nationalities
1 When Jesus said, “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them,” he had in mind more than the eleven to whom he spoke. It would not have been possible for that small group of eleven to teach all nationalities and baptize them, but they began that work. Today Jehovah has seen fit to gather out of this world more than 1,483,000 of us Kingdom proclaimers so this work could be accomplished, and more are coming.
2 Through his organization Jehovah has provided equipment for doing the work, including the Bible in a number of languages as well as publications such as the Truth book in dozens of languages. So in the month of December we are busy offering the New World Translation and The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life to all persons whom we can contact. This is an excellent offer because the people do need to have a Bible in their home, and the Truth book will be the basis for our teaching effort.
3 In this country there are people of different nationalities. Sometimes industrial areas have settlements of immigrants. In other parts of the land there are agricultural workers, doctors, technicians, and professional workers who have come from many different nations. Some men who have been in the armed forces have married wives from other nations. Do you know where there may be some persons in your territory who speak another language? The Society has printed a booklet called “Preach the Word” containing a presentation in many languages, and you can show the appropriate page to a person who knows the language so as to give the witness. Orders can be taken for Truth books or others. The Cost List, which the literature servant has, shows what publications are available in different languages. Furthermore, on the second page of The Watchtower and Awake! there is a list of the languages in which the magazines appear. Very frequently it is possible to get subscriptions from individuals by showing the English magazine and explaining that it is available in their language. How long has it been since your congregation gave special consideration to the non-English-speaking people? How many foreign-language publications are on the shelves in your Kingdom Hall stock? Offer them to those who use the languages.
4 In many experiences reported to the office brothers have told about conducting studies with interested people by using their English copy of the book and having somebody else use a book in his language. Others have been able to turn names and addresses over to brothers who know the language of the interested person, and in this way a study can be started. The objective of our work is teaching all nationalities with a view to baptism, and this is done by the home Bible study work.
5 But whether you have in your territory any who speak a foreign language or not, there is in your territory someone of at least one nation, your own, so make it your goal in December to visit people and present the good news. There is an opportunity to reach a new national peak of publishers in December. Jehovah has been blessing the work very much, and if all of us will have a share in the Kingdom work in one way or another during December, a tremendous witness will be given as we try to teach all nationalities with a view to baptism.
[Blurb on page 1]
Teaching all nationalities with a view to baptism.

