Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 6
Theme: Using Care in What We Preach. (Titus 2:8) Song 95.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: Branch Letter. Two servants discuss it, also observations on how Kingdom Ministry School benefits entire congregation.
15 min: “Do You Believe Everything You Read?” Questions and answers on “Awake!” article of November 22, 1970, with suggestions on how to be selective in using non-Biblical material in our ministry. When in doubt, better not to use it. Always safe sticking to Bible.
13 min: “Teaching All Nationalities.” Present by talk, making application to local opportunities for preaching. May include fitting local experiences.
 3 min: Accounts report.
14 min: Concluding comments. Local report. Song 116.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 13
Theme: Walking in the Right Way. (Eph. 4:1) Song 85.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Family discussion of the text for the day and Theocratic News.
18 min: Presenting the Good News. By now publishers well into campaign. What have they found effective in local territory for quick presentations? or longer ones? Demonstrate some. Refer to “Watchtower,” December 15, 1970, on “Basis for the ‘New World Translation,’” encouraging all to read it. Remind all that we may find opportunities to start studies where people have time on first call.
17 min: “When Hatred Is a Good Thing​—a Protection.” Material from November 15, 1970, “Watchtower.” A talk, including how this is a protection during the coming holidays for all Christians, young and old. Work in appropriate material from the “Truth” book, chapter 16, paragraphs 19-25, also December 8, 1970, “Awake!” article “Do You Care?”
15 min: Concluding comments. Report on how many Bibles and books placed, how many publishers reporting to date. Ask how many studies were started recently. Experiences may be included. What is planned for holiday group witnessing? Appropriate announcements. Song 75.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 20
Theme: Encouraging One Another. (Heb. 10:23-25) Song 99.
 4 min: Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: Discussion based on article “Is It Hard for You to Find Scriptures?” in December 1, 1970, “Watchtower.”
 6 min: Question Box. Two servants discuss subject, encouraging all to share in Theocratic Ministry School regularly.
13 min: “Encouragement.” By now should have “Yearbook.” Give talk on how to use it. Have some publishers comment on experiences they found especially encouraging. May select experiences you believe helpful to interested person or someone with a problem to overcome. How are some local families covering “Yearbook” throughout year?
15 min: “Do You Know Them by Name?” Discussion between “Watchtower” study servant or other servant and publisher who has asked how it is possible to know the names of all in the congregation.
10 min: Concluding comments. Report on congregation meeting attendance. Slogan, page 4. Song 107.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 27
Theme: Accept the Implanting of the Soul-saving Word. (Jas. 1:21) Song 76.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
13 min: Proper View Toward the Ministry. Talk by overseer on material from April 1, 1969, “Watchtower” article “Why Is Your Ministry Successful?” Highlight the thought that the thing that really counts is our willingness to be used by Jehovah and acting in harmony with that willingness. Whether people receive the Kingdom message graciously or not, we bring praise to Jehovah by calling at their homes and telling them why we are there. Strive to be a qualified teacher. Success in ministry should not be judged by the amount of literature placed. The joy of the ministry is in finding a hearing ear.
15 min: “I Already Have One of Those.” Questions and answers. Demonstrate how to start a study when someone says he has the book.
15 min: Suggested Presentation for “Watchtower” Campaign. Discussion followed by demonstration. “Watchtower” issues for January through April will include articles emphasizing the theme “The Government That Will Solve Man’s Problems.” Many fine talking points will be found in these articles. The purpose of the following sermon is to draw attention to the fact that only God’s kingdom will be able to solve man’s problems. People need to see the difference between God’s kingdom and what it will do and earthly governments, which most sincere people realize are not able to accomplish their full aims. More persons today than ever before have definite ideas about what a government should do, so it would be good to let them express themselves. At the outset, reason with the householder. Try to involve him in a conversation. A few timely, well-thought-out questions will help to arouse the householder’s thinking and interest. See if he will mention a problem that is his concern. What does he think is the solution to the problem? Does he believe new laws are the answer? Does he think new officials would be able to make people love one another and love what is right? Listen to his opinion, but instead of trying to draw an immediate solution to the problem in question, explain that human leaders and officials have been trying in vain to solve this as well as most of mankind’s woes. However, there is one government that will succeed. Then draw his attention to the Bible’s explanation of what this government will do.
Theme: The Government That Will Solve Man’s Problems.
“Hello. My name is ​———. Today the people are confronted with many problems in life​—illness, pollution, trouble in the schools, insecurity, wars and violence are some of them. What do you think can be done to solve these problems? Do you think that new laws are the answer? What do you feel is the greatest problem? [Allow the householder time to give his opinion and acknowledge that many governmental leaders work hard to find solutions, but with little lasting success.] Do you realize that there is one government that has the answer and will not fail in carrying out the solution? It will not be government by men. The Scriptures identify this government, calling it God’s kingdom. Matthew 6:9, 10 indicates coming of God’s kingdom will cause God’s will to be done here on earth. [Not necessary to read this text.] [Here use one of the following texts that best fits the problem under consideration. The first could be applied to illness or pollution. The second, to oppression or injustice. The third, to lawlessness or violence, etc.]
Rev. 21:3, 4​—God’s kingdom to do away with sorrow, sickness and death.
Dan. 2:44​—God’s kingdom to crush all kingdoms that have oppressed mankind.
Ps. 37:10, 11​—God’s kingdom to destroy the wicked one and provide abundance of peace.
“So God’s kingdom will provide a lasting solution to mankind’s problems, large and small. We all want to know when this heavenly government will do this for the earth, as our lives are involved!” Refer to article in current “Watchtower” and present offer.
12 min: Concluding comments, with remarks about month’s theme. (“Watchtower,” January 1, 1971) Song 80.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 3
(Arrange program locally.)

