“I Already Have One of Those”
1 More bound books and Bibles than ever before were distributed in the United States this past service year​—6,960,376! This figure represents 78,827 more book placements during the past service year than the previous one. But our placing Bible study aids is a means to an end and not the end itself. So what has happened as a result of these placements is of concern to all of us.
2 Something good happened, for the United States annual report showed an average increase of 27,888 publishers in the field. Paradoxically the report also showed that 7,952 fewer Bible studies were conducted, the total being 295,468 on an average per month. More workers, more placements, but fewer studies​—why? Is more effective follow-up work needed? Let us assume that many of these studies were started and conducted in harmony with the Society’s recommendation of a six-month program; then for the most part these are new studies or they have been conducted for a few months only. This could mean that for every 24 books placed, only one resulted in a Bible study.
3 However, what about the other 23 of every 24 books placed that are in the homes of people in our territory? Are these good books simply on shelves along with the best of books, the Bible? Many times when you are working from door to door and have begun to explain to the householder that you have a fine Bible study aid for him he informs you, “I already have one of those.” This makes you happy and you tell him how pleased you are, but then what? Do you try to place a different book with him? Or do you say you hope he reads the one he already has? Do you tell him that the one who left the book with him is going to be back and that, when the return visit is made, it would be good if they could discuss the Bible together and have a Bible study from this publication? Is this really enough? Will this type of encouragement result in starting a Bible study? Most likely not.
4 Therefore, why not apply the Bible principle of planting and watering, and let God make it grow. (1 Cor. 3:6-9) The planting has been done, but the seed is dormant. No one is making the back-call. Take advantage of your opportunity, like Apollos, to water. Our purpose at the door does not change when the householder already has a book. It would be best to proceed with the goal of starting a Bible study on the first call. The first meeting outlined in the Kingdom Ministry of April 1970 featured a very practical and workable way of starting studies in the Truth book. Why not try it at a door when a person says, “I already have one of those.”
5 The prospects are wonderful! A good percentage of the 23 of every 24 books placed with persons in our territory are in the hands of people who are sighing and groaning over what they see. They have shown that they care about God, for they took the book. So when someone says to us, “I already have one of those,” let’s help him to see what God has purposed for the future, by starting a Bible study with him, and thus make his sigh be one of relief and his tears be those of joy.​—Ezek. 9:4.

