Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will probably be able to recall the following:
□ Will some anointed Christians survive the “great tribulation” and live on earth for a time before being taken to heaven?​—Revelation 7:14.
The Bible is not explicit on this. Some Bible accounts seem to suggest that anointed ones might live on into the new world. However, millions of those hoping to live forever on earth have received the training needed to get the new world under way. Hence, the small remnant would not be needed for this work, and God may choose to take them to heaven for “the marriage of the Lamb” after the executing of the religious harlot, “Babylon the Great.” (Revelation 18:2, 10; 19:2, 7, 8)​—8/15, page 31.
□ With what motives should a man set his heart on being a Christian overseer? (1 Timothy 3:1)
A man ought to reach out for an office of overseer, doing so humbly because he wants to serve others. When he is thus moved by upright motives, this action on his part can result in spiritual blessings to all involved.​—9/1, page 18.
□ Why did the apostle Paul not get discouraged in spite of all that he had to endure?
Paul explains: “For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.” (Philippians 4:13) Paul never tried to carry his burdens alone. Rather, he looked to Jehovah to sustain him. (Psalm 55:22)​—9/1, page 30.
□ What is meant by Paul’s expression at Ephesians 4:26: “Be wrathful, and yet do not sin”?
These words acknowledge that a person might justifiably become angry, but when this does happen, the person should not maintain ‘a provoked state until the sun sets.’ (Ephesians 4:26) Why? Because this would give the Devil the opportunity to take advantage of that one, possibly inducing him to do something evil, so that he would experience God’s disapproval. (Psalm 37:8, 9)​—9/15, page 21.
□ What big contrast exists between the way that Jehovah’s Witnesses teach and the way of the clergy of Christendom?
Jehovah’s Witnesses teach with the authority of God’s Word, whereas the clergy of Christendom base their teaching on pagan religious tradition handed down from Babylon and Egypt.​—10/1, page 25.
□ For what most important reason did God’s Son come to earth?
Jesus came to earth primarily for the purpose of settling the issue raised by Satan with regard to Jehovah’s sovereignty.​—10/15, page 13.
□ In calling the secular authorities “superior,” do we in any way detract from the honor due Jehovah? (Romans 13:1)
No, since Jehovah is much more than merely “superior.” He is “the Sovereign Lord,” “the Supreme One.” (Psalm 73:28; Daniel 7:18, 22) The secular authorities are superior merely with regard to other humans and in their own sphere of activity. They are responsible to govern and protect communities.​—11/1, page 12.
□ Why is love the greatest of the nine fruits of God’s spirit mentioned at Galatians 5:22, 23?
The other eight fruits of God’s spirit are manifestations, or various aspects, of love, the one mentioned first. All these other fruits of the spirit are necessary qualities, but they will not benefit us if we lack love. (1 Corinthians 13:3)​—11/15, page 14.
□ What are the benefits of praying for fellow believers?
When we make the spiritual welfare of others our concern in prayer, we are drawn closer to them in brotherly love. We also have sympathy for them, sharing their interests and distresses. Thus, any bitterness is uprooted, allowing room for upbuilding thoughts that make us loving and joyful.​—11/15, pages 21-2.
□ What are the compelling reasons for worshiping Jehovah God?
We should worship Jehovah because he is the Creator and his qualities draw us close to him. (Deuteronomy 32:3, 4; 1 John 4:8; Revelation 10:6) The Bible says: “Godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.” (1 Timothy 4:8) No deity other than Jehovah can promise such an outcome and then fulfill his promise.​—12/1, pages 6-7.

