Helping Those Who Are Not Yet Ready for the Bible Teach Book
 1. Will the Bible Teach book appeal to everyone initially? Explain.
1 In order for someone to become a worshipper of Jehovah, he must learn what the Bible teaches. However, some belong to a non-Christian religion and do not consider the Bible to be God’s Word. Others do not believe in God at all and lack respect for the Bible. Which tools have proved to be helpful for those who are not initially inclined to accept the Bible Teach book? The suggestions below are based on the comments of publishers from some 20 different countries.
 2. If someone tells us that he does not believe in God, what should we try to find out, and why?
2 Those Who Do Not Believe in God: If someone says that he does not believe in God, it is beneficial to find out why. Is it because he believes in evolution? Has he lost faith in God because of the injustice in the world or the hypocrisy in religion? Is he from a land that suppressed belief in God? Perhaps he does not adamantly deny God’s existence, but he has never felt the need to believe in Him. Many publishers find that asking, “Have you always felt that way?” prompts the person to explain. Listen and do not interrupt. When we understand why the person does not believe in God, we will know how to reply and which publication to offer.—Prov. 18:13.
 3. How can we demonstrate respect for the person and his beliefs?
3 When replying, take care to avoid making the person feel that you are attacking his viewpoint. This suggestion came from the United States: “It is very important to respect the personal freedom of individuals to decide what they believe. Rather than seeking to win arguments, it is best to pose questions that make people think and reach their own conclusions.” After hearing the householder express himself, one traveling overseer often prefaces his reply by asking, “Have you ever considered this as a possibility?”
 4. How may we help those who are Buddhist?
4 The concept of God is foreign to many who are Buddhist. Some publishers in Britain like to use the brochure Lasting Peace and Happiness—How to Find Them when witnessing to such ones. After considering the introduction, they discuss the section “Is There Really a Most High Creator?” and then the section “A Guidebook for the Blessing of All Mankind.” Afterward, they may be able to introduce the Bible Teach book and tell the householder, “Even if you do not believe in God, studying the Bible is beneficial because it contains much practical guidance.” A pioneer in the United States who is serving in the Chinese field said: “Many in our territory enjoy reading. So they often read the entire publication before we return. But they may not understand the concept of a Bible study. So I like to offer the Good News brochure on the initial call because it is written in a way that encourages discussion.” A circuit overseer serving in a Chinese-language circuit in the United States reports that it is possible to introduce the Bible Teach book on the initial call. However, it may be better to start the study in chapter 2, which gives an introduction to the Bible, rather than in chapter 1, which discusses God.
 5. Why is patience important?
5 It takes time for someone to build faith in God, so patience is vital. Our initial conversations may not move a person to agree that a Creator exists. But perhaps in time he will acknowledge that it might be possible, or he may say that he understands why someone could come to that conclusion.
 6. Why may some people lack interest in the Bible?
6 Those Who Lack Interest or Confidence in the Bible: Often, however, a person who acknowledges that God may exist is not interested in what the Bible teaches because he does not believe that it is God’s Word. Perhaps he lives in a non-Christian land and associates the Bible with Christendom. Or he may live in a so-called Christian land that is very secular, and he may not think that the Bible will be useful to him. How can we help such ones to develop interest in the Bible and eventually accept a study in the Bible Teach book?
 7. What is often a good way to stimulate interest in the Bible?
7 The branch office in Greece wrote: “The best way to help people who lack interest in the Bible is simply to open the Bible and show them what it contains. Many publishers have noticed that the influence of the Bible’s message on a person’s heart is more powerful than anything they personally might say. (Heb. 4:12) Seeing God’s name in the Bible has helped many to develop a desire to peer into the Bible.” The branch office in India wrote: “The truth about life and death really attracts many Hindus—so does the Bible’s promise of a world without caste discrimination.” Alluding to problems of local concern often gives publishers an opportunity to show what the Bible says God’s Kingdom will do to rectify matters.
 8. What could we say to those who have a negative view of the Bible because of Christendom?
8 If someone has a negative view of the Bible because of Christendom, let him know that Christendom has misrepresented the Bible and its teachings. The branch office in India wrote: “At times, we need to help individuals see that churches are not the custodians of the Bible.” They reported that Hindus are often impressed by section 4 of the brochure What Is the Purpose of Life? How Can You Find It?, which explains how the churches have tried to adulterate and destroy God’s Word. A pioneer in Brazil tells people: “Why not find out more about the Bible’s contents? Many people are doing this with an open mind, with no obligation to any religious affiliation. You may be surprised by what you learn.”
 9. Why should we not give up if someone is not initially interested in what the Bible teaches?
9 Jehovah looks at each person’s heart. (1 Sam. 16:7; Prov. 21:2) He is drawing those with the right heart condition to true worship. (John 6:44) Many such ones were never taught about God or had little exposure to the Bible. Our ministry gives them a chance to “be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) Therefore, if some are not initially interested in what the Bible teaches, do not give up! Use one of the tools available in your language to stimulate their interest. Eventually, you may be able to transfer the discussion to our primary tool for conducting Bible studies, the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?
[Box on page 4]
If the householder says he does not believe in God, try this:
• Ask, “Have you always felt that way?” to find out why.
• If he is a Buddhist, use the brochure Lasting Peace and Happiness—How to Find Them, pages 9-12.
• If he believes in evolution, these references may be helpful:
The Awake! series “Was It Designed?”
The video The Wonders of Creation Reveal God’s Glory
The brochures A Satisfying Life—How to Attain It, section 4; Was Life Created?; and The Origin of Life—Five Questions Worth Asking
• If he has lost faith in God because of injustice and suffering, these references may be helpful:
The book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You?, chapter 10
The brochures Does God Really Care About Us?, part 6, and What Is the Purpose of Life?, section 6
• Switch to the Bible Teach book as soon as the householder is open to the idea that God may exist. It may be good to begin with chapter 2 or another subject appropriate for him.
[Box on page 5]
Try this if the householder does not believe in the Bible:
• Consider chapters 17 and 18 of the book Life—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation?
• For Hindus, use the brochure Why Should We Worship God in Love and Truth?
• For Jews, use the brochure Will There Ever Be a World Without War?, pages 3-11.
• Discuss the benefits of following Bible principles. Publications that you can use to show someone the practical value of the Bible are:
The Awake! series “Help for the Family”
The video The Bible—Its Power in Your Life
The brochures Good News From God!, lessons 9 and 11; A Book for All People, pages 22-26; and A Satisfying Life—How to Attain It, section 2
For Buddhists, use the brochure The Pathway to Peace and Happiness, pages 3-7.
For Muslims, use the brochure Real Faith—Your Key to a Happy Life, section 3.
If you are preaching in an area where there is prejudice against the Bible, it may be best not to identify the source of the wise sayings you are sharing until you have made several visits.
• Explain how Bible prophecies have come true. Publications you can use are:
The video The Bible—Accurate History, Reliable Prophecy
The brochure A Book for All People, pages 27-29
• Switch to the Bible Teach book as soon as the person asks what the Bible teaches on various topics.
[Box on page 6]
If the householder says: “I don’t believe in God,” you might say:
• “May I briefly explain what has convinced me to believe in a Creator?” Then share points from the Reasoning book, pages 84-86, or make arrangements to bring the person a publication that you enjoyed reading.
• “But if there were a God, how would you like him to be?” Most householders reply that they would be drawn to a God of love, justice, and mercy, one who is impartial. Show him from the Bible that God has such qualities. (It may even be possible to use chapter 1 of the Bible Teach book, starting with paragraph 6.)
If the householder says: “I don’t believe in the Bible,” you might say:
• “There are many who feel that way. Some are of the impression that the Bible is not scientific or that Bible standards are impractical. Tell me, have you ever read the Bible before? [Allow for response. Then show the introduction on page 3 of the brochure A Book for All People, and offer the brochure.] Many have discredited the Bible because religion has misrepresented its teachings. Next time, I would like to discuss an example from pages 4 and 5.”
• “Many people share your view. May I show you something that impresses me about the Bible? [Read Job 26:7 or Isaiah 40:22, which show that the Bible is scientifically accurate.] The Bible also contains wise sayings to help families. Next time, I would like to show you an example.”
• “Thank you for telling me that. If God did write a book for mankind, what do you think it would contain?” Then show the person something from the Bible that agrees with his comment.

