How to Prepare Effective Introductions
 1. How important is it to have a good introduction?
1 Just as a flavorful appetizer builds anticipation for the meal that follows, a good introduction opens the door to a positive Scriptural discussion. Effective introductions may vary in their length and content, but just like tasty food, they always require advance thought and preparation. (Prov. 15:28) What makes an introduction effective?
 2. How may we prepare an introduction that is interesting?
2 Choose Topics of Interest: Our introduction must arouse interest, or the householder may end the conversation. So when preparing, think about local interests. Are people in the community interested in good government, happy family life, or an end to war? People generally like to give their opinion, so prepare a thought-provoking viewpoint question. Could you use one of the sample introductions from Our Kingdom Ministry and adapt it to your territory? Why not occasionally practice some introductions during your Family Worship evening?
 3. How may we tailor our introduction to the culture and background of those in our territory?
3 Consider Culture and Background: In some places, we are expected to state the reason for our visit right away. In other places, it is considered impolite if a visitor does not first inquire about the welfare of the householder and perhaps share some personal information. In some areas, the religious background of people allows us to refer freely to the Bible in our introduction. (Acts 2:14-17) However, where people belong to a non-Christian religion, or to no religion at all, it may be better to mention the Bible on a return visit, rather than at the outset.—Acts 17:22-31.
 4. What attention should we give to the opening words of our introduction?
4 The Opening Words: Prepare your opening words carefully. Short, simple sentences are usually best. The way we deliver our opening words is also vital. Be enthusiastic. Have a sincere, friendly smile that reflects personal interest in the householder. Following these suggestions will help us to prepare appetizing introductions that will encourage people in our territory to feed at “the table of Jehovah.”—1 Cor. 10:21.

