Study of Draw Close to Jehovah Begins the Week of January 6
 1. Beginning the week of January 6, what opportunities will we have to draw closer to Jehovah?
1 Jehovah wants us to draw close to him. (Jas. 4:8) To help us do that, beginning the week of January 6, we will study Draw Close to Jehovah at the Congregation Bible Study. Regarding the purpose of the book, the opening page states: “Pondering the way Jehovah manifests each of his qualities, seeing how Jesus Christ perfectly reflected them, and understanding how we too may cultivate them will draw us closer to God.” Congregations previously considered this book during 2004 and 2005. However, for many of the approximately two million publishers who have come into the truth since then, this will be the first time that Jehovah’s endearing qualities have been discussed in detail. For those who studied the book before, the review will help them to deepen their appreciation for Jehovah’s attributes.—Ps. 119:14.
 2. How will Draw Close to Jehovah be studied?
2 How It Will Be Studied: The conductor will begin with a brief introduction, perhaps one or two sentences. The material does not stipulate which scriptures should be read, so during the study the conductor will select key scriptures to read. One or two questions may be asked at the end of each lesson as a review. If the material includes the box “Questions for Meditation,” this will be used as the review. As time permits, the conductor can have some of the cited verses in the box read and then ask auxiliary questions to draw out comments from the audience.
 3. As the book is being considered, what should we do and why?
3 Benefit Fully: Prepare in advance even if you previously studied this book. Have a share in commenting, as this will bring praise to Jehovah, help you to remember the information, and benefit others in attendance. (Ps. 35:18; Heb. 10:24, 25) As you meditate on Jehovah’s matchless qualities, you will draw closer to him. (Ps. 77:11-13) In turn, you will be more determined to obey his commandments and more motivated to tell others about him.—Ps. 150:1-6.

