From Our Readers
Alpine Iceman  I just finished reading “The Mystery of the Alpine Iceman.” (May 8, 1995) I must admit that when I first received it, I really did not think I’d like the subject. But I found the article to be unbelievably fascinating! I appreciate the way it showed that the traditional view of “primitive” man is not correct.
J. S., United States
The eye-catching title helped me place the magazine with a man I met on the train. The next week I met him again, and he said he had found the article to be of “high quality” and well developed. He accepted the latest issue of The Watchtower.
G. C., Japan
Menopause  In your series “A Better Understanding of Menopause” (February 22, 1995), you mentioned using “vegetable or fruit oils, vitamin-E oil, and lubricant gels” as remedies for feminine dryness. As a senior nursing student, I feel impelled to mention that oil-based and fruit-based lubrication provide a medium for bacterial growth. Water-soluble lubricants are thus preferable.
H. W., United States
We appreciate receiving this updated information.—ED.
At the age of 45, I began suffering from hot flashes. I endured them for years without medication. I therefore cried as I felt the loving care evidenced in your article. It helped me to understand menopause better, and it answered many of my questions.
S. T. B. A., Brazil
Computer Games  I was thrilled to see the article “Is This the Game for You?” (May 8, 1995) As a parent, I am appalled at the relaxed attitude of some who think these games are harmless fun. There are many educational and nonviolent games available.
K. G., United States
I am a computer software evaluator, and I was recently given a copy of the game Doom II for evaluation. I found that the game utilizes demonic symbols, such as inverted crosses and pentagrams. I hope people realize how bad these games are.
R. B., United States
Young Marriage  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Married Too Soon—Can We Succeed?” (April 22, 1995) As congregation overseers, we had arranged to make a counseling visit on a young couple who were having a marital crisis. What a surprise for me when this issue arrived! It was just what we needed to help that young couple. We considered the entire article as well as all the Bible texts cited.
M. C., Brazil
Undersea Exploration  We greatly appreciated the article “Safely Exploring the World Beneath the Waves.” (May 8, 1995) We have just returned home from a trip to the Red Sea and found that your advice was very useful. Not only did we explore a magnificent seabed but we also saved a lot of money!
V. C. and K. B., Italy
My husband and I occasionally have problems concerning the leisure activities of our two sons. My husband is interested in diving, and a new diving school recently opened in our area. After reading your article, I am pleased that I can have a good conscience when they participate.
C. P., Germany
Surviving Communism  Thank you so much for the article “Over 40 Years Under Communist Ban.” (April 22, 1995) My heart was touched deeply as I read it. It showed me how Jehovah gives the needed support at the appropriate time so that a person can maintain integrity.
S. A. A., Ghana

