Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 30
10 min: Song 29 and local announcements.
22 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Happiness Book.” Discuss article with congregation and demonstrate variety of presentations as suggested in article or others that would be effective in local territory. Demonstrate using current Topic for Conversation highlighting presentation of Bible. Also demonstration featuring Happiness book. Call particular attention to three major sections of book that will aid publishers in making presentation to persons with differing points of view and varying interests. Consider suggestions from publishers as time permits.
23 min: Teaching with the Happiness Book. Animated talk with practical demonstrations. Placements should open the way for return visits and productive discussions, leading into home Bible studies. Distinctive features of the book are designed for this purpose. Also the book provides encouragement and help toward personal application of what is learned.
First, the vivid illustrations are valuable teaching aids. How could these be used? (Demonstrate starting Bible discussion on return visit using one or more of the illustrations.) Discussion of information is encouraged at the beginning of each chapter with the expression “POINT FOR DISCUSSION” that introduces questions at the bottom of the page. Using fewer questions, each of which involves a number of paragraphs, attention is focused on major points rather than mere details. Those answering will be encouraged to express thoughts in their own words rather than just repeating words found in the paragraphs. (Demonstrate, using first chapter.)
Another helpful feature of the book is that it directly introduces suggestions to the student. (Demonstrate this feature as it could be used in conducting a home Bible study. See pages 25, 50, 102, 130, and others.)
Get comments from audience as to how some of them may have already used the book in conducting studies or otherwise in field service.
 5 min: Song 97 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 7
 7 min: Song 51. Accounts report.
15 min: Question-and-answer discussion of the article “Keep On Speaking God’s Word with Boldness.”
18 min: Talk by an elder on the article “Are We Making the Best Use of Magazines?” On paragraph 4 get comments from the audience on each of the five points and what they are doing personally or could do. (It may be some will have good experiences to offer showing how they have carried out one or more of the five points mentioned.)
12 min: Prepare locally, or elder may give talk on article “Security Now and Forever” in Watchtower of September 1, 1980, pp. 5-7.
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage audience to read the article “Meeting the Challenge of Inflation,” in the insert before next week’s service meeting. Song 4 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 14
10 min: Song 70 and Announcements. Discuss any plans locally for increased activity during the holiday period. Invite comments on the question: How can you respond when individuals offer a holiday greeting? Remind audience to bring the Organization book to the meeting next week.
12 min: Talk by elder on article “The Importance of the Congregation Book Study.” Emphasize spiritual benefits, urging wholehearted support. Let some tell how they have benefited over the years. Offer suggestions that may assist more to attend. Briefly point out highlights of the ka book soon to be studied.
10 min: Discuss “Question Box.”
23 min: Question-and-answer discussion of insert from paragraphs 1 through 19. Consider pertinent scriptures cited as time permits. No need to read paragraphs.
 5 min: Song 57 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 21
 8 min: Song 48 and local announcements.
10 min: Prepare locally or discuss article “Do You Find Entertaining What God Hates?”, August 1, 1980, Watchtower, pp. 28-30.
15 min: The Importance of the Christian Congregation. Scriptural discussion. Source material: Aid book, pp. 371, 372, subheading “Organization of the Christian Congregation.” Also, Organization book, pp. 8-11. (1) How did the apostles and older men serve in the first century? (Acts 15:1, 2, 28, 30, 31) (2) From when did the “faithful and discreet slave” start operating? (Luke 12:42-44) (3) Who constitute the “faithful and discreet slave” today? (4) What is the Scriptural basis for the functions of the governing body today? (Acts 16:4, 5) (5) From where are members of the governing body chosen? (6) How are elders and ministerial servants appointed today? (1 Tim. 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-9) (7) Is Jehovah using more than one organization today? (Eph. 4:4, 5) (8) Is he using individuals apart from his organization? (Eph. 3:10) (9) How can we show appreciation for the organization today?
22 min: Question-and-answer consideration of insert, paragraphs 20 through 36. Following discussion of material in paragraphs 31-35, qualified brother should read each of these paragraphs.
 5 min: Song 65 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 28
10 min: Song 38 and local announcements. Mention coming series of talks on the Happiness book.
20 min: Elder talks with group of young people of varying ages using chapter 16 of the Youth book. They express their views about their need for recreation and entertainment frankly but avoid critical remarks about their parents or elders. Elder is sympathetic; recalls struggles he experienced himself during his teenage years. Reminds them of the need to be guided by Bible principles rather than personal desires.—Prov. 16:25; 2 Tim. 2:22.
Elder asks some questions, inviting the group to express themselves extemporaneously: (1) Is it wrong to participate in sports? What makes some entertainment harmful? (2) What does the Bible say about “bodily training”? When is it beneficial? What pitfalls must be avoided? Why is it wise to keep balanced? (3) How can movies and television sometimes serve a useful purpose? When do they become a snare? How could you be influenced toward wrong conduct? (4) In such matters, what does it mean to be “selective”? What are some forms of recreation that can be refreshing without being detrimental? What always should be our chief objective in life? (For additional suggestions see January 22, 1979, Awake!, pp. 3-12.)
Invite audience to tell about field service arrangements that have benefited them individually or as a family.
10 min: Discuss “Questions from Readers” from August 15, 1980, Watchtower, pp. 30, 31.
20 min: Discuss importance of The Watchtower. It contains vital spiritual food for dedicated ones as well as timely information for newly interested ones and others. Consider points to use in featuring latest issue to people in field service on the coming weekend. Point out that it is only by offering the subscription that we will get subscriptions. Where people do not subscribe, try to place the latest issue of The Watchtower and Awake! Take written note of anyone who obtains magazines and plan to return in two weeks with new issues, in this way starting a magazine route for regular delivery of the magazines. Include in consideration how to fill out subscription slips. Encourage all to share in service on first Sunday of January. Song 40 and prayer.

