Part II—Congregation Meetings: The Importance of the Congregation Book Study
1 Each member of the congregation can derive great personal benefit from the congregation book study arrangement. In some respects, it provides benefits that do not directly come through some other provision of the congregation. Why is that so?
2 It is because the congregation book study arrangement not only provides a careful and detailed study of Bible subjects, but also incorporates personal assistance and shepherding benefits, along with counsel, encouragement and direction for carrying out our individual responsibilities in the Kingdom-preaching work.
BENEFITS OF THE BOOK STUDY
3 Basically, the book study arrangement provides a means for everyone in the congregation to take in vital Bible knowledge. The conductor is himself a student of God’s Word. He is qualified to help each one not only to increase in Bible knowledge, but also to apply it in a practical way.
4 With regard to our individual effort in connection with the study, the principle set forth by Jesus as recorded at Acts 20:35 applies, namely: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” Thorough individual preparation and a willingness to share in the group discussion make for a lively study that brings great benefit to everyone attending.
5 The book study arrangement is also a means by which Jehovah carries out his promise to render needed personal assistance to all of his spiritual flock. (Isa. 40:10, 11) The brother assigned as conductor is usually an elder. As a shepherd he is particularly concerned with ‘knowing the appearance of the flock.’ (Prov. 27:23) As he becomes better acquainted with you, he can give attention to your spiritual needs. His efforts may contribute toward building up your spiritual strength.
6 Finally, the book study arrangement plays a vital role in advancing the Kingdom-preaching work in the congregation’s assigned territory. Arrangements are made for all to have a full share in this sacred service. As one who takes the lead in the field, the conductor aids the group as a whole and encourages each individual to share regularly in the work.
7 Cooperating in all these arrangements results in a book study group that is closely knit together. And by doing all things out of love for one another the brothers display the identifying mark of true disciples of Jesus.—John 13:35.
BE DETERMINED TO ATTEND
8 Many of us still vividly recall the delightful experience, in 1974, of studying through the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached. Although the book was published seven years ago, the value of the information it contains has not diminished.
9 The hundreds of thousands of persons who have come into the truth since this outstanding book was published will especially be strengthened by this information. Indeed, all of us should grow in faith and have our hope strengthened by attending the congregation book study during the year ahead. Why not resolve not to miss a single study, beginning with the week of January 4, 1981.

