Presenting the Good News—With the Happiness Book
1 Happiness—How to Find It—what an interesting subject to discuss with people we meet in field service during the month of December! And what a marvelous book to offer along with the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures!
2 By now most of you probably have read the new book we received at the “Divine Love” District Conventions last summer. It may be that you already have in mind a number of talking points in the book. Also, your own personal interest in this new book very likely has moved you to offer it to friends, relatives and especially to interested persons who were unable to attend the convention and get their own personal copies there.
3 The book is designed to appeal to persons of many different interests and backgrounds. This should be obvious from the very title of the book, Happiness—How to Find It. Who doesn’t want to be happy? How many people are desperately in search of happiness today and yet find that it eludes them at every turn?
4 Just a brief examination of the contents of the book shows that there is something in it for everyone. It should appeal to those who have no particular religious background as well as those who profess a firm belief in God. By becoming familiar with the various chapters in the book, you should be able readily to select one with appeal for whatever type of person you meet.
5 Chapters one through four should prove to be most helpful in presenting the book to persons who are not religiously inclined. These chapters appeal to reason and avoid being dogmatic. Even persons who are generally apathetic about spiritual matters may be intrigued by the content of these first four chapters.
6 Chapters five through 10 show how practical the Bible can be in resolving problems of daily life, with such interest-arousing titles as “Money Problems—What Help?”, “Sex—Which Advice Really Works?” and “Better Health and Longer Life—How?” Then chapters 11 through 20 deal with fundamental teachings of the Bible, but often from a fresh standpoint that most readers should find stimulating.
OFFERING THE BIBLE AND “HAPPINESS” BOOK
7 During December we will be offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with the Happiness book on the contribution of $3.10. If you wish to feature the Bible as you call on people in their homes, the current Topic for Conversation will lend itself well to making the presentation.
8 If you should wish to feature the Happiness book, after introducing yourself you may wish to say something like this: “Everyone alive really wants to be happy. But genuine happiness is so difficult to find. Why do you think that is so?” (Allow householder to comment.) Then proceed: “There have been quite a number of serious studies made in recent times researching the subject. Some of these studies and their conclusions are commented upon in this book and are presented along with parallel comments from the Bible showing how to find true happiness.” Then you might choose to refer to an appropriate point in the book.
9 Or a direct presentation can be made by briefly stating: “You may have heard at some time or other the expression, ‘Happiness is where you find it.’ But I am sure you will agree with me that such reasoning doesn’t really help too much when we all find so much unhappiness in the world today.” (Allow householder to comment.) “The Bible promises happiness to those who make the effort to apply its righteous principles in their lives. You know, quite a number of modern researchers and professionals in the field of human relations are in full agreement with what the Bible counseled long ago. For example, . . . ” (Cite point previously selected that you think may appeal to the householder, such as pages 58-61 or 65 and 66.)
10 Become familiar with the Happiness book. Use interesting talking points to help others find happiness in coming to know Jehovah.

