VOL. XXXVII. APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 

Principles of Love and Justice Contrasted 1 15 

Justice Before Generosity . . .115 

Love and Justice Both Control . .116 

How Love May Overflow the Measure . 116 
Yoke-fellows With Christ . . . .117 

New Creature Fulfils the Law . .117 

The Perfect, Adjustable Yoke . .118 

"The Little Foxes" 118 

St. Peter Delivered From Prison . . .119 

Passover Season Siftings . . .119 
The Missionaries of Antioch . . . . 121 

Disciples First Called Christians . 122 

Ordination and Laying on of Hands . 123 
"Lo, We Turn to the Gentiles!" . . .123 

"Ordained to Eternal Life" . . .125 
Proper and Improper Judgment of Brethren. 125 

Church Incapable of Judging Now . . 125 
Interesting Letters 126 

Spirit of a Sound Mind .... 126 

page 1 14 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED, 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDER, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 



for this Journal, will be supplied free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA, 



SEND REPORTS OF MEMORIAL PROMPTLY 

We request prompt reports from all classes and little 
groups celebrating the Memorial of our Lord's death on April 
16th. A postcard report of numbers and interest will do. 



THE EUREKA DRAMA SUCCEEDING WELL 

Nineteen Classes have sent in reports which show the following 
results for one week's exhibitions of EUREKA DRAMA: 

Thirteen places were served. A total of twenty-nine exhibitions 
were given to an audience of thirteen hundred and 
thirty-eight. One hundred and twenty-nine cards requesting 
free literature were handed in. 

These nineteen EUREKA DRAMAS heard from for the week 
are only a small portion of the whole number thus far sent 
forth. Fifty-seven have sent in no report whatever for the 
week. We can only imagine how many other thousands they 
may have served if actively engaged, or how many other thousands 
missed being served if they were not actively engaged. 

Total EUREKA DRAMA reports to date show 1,788 places 
served; total exhibitions, 5,967; total attendance, 1,041,998; 
total cards received, 33,188. 

All this is very encouraging and shows what possibilities 
there are in connection with this EUREKA DRAMA outfit. In a 
previous notice we suggested that the EUREKA DRAMA be not 
used in theaters, but in country schoolhouses, etc., leaving the 
theaters for the regular DRAMA. However, we have no desire 
to restrict the use of the EUREKA sets. We therefore 
suggest now that where openings for it may be found, it 
should be shown. Indeed, we have some excellent reports 
of its showing in theaters. Quite a number of exhibitions 
have been given in private theaters on Sunday mornings recently. 
They were very successful. People seemed to be 
interested and a good class of people seemed to attend. The 
Theater Managers were very pleased to have the EUREKA 
DRAMA, desiring in some manner, no doubt, to cooperate for 
the public good and also to give tone to their Theaters. 

Be it remembered that we have the lecture records in 



Danish, Swedish, German, Polish, Italian, and Spanish (soon). 
These foreign records have cost us more than the English, 
but we propose to supply them hereafter to the friends at 
uniform prices— an entire set of DRAMA records for $25.00. 

Wonderful opportunities, dear Brethren, are at our hands. 
Many are showing their love and zeal. Let each do according 
to his judgment of what would be pleasing in the sight 
of the Lord. 



R5883:page 115 



THE PRINCIPLES OF LOVE AND JUSTICE CONTRASTED 

NOTHING is more necessary to the peace and 

prosperity of the Church of God than that 

its members should have a clear understanding 

and appreciation of moral principles, 

with a full determination to be controlled 

by them. Even among Christians there are 

often differences of opinion with reference 

to principles of action, which greatly interfere 

with spiritual growth and prosperity. 

Such difficulties most frequently arise 

through failure to distinguish between the relative claims 

of Love and Justice. Therefore we consider it profitable 

to examine these principles and their operation among 

the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of evenly 
poised balances, and sometimes by a square and compass, 
both of which are fitting emblems of its character. Justice 
knows no compromise and no deviation from its fixed 
rule of action. It is mathematically precise. It gives 
nothing over for "good weight" or "good measure." 
There is no grace in it, no heart, no sympathy, no favor 
of any kind. It is a calculating, exact measure of truth 
and righteousness. When justice is done, there are no 
thanks due to the one who metes it out. Such a one has 
merely done a duty, the neglect of which would have 
been culpable, and the doing of which merits no favor or 
praise. And yet, firm and relentless as this principle is, 
it is declared to be the very foundation of God's Throne. 
It is the principle which underlies all His dealings with 

R5884 :page 115 

His creatures. It is His unchangeable business principle; 
and how firmly He adheres to it is manifest to every 
one who understands the Plan of Salvation, the basis of 
which is the satisfaction of Justice against our race. 
Though the arrangement for the satisfaction of Justice 
cost the life of His Only-begotten and well-beloved Son, 
so important was this principle of Divine Justice that 



God freely gave Him up for us all. 



JUSTICE, BEFORE GENEROSITY 

The principle of Love, unlike that of Justice, overflows 
with tenderness, and longs to bless. It is full of grace, 
and delights in the bestowment of favor. It is manifest, 
however, that no action can be regarded as a favor or a 
manifestation of love which has not underneath it the 
substantial foundation of justice. Thus, for instance, if 
one comes to you with a gift, and at the same time disregards 
a just debt to you, the gift falls far short of 
appreciation as an expression of love; and you say, "We 
should be just before we attempt to be generous." 

And this is right; if Justice is the foundation principle 
in all of God's dealings, it should be the same in all 
of our dealings; and none the less so among brethren 
in Christ than among those in the world. As brethren 
in Christ, we have no right to presume upon the favor of 
one another. All to which we have a right is simple 
justice, though we may waive those things that are really 
our rights. But in our own dealings, we should strive 
always to render justice— justice in the payment of our 
honest debts to each other, justice in our judgment one 
of an other (which must make due allowance for frailties, 
etc., because we recognize in ourselves some measure 
of similar imperfection), and justice in fair and friendly 
treatment one of another. 

As we have just said, there is no obligation to demand 
justice for ourselves, and we may, if we choose, 
even suffer injustice uncomplainingly. We must, however, 
if we are Christ's, render justice so far as we are 
enabled to recognize it. In other words, we are not responsible 
for the actions of others in this respect, but are 
responsible for our own. Therefore we are to endeavor 
earnestly that all our actions, our words and our thoughts 
may be squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
offer even one single act as an expression of love. 



JUSTICE, EQUITY, A CHRISTIAN QUALITY 

It would appear that many Christian people spend 
years of their experience without making any great 
progress. One difficulty leading up to this condition is a 
failure to recognize the basic principles underlying the 
Divine Laws, which apply to us from the moment we are 
adopted into the Lord's family. The first of these basic 
principles is justice. We need to learn more and more 
clearly what are our own rights and the rights of our 
fellow creatures in the Church and out of the Church. 
We need to learn how to measure the affairs of ourselves 
and of others with the plummet of justice, and to 
recognize that we must not under any circumstances or 



conditions infract the rights, interests or liberties of 
others— that to do so would be wrong, sinful, contrary 
to the Divine will, and a serious hindrance to our growth 
in grace. Secondly, we must learn to esteem love next to 
justice in importance in the Divine Code. By love we 
mean, not amativeness nor soft sentimentality, but that 
principle of kindness, sympathy, consideration and benevolence 
which we see manifested in our Heavenly Father 
and in our Lord Jesus. 

In proportion as we grow up in the Lord, strong in 
Him, it must be along the lines of these elements of His 
character. More and more we must appreciate and sympathize 
with others in their trials and difficulties and 

R5884:page 116 

afflictions; more and more we must become gentle, patient, 
kind toward all, but especially toward the Household of 
Faith. All the graces of the Spirit are elements of love. 
God is love; and whoever receives of His Spirit receives 
the spirit of love. 

These two basic principles must cover all of our conduct 
in life. Justice tells us that we must cease to do 
evil— that we must not speak a word nor do an act that 
would work injustice to another, nor even by look imply 
such injustice; that we must be as careful of his or her 
interests and welfare as of our own. Justice must govern 
all of our dealings with others. Love may permit us to 
give them more than justice could require, but justice 
demands that we must never give them less than due. No 
matter if they do not require justice at our hands, no 
matter if they are willing to take less than justice, no 
matter if they would say nothing if we should take advantage 
of them, no matter if they would not appreciate 
our degree of justice, still our course is the same. 
We have received of the Lord's Spirit, and must act 
from this standpoint and not from the standpoint of 
others who have not His Spirit or who are more or less 
blinded and disabled from dealing justly. 



LOVE AND JUSTICE BOTH CONTROL 

If justice must mark our conduct toward others, so 
love must be used by us in measuring the conduct of 
others toward us. We may not apply to others the strict 
rules of justice which we acknowledge as our responsibility 
to them. Love, generosity, demands that we accept 
from others less than justice, because we realize that they 
are fallen, imperfect, not only in their flesh, but also in 
their judgments. Furthermore, we see that the great 
mass of the world has not received the Spirit of the Lord 
at all, and therefore cannot appreciate these basic principles 
of justice and love as we appreciate them. We 
must in love look sympathetically upon their condition, 
as we would upon the condition of a sick neighbor. 



friend, parent or child. We must make allowance for 
their disordered condition, and think as charitably as 
possible of their words, conduct, etc. 

This does not mean that we are to be blind or oblivious 
to true conditions, and permit ourselves to be deprived 
of all that we possess or earn; but it does mean that we 
should take a kind, sympathetic view of the unrighteousness 
and injustice of those with whom we have dealings. 
We should remember that they are fallen, and that they 
have not received the grace of God as we have received 
it; and that they are not, therefore, to be measured by the 
line of strict justice, but rather that their imperfections 
are to be allowed for reasonably by the elastic cord of 
love. It is our own conduct that we are to measure by 
the law of justice, the Golden Rule. 



HOW LOVE MAY OVERFLOW THE MEASURE 

How clearly the Master sets forth these conditions, 
urging upon us the Golden Rule as the measure for our 
conduct toward others, and that in measuring their conduct 
toward us we shall be as generous as we shall wish 
our Lord to be in His judgment of ourselves, in harmony 
with His statement, "With what judgment ye judge, ye 
shall be judged"! A right appreciation of these basic 
principles, justice and love, by the Lord's people, and 
worked out in the daily affairs of life, would lift them 
above the world. It would save many an altercation, 
many a law suit, many a quarrel, and would make of the 
Lord's people shining examples of kindness, generosity, 
love, and at the same time examples of justice, right 
living, sterling honesty, etc. 

Love is not, like justice, an exact principle to be 
measured and weighed. It is three-fold in its character: 
it is pitiful; it is sympathetic, in the sense of kinship of 
soul— affectionate; it is reverential. These different forms 
of love are exercised according to the object upon which 
love is centered. Pity-love is the lowest form of love; 
it takes cognizance of even the vile and degraded, and is 
active in measures of relief. Sympathetic love rises 
higher, and proffers fellowship, comradeship. But the 
reverential love rises above all these, and delights in 
the contemplation of the good, the pure and the beautiful. 
In this latter form we may indeed love God supremely, 
as the personification of all that is truly worthy 
of admiration and reverence; and love our fellow men 
in proportion as they bear His likeness. The Divine 
Law demands love, both to God and to man. 

Although we owe to every man, as a duty, love in one 
of these senses, we may not demand it one of another; 
but love overflows justice. Love shakes the measure, 
presses it down, heaps it up. The lack of love is not to 
be complained of by the Christian, however, but when bestowed 
it is to be appreciated gratefully and reciprocated 
generously. Every one who craves love should crave it 



in its highest sense— in the sense of admiration and 
reverence. But this form of love is the most costly; and 
the only way to secure it is to manifest that nobility of 
character which calls it forth from others who are truly 
noble, truly like our Lord Jesus. 

The love begotten of sympathy and fellowship is also 
very precious. But any sentiment that comes merely in 
response to a demand, is deprived of love's choicest aroma. 
Therefore never demand love, but rather by manifestation 
of it toward others court its reciprocation. The 
love of pity is not called out by the nobility of the subject, 
but rather by the nobility of the bestower, whose heart 
is so full of love that it overflows in generous impulses 
toward even the unworthy. All of the objects of pity, 
however, are not unworthy of love in the higher senses; 
and some such often draw upon our love in every sense. 



A SELFISH, ONE-SIDED VIEW 

To demand Love's overflow of blessing— which is beyond 
the claim of justice— is only an exhibition of covet ousness. 
We may act on this principle of love ourselves, 
but we may not claim it from others. If we do, we manifest 
a lack of love and the possession of a considerable 
measure of selfishness. Some seem to see clearly where 
brotherly love should be extended to themselves, but are 

R5885:page 116 

slow to see their own obligations in this respect. 

For instance, two brethren were once rooming together, 
and through a failure to consider the relative 
claims of love and justice, one presumed upon the brotherly 
love of the other to the extent of expecting him to 
pay the entire rent of the room. When the other urged 
the claim of justice, the first urged the claim of brotherly-love, 
and the former reluctantly yielded, not knowing 
how to refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly people. 
How strange that any of God's children should take so 
narrow, so one-sided, so selfish a view! Cannot all see 
that love and justice should work both ways; that it is 
the duty of each not to oversee others in these respects, 
but to look well to his own course, to see that he manifests 
brotherly love; and that if he would teach others, 
it should be rather by example than by precept? 



LET LOVE REIGN SUPREME 

Let us beware of a disposition toward covetousness. 
Let us each remember that he is steward over the Lord's 
goods entrusted to him, and not over those entrusted to 
his brother; that each is accountable to the Lord, and 



not to others, for the right use of that which the Master 

R5885:page 117 

has placed in his hands. There is nothing much more 

unbecoming and unlovely in the children of God than a 

disposition to petty criticism of the individual affairs of 

one another. It is a business too small for the saints, 

and manifests a sad lack of that brotherly love which 

should be especially manifest in broad and generous consideration, 

which would rather cover a multitude of sins 

than to magnify one. 

The Christian is to have the loving, generous disposition 
of heart— a copy of the Heavenly Father's disposition. 
In trivial affairs he is to have so much sympathy 
and love that he will take no notice, just as God for 
Christ's sake deals with us and does not impute sin to 
us, except as it represents knowledge and wilfulness. 
With such a rule operating amongst Christians, a determination 
not to recognize as an offense anything that is 
not purposely done, or intended as an offense, would be 
a great blessing to all, and the proper, God-like course. 
The transgressions to which our Lord refers in "Matthew 18:15-17" 
are not the trivial affairs of no consequence, 
are not evil surmisings and imaginings, are not rumors, 
are not fancied insults, but positive wrongs done us, and 
on account of which it is our duty, kindly and lovingly 
and wisely, to give some proper rebuke— some intimation 
that we recognize the wrong and that it has grieved us 
and hurt us and needs correction. 

The disposition to forgive should be with us always, 
and should be manifested by us at all times. Our loving 
generosity, our kindness and our desire to think no evil 
or as little evil as possible, should be manifested by all 
the words and acts of life. This is God-like. God had 
a kind, benevolent, generous sentiment toward us even 
while we were yet sinners. Nor did He wait for the 
sinners to ask forgiveness, but promptly manifested His 
desire for harmony and His readiness to forgive. The, 
whole Gospel Message is to this effect: "Be ye reconciled 
to God." Our hearts should be so full of this disposition 
toward forgiveness that our faces would not 
have a hard look, nor our words of reproof a bitter 
sting. We should manifest the loving forgiveness that 
we should have in our hearts at all times. 

May love and justice find their proper, relative places 
in the hearts of all of God's people, that so the enemy 
may have no occasion to glory! The Psalmist said, "O 
how love I Thy Law [the Law of Love whose foundation 
is justice]! It is my meditation all the day." ("Psalm 1 19:97".) 
Surely, if God's Law were the constant meditation 
of all, there would be fewer and less glaring mistakes 
than we often see! Let us watch and be sober, that 
the Adversary and our fallen flesh may not gain an advantage 
over us as New Creatures. Let SELF be more 
and more eliminated and LOVE reign supreme. 



R5885:page 117 

YOKE-FELLOWS WITH CHRIST 

"Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me;. ..for My 

yoke is easy and My burden is light."— "Matthew 1 1:29,30". 

OUR Lord was here addressing the Jews. He 
did not preach to the Gentiles, because the 
time for favor to the Gentiles had not yet 
come. He was not sent. He declared, 
"save to the lost sheep of the House of 
Israel." The Israelites were under the yoke 
of the nation of Rome, but we do not think 
that this was the yoke to which our Lord 
referred. They were under a religious 
yoke, the yoke of the Law. 

A yoke signifies servitude. One who bears a yoke is 
a servant. For instance, oxen have a yoke put upon 
them, not that they may bear a yoke, but that they may be 
enabled by the yoke to bear the burdens which are to be 
laid upon them. Hence the yoke becomes the symbol of 
service, of burden-bearing. So with the Israelites; all 
the obligations of the Law Covenant were to be borne 
by them. They had agreed to become the servants of 
God under the conditions of this Law Covenant. But 
they found themselves so unbalanced and weak, as the 
result of sin, that they could not bear the burdens of the 
Law. No Jew could draw that Law Covenant load. 
"There is none righteous; no, not one"— none could meet 
the obligations of God's perfect Law. 

Our Lord did not come to do away with the Law. 
On the contrary. He magnified the Law, and made it 
honorable. He showed that its requirements were neither 
unreasonable nor unjust, although by reason of their 
imperfection no man had been able to keep it. By keeping 
the Law perfectly Himself, our Lord proved that it 
is not beyond the possibility of the obedience of a perfect 
human being, but it is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. The Law did not prove too weighty a load for 
Him to bear; He was able fully to meet its every requirement, 
and did so. 

But now He was inviting His disciples to come under 
a different yoke— a yoke of servitude with Him. He had 
a new Message— the Gospel, the Message of "good tidings." 
It spoke of release from the obligations of that 
Law Covenant which they were unable to bear, but which 
was designed to be a "schoolmaster, to lead them to 
Christ." He told them how they might have part in 
this wonderful new arrangement which was just opening 
up, of which He Himself was to be the Head. The arrangement 
was altogether of the Father, but the Son 



was to be His special Representative. His disciples 
might have a part by becoming dead to the Law Covenant, 
through believing in Jesus their Messiah and becoming 
united to Him. Thus they would be acceptable 
to God by Him, and would be begotten of the Holy Spirit 
and become sons of God. 



THE NEW CREATURE FULFILS THE LAW 

In this way they would become associates of the 
Messiah in the keeping of the Law of righteousness; for 
it would be quite possible for them to keep God's Law 
under this new kind of yoke and these new conditions. 
The new yoke would not be upon the old creature; the 
old creature had already demonstrated that it could not 
keep the Law's requirements. But the Divine arrangement 
was that in order to become New Creatures they 
must become dead, not to the Law Covenant alone, but 
to all earthly interests, hopes and prospects. The Apostle, 
speaking of such, says the righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the 
Spirit.— "Romans 8:4\ 

We are not only fulfilling the requirements of the 
Law, but we do more. We lay down our lives for the 
brethren. This is beyond what the Law could require. 
But it is the New Creature that does this. The old 
creature is dead, from God's standpoint. The New Creature 
must operate through the old body, the imperfections 
of which are all covered by the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. Hence the New Creature is, from the Divine 
viewpoint, fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, 
for it abides faithful to the Lord and has continually 
the cleansing of the imputed merit of the blood of Christ 
for the imperfections of its body. 



THE HEAVY YOKE OF THE LAW UPON ISRAEL 

It was for a purpose that the Master brought this 
figure of a yoke to the attention of the Jews. They knew 

R5885:page 118 

something about the burdens of the Law under which 

they as a people had long groaned. They had learned 

that they were unable to gain the everlasting life which 

it promised on condition of perfect obedience to its requirements. 

For sixteen hundred years they had been 

trying to keep the Law, and had failed. They remembered 

that God had promised them the Messiah, and they 

knew that somehow or other He would bring in a new 

arrangement; but they did not know how or when. 

Through their Prophets God had foretold that He would 

take away the stony heart out of their flesh and give 



them a heart of flesh. So the faithful ones had been 
watching and waiting with longing for this Messiah and 
all that had been promised through Him. And devout 
Jews are still waiting for the fulfilment of those promises. 

But when Jesus came He began a work not clearly 
understood before. He did not then bring in the New 
Covenant which had been promised through the Prophets. 
Jeremiah 31:31-34'; "32:38-41"; v Ezekiel 1 1:19; "36:25-30".) 

R5886:page 118 

He did not then take away their stony hearts and give 
them hearts of flesh. This was to be a still future work, 
the work of the Kingdom, when it should be set up in 
power and great glory over all the earth. 



THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW CREATION 

But now, previous to all this, the Messiah had come 
for a different purpose; to do a preparatory work. He 
was instituting a new thing; He was starting a New 
Creation, and was inviting as many of the Jews as were 
in the proper attitude of heart to join with Him— not 
waiting for the New Covenant of the future, but to 
have a part with Him in this matter of becoming sons of 
God. "Yoke up with Me," Jesus said. And His Message 
was appreciated by those who had been sincerely 
trying to keep the Law. "Come unto Me, all ye that labor 
and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." ("Matthew 1 1:28".) 
Here was a new proposition. It must have 
seemed very strange to them, even if they had fully 
understood the figure of speech which He used. 

Although we who are Gentiles by nature were never 
under the yoke of the Jewish Law, yet, in another way, 
we have had a great burden which we were unable to 
bear— the burden of sin and death. Adam first came 
under the burden of sin which has brought so great a 
curse upon the world. We have all borne and felt the 
weight of sin and all its evil accompaniments. So the 
Master's words of hope and comfort have brought joy 
and refreshing to our hearts also, and we have found 
this offered rest— rest in Him, our true Yoke-Fellow. 

All who are heavy-laden, who appreciate the nature 
and the bitterness of sin, who know and fear it and are 
striving against it— all these are invited to come to the 
Master. They are invited to take His yoke upon them 
and to learn of Him. They are assured that His yoke 
is easy. It is easy in the sense that it is possible to bear, 
and that it is not galling. 



THE PERFECT, ADJUSTABLE YOKE 

We have seen oxen yoked. We have seen the great 



wooden yokes upon their necks bear down with heavy 

pressure upon the skin and muscles. A yoke that does 

not fit an animal will chafe him and cause restlessness; 

whereas a yoke that is properly fitted will be comfortable 

and will make (lie load much more easily drawn. Our 

Lord declares that He has a yoke that is easy, comfortable 

and enjoyable. His yoke is, so to speak, an elastic 

yoke. It meets the varied conditions of the different individuals 

who wear it. It is large for the large, small 

for the small, medium for the medium. It is a yoke by 

which the greatest, the highest and the most talented may 

yoke up with the Lord— or the most insignificant, may 

do the same. The Lord is able to bear for us all that 

we lack ability to bear. There is no yoke which will 

enable one to bear burdens as this yoke does. True, it 

requires perfection to bear this yoke and we are weak 

and imperfect beings; but if we have only one -tenth of 

perfection, and nine -tenths of imperfection, our Lord will 

bear for us the lacking nine -tenths. If we have one-half 

imperfection. He will bear that. Thus the weakest are 

provided for, and the strongest get what they need. Here 

is the great opportunity of the Gospel Age. 

Our Lord Jesus gave to the Apostle Paul the assurance, 
"My strength is made perfect in weakness." ( v 2 Corinthians 12:9'.) 
All things shall work together for 

good to us because we love Him, because we have taken 
His yoke, have become yoke-fellows with Him. We rejoice 
in the privilege of suffering with Him. The flesh 
may suffer, but the spirit rejoices. We shall not be tried 
beyond our strength. His burden is light. No one is required 
under this arrangement to do more than he is able 
to perform. If we have the right spirit we shall be glad 
to do all that we can accomplish. One who would not 
be willing to do all in his power would not be accounted 
by the Lord as faithful. The Master's burden is light if 
it be accepted in sincerity and in truth, and only those 
who so receive it can become yoke-fellows with Him. 



R5886:page 118 



"THE LITTLE FOXES" 

"Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines, 
for our vines have tender grapes."— 'Canticles 2: 15". 

IN THE above text the word "take" is used in 
the sense of catch— help us to catch the 
foxes, especially the little foxes. The fox is 
known as a very cunning, but docile little 
animal, not capable of ferocity and viciousness, 
but nevertheless the cause of much 
harm. Its very appearance of harmlessness 



makes it the more dangerous. The young 

fox, like all the young of the dog family, is 

very destructive in its character; and the 

fox is particularly cunning and crafty when bent on mischief, 

hence less likely to arouse suspicion of its evil intentions. 

It has a peculiar simplicity of manner; it attracts 

by its apparent innocence, and is all the more apt 

to deceive. 

In our text King Solomon seems to be picturing the 
depravities of our fallen nature which are not so extreme, 
not so gross, as some, but which are none the less 
very harmful; indeed they are especially deceitful and 
likely to elude our attention, and for this reason need 
more careful and constant watching. The words seem to 
be the language of the Bridegroom to His espoused. He 
emphasizes the expression, "the little foxes," and intimates 
that they would be very destructive. 

If we apply the term to sins, we find that there are 
little sins which are really more dangerous than grosser 
sins, because we are less likely to be on our guard against 
these than against the greater sins. Every one would be 
instinctively on guard against lions, bears, serpents, etc.; 
but little foxes are so attractive-looking and seem so artless 
in disposition that unless one has had bitter experience 
with them he would have little or no fear. But these 
little animals are much given to scratching and generally 
destroying everything with which they come in contact. 

R5886:page 119 



GUARD CAREFULLY THE "TENDER GRAPES" 

In this illustration of the wise man the grape-vine is 
spoken of, as though these foxes have a special predilection 
for grapes— the grapes representing the fruits of the 
Holy Spirit. As these little foxes delight to tear the vine 
with their sharp claws and to gnaw the roots with their 
teeth, so small sins tear the branches and gnaw at the 
roots of the spiritual vine, thus endangering its very life. 
They destroy or devour the precious grapes, which are 
very tender. Grapes during the formative period and 
while very small are exceedingly tender and the stems 
very brittle and easily snapped off the vine and destroyed. 
So the Spirit's fruitage in the hearts and lives of immature 
Christians may be easily ruined, either by their 
own lack of care and watchfulness or by the example of 
the brethren. How careful should those be who have 
been longer in the Heavenly way to guard their words 
and conduct in the presence of the younger, less mature 
ones, the lambs of the flock! Unloving criticism of the 
brethren before beginners, or others, may do untold 
harm and is a manifestation of a lack of love and 
Christian maturity. 

Every child of God should be especially on guard 
against the little things— the things that seem like jokes. 



which sometimes do more harm in the Church than things 
which appear great; the little insinuations, that often 
leave a sting; the jesting about sacred matters, turning 
Scriptural passages into jests; the little acts of selfishness. 
etc. These things and many others which by careful 
thought each one may note really do much damage, injuring 
the branches and destroying the precious fruits 
of the Lord's Vine. Then let us, dear brethren, strive to 
be more and more watchful to catch these "little foxes." 
Let us each, individually, watch and pray that we do not 
by thought or word or act of ours hinder or lessen our 
own fruit-bearing or that of another. 

It is difficult for us to realize how potent is our influence 
for either good or evil in matters which, unless 
carefully scrutinized, seem trifling. Ah, these little foxes! 
Careless words, spoken with scarcely a thought or in a 
moment of impatience, little grumblings, a sarcastic word 
or laugh or look or shrug— oh, how these things count in 
our daily lives either for or against our own spiritual development, 
and often the development of others! How 
earnestly we should each seek to upbuild our own character 
and the characters of the brethren! Our Lord is 
marking all these things. Remember, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least, will be faithful also in much." 



R5887:page 119 



ST. PETER DELIVERED FROM PRISON 

-APRIL 30.- ACTS 12:1-11".-- 

PASSOVER TRIALS AND TESTINGS-DEATH OF ST. JAMES- 
ST. PETER IMPRISONED-HIS MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE- 
AN ALL-NIGHT PRAYER-MEETING-THE REWARD OF 
FAITH-LESSONS FOR OUR DAY-DIVINE GUARDIANSHIP OF 
ALL WHO ARE TRULY THE LORD'S-THE POWER OF 
SATAN-THE POWER OF GOD AND THE POWER OF PRAYER. 

"The angel of Jehovah encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— v Psalm 34:7'. 

HEROD was the family name of several kings 
who ruled Israel, but who were descendants 
of Esau— Edomites. At the time of our 
Study for today Herod Agrippa I. had been 
appointed king of Judea. He was the grandson 
of Herod the Great, murderer of the 
babes of Bethlehem, and the nephew of 
Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the 
Baptist and subsequently, with his soldiers, 
set Jesus at naught and mocked Him, just 
prior to His crucifixion. 



Herod Agrippa appears to have been desirous of the 
good will of the people, even at the cost of principle. He 
took pains to observe the minutiae of Jewish ceremonials. 
He hung up in the Temple the gold chain which the 
Emperor Caligula had given him. The story is related 
that at the Feast of Tabernacles he caused the entire Book 
of Deuteronomy to be read in the hearing of the people; 
and that when the reader came to the words, "Thou 
mayest not set a stranger over thee, who is not thy 
brother" ("Deut. 17: 15"), the king "burst into theatrical 
tears." Thereupon the populace obsequiously cried, "Do 
not weep, Agrippa; thou art our brother!" 



PASSOVER SEASON SIFTINGS 

On the lookout to curry favor with the Jews, especially 
the influential ones, Agrippa caused the Apostle James to 
be beheaded. St. James was one of the three who had 
usually accompanied our Lord in the most confidential 
capacity. Although the record of this noble Apostle's 
ministry is brief in the extreme, it contains nothing that 
gives the slightest suggestion of anything but zeal and 
faithfulness to our Lord and to His Cause. This James, 
who died early in the Christian Era, should not be confounded 
with the author of the Epistle of James— "James 
the Less," supposed to have been second cousin to our 
Lord, and for this reason styled "the Lord's brother," according 
to Jewish custom. 

Finding that the death of St. James brought great 
pleasure to the Jews, Agrippa had the Apostle Peter arrested. 
The expression, "When he had apprehended 
him," implies that some delay occurred between the order 
for the Apostle's arrest and the time of his imprisonment 
—that his arrest was after searching. Probably all of 
the Apostles were more or less secreted about that time; 
but, trusting to the sacredness of the Passover season, St. 
Peter had ventured forth and was arrested and imprisoned, 
Agrippa intending his death directly at the close 
of the Passover week. Meantime, however, the Lord 
delivered His faithful Apostle, as this Study shows. 

We can well imagine the sadness of the Church at this 
Passover season, which must have reminded them considerably 
of the time of our Lord's death and of the 
alarm then amongst His followers. For some years past 
it has seemed to us as though each Passover season, each 
Memorial celebration, was a time of special trial and 
testing amongst the followers of our Lord. Whether 
this is a fact or not, it surely will not injure the Lord's 
people to be especially on guard against the wiles of the 
Adversary at these times. Let us watch and pray always, 
lest we fall into temptation. 

The thought of special trial, special temptation from 
the Adversary at this season of the year, seems to have 
been the foundation for the Lenten Season, a period of 
special restraint, fasting and prayer, which has come 



down to us through the oldest channels of Church history. 
The fact that with many today the Lenten season 
is a mere formality does not mean that it is so or that it 
was originally so. Strongly would we recommend the 
fasting and prayer at all times enjoined in the Scriptures; 
and we suggest that, if possible, alertness be especially 

R5887 : page 120 

exercised by all the consecrated during the forty days 
preceding the Memorial. 

As we have already explained, our self-denials are 
not merely along the lines of food and drink, but are to 
extend to all of our appetites. Undoubtedly a very simple 
and limited diet during the Spring of the year would be 
beneficial for the majority of mankind, even though there 
were no spiritual blessings connected therewith. Winter 
cold brings hearty appetites; and the result is that toward 
Spring the system is apt to be surfeited, or over-charged. 
From this condition it need to be relieved by a measure 
of abstention, which is as favorable to spirituality as 
surfeiting is unfavorable. 



PRAYING FOR ST. PETER 

St. Peter is supposed to have been imprisoned in the 
famous Castle of Antonia, where our Lord was arraigned 
before Pilate, and where St. Paul was subsequently taken 
when mobbed in Jerusalem. The Apostle had a guard of 
four quaternions— four soldiers each— who relieved each 
other every three hours. Two of the four were chained 
to St. Peter's arms, one to each arm; a third stood outside 
the door; and a fourth was stationed in the passage 
leading to the outer iron gate. 

The power of Divine grace to help in ever)' time of 
need and to give peace amidst alarms is well illustrated in 
this case by the fact that under all these circumstances 
St. Peter was fast asleep when the angel of the Lord 
came to deliver him. The proprieties of the case are also 
illustrated by the fact that the Church were not asleep, 
but praying for the Apostle. It was not for him to pray 
for his own deliverance from the power of Agrippa; he 
had already consecrated his life unto death, and properly 
should feel quite ready to lay down his life at this time, 
if such proved to be the Divine will respecting him. For 
him to have asked for the prolongation of life would have 
been to ask amiss, and would have manifested a wilfulness 
incompatible with a full consecration to the Lord's 
will. But with the Church it was different. While expressing 
their confidence in the Divine supervision of the 
affairs of the Church, they could with all propriety tell the 
Lord of their love for St. Peter and express the hope that 
it might be the Lord's will that the Apostle should continue 
with them for their joy and comfort and for their 
upbuilding in the "most holy faith." 



Then, too, the loss of the Apostle James, who apparently 
was the leader amongst the Apostles, would make 
St. Peter and every other Apostle doubly precious in the 
estimation of the Household of Faith. God purposed 
that St. Peter should live to be an old man; for this was 
our Lord's prophecy concerning him. ('John 21: 18,19'.) 
But the emergency proved a blessing to the Church, by 
way of stirring up their pure minds to an appreciation 
of God's Cause in general and of St. Peter in particular. 



DELIVERED BY AN ANGEL 

Between three and six o'clock in the morning St. 

Peter, who had been sleeping peacefully, was awakened 
by an angel, whose radiant features enabled the Apostle 
quickly to discern that his deliverer was a holy being. 
The Apostle was bidden to arise. Quickly and simultaneously 
the chains were loosed which bound him to the 
soldier by either hand. He was then instructed to put on 
his sandals and his outer garment, or cloak, and to follow 
his leader. He did so, realizing the facts as those in a 
dream. Thus he was led past the first and second wards, 
or doors, until they came to the great gate leading into the 
city. This swung open of its own accord; and then the 
angel left him. 

It is worthy of notice that the miracles performed were 
only such as were beyond St. Peter's natural power. 
Whatever he could do he was required to do; namely, to 
put on his sandals and his cloak and to follow the angel. 
He might have been transported; sandals might have been 
fastened to his feet; a new cloak might have been provided. 
But the lesson is more profitable as it was given. 
Similarly in the Lord's dealings with us today, we should 
remember that it is ours to do everything in our power; 
and that it is the Lord's to overrule all things for our 
good and to supply our deficiencies from His abundance. 

When the Apostle came to himself, when he realized 
the facts in the case— that he was free— his faith was 
strengthened. Willing to die, he found that the Lord was 
willing that he should live, labor and endure; and he was 
equally pleased, rejoicing, we may be sure, for the privilege 
of further service, even though it would mean further 
sacrifices and sufferings for the sake of the Lord 
and of His people. 

Doubtless the angel had started St. Peter in the direction 
of Mary's home, where prayer was being made on 
his behalf. The description of the house implies that it 
was one of the better class. St. Peter's knock was answered 
by little Rose (Rhoda), who child-like, was so 
delighted, when she recognized the Apostle's voice, that 
she neglected to open the door before running back to tell 
the praying household that he was at the gate. Expecting 
no deliverance at such an hour, some thought that the 
little maid was mistaken, and insisted that it must be his 
angel— in harmony with the prevalent thought that an 



angel had supervision of each individual of God's people, 
and that such might personate the one under his protection. 

The brethren were surprised at the Lord's answer to 
their petition; for it came very unexpectedly as respects 
time. When they realized that it was actually St. Peter 
who stood before them, there was an outburst of excitement 
and of questions which the Apostle was obliged to 
silence by the shaking of his hands. Then he narrated 
the wonderful story of his deliverance, and bade them tell 
it to the other James, the cousin of Jesus, and to the other 
disciples. Then he went his way, whether to another city 
or to another house we do not know. In any event, he 
exercised wisdom in not needlessly provoking Herod. 

With the coming of daylight there was consternation 
in the prison. Later on in this same chapter we learn of 
another visit of the angel of the Lord. This time he came 
to smite the king with disease, from which he subsequently 
died. The entire chapter shows us the power of Satan, 
the power of God and the power of prayer. 



THE GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text is a symbolical statement illustrative 
of the Divine guardianship of all those who are truly the 
Lord's. The thought is that the affairs of His people are 
under His continual supervision. Whether we think of 
the angel of the Lord as one of the Heavenly host especially 
appointed on our behalf, or whether we think of 
him from the standpoint of the various powers of nature, 
the levers of which are all in the Divine care, it matters 
not. We have the assurance that the Father Himself 
loves us, and that all the Heavenly powers are pledged to 
those whom He has accepted in Christ Jesus; and these 
unitedly guarantee blessings to all who abide in God's love. 

To thus abide means to abide in the Redeemer. It 
means to abide loyal to our consecration, to do the 
Father's will to the best of our ability. That will is declared 
to be that we shall love the Lord supremely, shall 
love our neighbor as ourselves, and shall love all the members 
of the Household of Faith even as Christ loved us. 



R5888:page 121 



THE MISSIONARIES OF ANTIOCH 

-MAY 7.-' ACTS 11:19-26'; M 3:1 -3\- 

PERSECUTION SPREADS THE GOSPEL-THE FIRST CHURCH 
AMONGST THE GENTILES-BARNABAS SENT FROM JERUSALEM TO 
ASSIST THE YOUNG CHURCH-SAUL OF TARSUS BROUGHT 
TO ANTIOCH-THE TWO BRETHREN SENT FORTH AS 



MISSIONARIES-ORDINATION AND LAYING ON OF HANDS. 

"Go ye therefore, and make disciples of 
all the nations."- v Matthew 28:19\ R.V. 

ANTIOCH, at the time of our Study, was the 

third city in the world both in commercial 

importance and in population, only Rome 

and Alexandria taking precedence. It is 

noted as being the first city outside of 

Palestine in which a Christian Church assembly 

was formed. Indeed, we might say 

that as Jerusalem was the center of influence 

in Palestine, so Antioch became a 

center of influence as respected the Gospel 

amongst the Gentiles. 

It seems that the little spark of Truth which started 
the work of the Lord at Antioch resulted from the persecution 
which arose at the time of St. Stephen's death. 
Some of those forced out of Jerusalem by the persecution 
settled at Antioch; and of course they could not 
walk in the light of the Gospel without letting the light 
shine out for others. At first this was done only toward 
those who were of the Jewish faith; and in a large commercial 
center such as Antioch there were sure to be large 
numbers of Jews. We know not how many of them were 
reached with the Gospel; but it was surely confined to 
them until the end of Israel's seventy symbolical weeks 
of Divine favor— until the autumn of 36 A.D. 

At the same time that the Lord was sending Deacon 
Philip to the Samaritans and to the Ethiopian eunuch, 
and the opening the door to the Gentiles through the Apostle 
Peter, He was ready to open the door to the Gentiles 
everywhere. Under the leadings of Divine providence 
some of the Christian Hebrews got the proper thought 
at the proper time— that a Gentile who would receive 
the Lord Jesus could be classed as a disciple equally with 
the Jews who had done so. The work thus started 
amongst the Gentiles at Antioch spread considerably, the 
Gentiles seeming to take more notice of the Gospel than 
had the Jews to whom it was first preached. 



BARNABAS SENT TO ANTIOCH 

The news that the Gospel had gone to the Gentiles 
at Antioch, and that large numbers were turning to the 
Lord, reached the Church at Jerusalem— the head-center 
of the Christian work, so to speak. The Apostles and all 
the brethren had been prepared by the Lord's manifest 
dealing in the case of Cornelius, the Roman centurion; 
and this undoubtedly would detract from their surprise 
and would largely correct any prejudice on the subject 
of the Gentiles as fellow-heirs of the Abrahamic Promise, 
which had previously pertained to the Jews alone. 



Nevertheless, we note that the record does not say that 
this news caused rejoicing in the Church at Jerusalem. 

trepidation that large numbers of Gentiles were attaching 

that this would have an injurious effect upon the Cause 
they loved to serve. 

Barnabas to Antioch was that he might see and judge 
of the true condition of things, and give a report as to 

as fellow-heirs with the saints. When Barnabas had 

manifested amongst the believers there. This must have 
been manifested not only in their faith in Jesus as their 

disciples of our Lord. Barnabas quickly discerned the 

these believers, and thus realized that the Cause, instead 
of being hindered by such accessions, would be honored 

although it is not stated, that he promptly made report to 
the brethren at Jerusalem, and that they were glad also. 

they sent Barnabas to Antioch. The fact that he was 

Levite by birth would make him very careful of every 
Jewish interest connected with the faith; and undoubtedly 

of Cyprus, an island in the Mediterranean Sea, not far 
from Antioch. Born thus at a distance from Jerusalem 

man, as well as familiar with the dialect spoken by the 
people of Antioch. Another good reason for sending 

very helpful as a brother and a teacher in the Church. 
We remember that he sold a part of his property in the 

the name Barnabas— "a son of consolation," a helper— 



HIS WORK WITH THE YOUNG CHURCH 



brethren, and in the same comforting and helpful manner 
as at Jerusalem he exhorted them all. Doubtless he saw 

finding fault, instead of lacerating their feelings and chiding 
them, he began by acknowledgment of what he saw 

was to the effect that they should cleave unto the 
Lord with purpose of heart. He wished the dear 

were firmly united to the Lord, that their minds were 
fully made up, that their consecration was complete. 



might show them kindly, gently, certain weaknesses of 
the flesh to which they were addicted. Or, their hearts 
being more firmly united to the Lord, they might very 
speedily see these inconsistencies of themselves, without 
a word being said. The point which we would impress 
is that it was not a restraining of the flesh, nor a perfecting 
of it, but a much deeper work of grace than this 
—a purity of heart, a heart-adhesion to the Lord. 

We cannot do better today than to follow this same 
course in our endeavors to do good unto others as we 
have opportunity. The brethren need strengthening 
rather than tearing. They need building up in the most 
holy faith and in love. They need encouraging in heart 
adhesion to the Lord. Criticisms of the flesh may come 
in afterward, but very gradually and kindly. 

There were three elements cooperating which made 
Barnabas so suitable a person for service, and which will 
surely make any of us an able minister of the Truth. 
These elements are stated in "Verse 24 v : "He was a 
good man [moral, upright, reverential], full of the Holy 
Spirit [he had not received the grace of God in vain; in 
him it was a living power, the new mind guiding and controlling 
in all of his affairs] and of faith." However 
good a man may be, and however much of the Lord's 
Spirit he may have, a strong faith is essential. "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God." Let us strive to have 
all of these qualifications in our ministry, that we may be 

R5888 : page 122 

true sons of consolation, helpful in the Lord's service 
and to His people wherever we may be. No wonder we 
read that as a result of the labors of Barnabas at Antioch 
much people was added to the Lord! 



SAUL OF TARSUS BROUGHT TO ANTIOCH 

The last we heard of Saul of Tarsus ("Acts 9:30") was 
that after the opening of his eyes of understanding, after 
he had become a disciple of the Lord Jesus, he had 
preached first in Damascus and then in Jerusalem, after 
which, his life being endangered, the brethren had sent 
him down to Caesarea, and then probably by ship to his 
native city. Tarsus. We are not informed regarding the 
nature of his work in his home city, but can readily 
suppose that one of his character and disposition would 
not long remain idle. And if the sphere of outward 
activities was a narrow one, we may be sure that his 
mind was active in the study of the Divine Plan, and 
that his great heart was also active, in comprehending 
Divine grace and in considering ways of service. 

Evidently Barnabas had in mind the talents, the force, 
the logic, of Brother Saul, whom he had met in Jerusalem; 
and he concluded that. Tarsus being not very far 
from Antioch, he would look Saul up, interest him in the 



service of the Church at Antioch, etc. He probably remembered 

that 

extremely broad— too broad, perhaps, for the brethren at 

Jerusalem to appreciate fully when Saul was amongst 

large-hearted Barnabas, had come to see the Divine Plan 

comprehended it. 

were such as would deeply interest Saul, and that the 
brethren there would be greatly profited by his assistance. 

influence was doubtless great. We rejoice in noting the 

heart nobility of 

smaller caliber would have reasoned themselves into a 

wrong course, saying, "Having had larger opportunities 

Apostles at Jerusalem, I am the chief one amongst the 
brethren here. But if I bring Saul into our midst, his 

Scriptures, will cast me quite into the shade." 
Brethren who reason thus are misguided by their own 

own hands; that with such a spirit they could neither 
please Him nor be prospered in His service; and that the 

All of the Lord's people should be noble and unselfish. 
And the closer we approximate this character, the more 

the greater will be our sphere of influence for righteousness, 
for the Truth, for the Lord. 



It is noteworthy that our Lord never gave a name to 
His people, but called them disciples— pupils, learners. 

such as, "Church of the living God," "Church of God," 
"Church of Christ," "the Church." But gradually the 

came to be the general name everywhere. 
It is a pity that any have thought it necessary to adopt 

entire Church of Christ, or to use these names in a sectarian 
manner. Evidently the name Christian should represent 

therefore, who trusts in Him as the Redeemer and who 
accepts all the fundamental doctrines of the Scriptures. 

That all were sinners, needing to be redeemed before 
they could be acceptable to God. (2) That the believer 

Christ. (3) That he has accepted the Leadership and name 



of Christ and henceforth will seek to walk in His steps. 

There was a start toward sectarianism in the early 
Church, some saying, "I am a Christian, but of the order 
of Paul." Others said, "I am a Christian of the order of 
Apollos;" still others, "I am a Christian of the order of 
Peter." St. Paul promptly rebuked this spirit, assuring 
them that relationship in Christ was all that was necessary, 
that neither Peter nor Paul had redeemed them, and 
that neither Apostle could therefore occupy the place of 
a head to the Church. Furthermore, the Apostle calls 
attention to the fact that such a spirit on their part was 
an evidence that much carnality still remained, much of 
a worldly, partisan spirit, contrary to the teachings of the 
Holy Spirit. -1 Corinthians l:10-13V3:l-7\ 

It is to be regretted that ever since the Reformation 
this spirit has prevailed to a large extent, some taking 
the name of Luther, others, Wesley, Calvin, others non-personal, 
sectarian or party names such as Methodist, 
Presbyterian, Baptist, etc. We are not claiming that 
those who do so are wholly carnal, without the Lord's 
Spirit; but with the Apostles we do claim that a disposition 
to such partisanship is contrary to the Spirit of the 
Lord, and to that extent is carnal, fleshly, and should be 
overcome by all who would be recognized of the Lord 
as overcomers. 

What we ought to have is one Church, one Household 
of Faith, accepting the plain fundamentals of Scripture, 
and with limitations as to acceptance of more or 
less conjectural views outside of those fundamentals- 
all fellowshipping each other, and all known as Christians, 
and thus separated from all who deny the Atonement. 
from all who deny the results of the Atonement in the 
resurrection, and from all who deny the propriety of a 
newness of life in the present time. In this view of the 
matter, each individual Christian would have an independence 
as respects his own thought, aside from fundamentals 
which are clearly stated in the Scriptures. 



MISSIONARIES SENT FORTH 

For a considerable time Paul and Barnabas met with 
the Church at Antioch in the worship of the Lord and 
in the study of His Word. The result of these studies 
was that the Church as a whole was developed and 
brought to the point of considering and praying about 
means for the spread of the Gospel. There were a number 
of Prophets— public speakers— and teachers in the 
Church; and evidently they began to think of how they 
might be used to the glory of God and to the blessing of 
others, as they themselves had been blessed by the Truth. 

This is always the case with those who receive the 
Truth into good and honest hearts. Properly enough. 
they desire to feed thereon themselves and to grow strong 
in the Lord. But just so surely as the Truth is received, 
it gives a strength and a desire to use that strength. 



This is as true today as it was then. The sanctification 
which the Truth brings starts with our begetting 
of the Spirit; and the energy for service corresponds 
with the quickening of the Spirit. 

Evidently the Church at Antioch had an oversupply 
of teachers, as compared to its own requirements, and 
began to look about for larger fields of service. They 
were uncertain as to the course they should follow, and 
hence looked to the Lord as the real Head of the Church. 

R5888 : page 123 

They served and they fasted; and we may be sure that 
they prayed also. As a result they came to the conclusion 
to send forth two of their number— Barnabas and 
Paul— as representatives of the whole in mission work. 

We are not informed in what manner the Lord directed 
them to this decision. It is possible that this was 
after the same manner that we today would consider 
a similar case, and would say, "After studying the Scriptures 
and praying, seeking thus to know the mind of the 
Lord, we believe that it would be His will that such ones 
of our number should go for a public service of the 
Truth. We believe that we are guided to this conclusion, 
not by any wrong spirit of pride or ambition, nor with 
any mercenary motive, but by the Holy Spirit. We believe 
that it is the Lord's will that we as a congregation 
should send forth these representatives to carry the 
light to others." 

In some manner the conviction came strongly to the 
Church at Antioch that this was its duty and privilege. 
It is worthy of note that the Church sought out its very 
best representatives for this service, thus letting the spirit 
of self-sacrifice prevail. No doubt the Lord blessed the 
Church correspondingly, and made up to them the loss 
sustained in the giving of these two very talented brethren 
to the mission work. 



ORDINATION AND LAYING ON OF HANDS 

The proper course having been decided upon, the congregation 
fasted, prayed and laid their hands upon Paul 
and Barnabas, and then sent the two on their missionary 
tour with God-speed. The laying on of hands would 
probably be done by the congregation through their representatives, 
the Elders. But this proceeding did not 
signify, as is generally understood today, an "Ordination"; 
for Paul and Barnabas had been recognized for a 
considerable time as amongst the principal prophets and 
teachers in the Church at Antioch. It would not signify 
authority to preach, as Ordination sometimes means today 
amongst Christians of various sects and parties. 

This ceremony simply meant, "We, the congregation 
at Antioch, by this laying on of hands of our 
representative Elders, are sending forth these two men. 



Paul and Barnabas, on a missionary tour; and that they 

go, not only as representatives of the Lord and of themselves, 

but also as representatives of the Church of the 

Lord at Antioch; and that as such we hold ourselves responsible 

for their maintenance. We will supply them 

the needful assistance, and thus will be colaborers— 

sharing in their labors, sympathizing in their difficulties 

and trials, helping them in their necessities, and partaking 

with them also in whatever results shall come to the 

Lord's praise through their efforts." 

Accordingly we find that after this missionary tour 
the two brethren returned to Antioch, and made report. 
It would appear that subsequently the Apostle Paul, at 
least, traveled without any such dependence upon the 
Church at Antioch— without any such praying and laying 
on of hands and without any subsequent reports of 
results of labors— though still in love and sympathy with 
them, so far as we may judge. 



R5889:page 123 



"LO, WE TURN TO THE GENTILES!" 

-MAY 14.- ACTS 13:13-15,42-52\~ 

ST. PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY TOUR-HIS SERMON AT ANTIOCH 
IN PISIDIA-EFFECT OF HIS DISCOURSE TWOFOLD- 
VIOLENT OPPOSITION FROM THOSE BLINDED BY SECTARIAN 
PREJUDICE-MISREPRESENTATION AND SLANDER EVER 
THE ADVERSARY'S METHOD OF FIGHTING THE TRUTH. 

"I have set thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be 
for salvation unto the uttermost part of the earth."— v Verse 47\ 

FROM Antioch Paul and Barnabas went to the 
seaport town of Selucia, where they took 
ship for the island of Cyprus. This island 
was as about as good a place to begin as any, 
and had the advantage of being the home 
country of Barnabas, who was familiar with 
the dialect of the people, their customs, etc. 
With them went a cousin of Barnabas, John 
Mark, writer of the Gospel of Mark and 
son of one of the Marys at Jerusalem. 

Although Paul and Barnabas fully appreciated the 
fact that Gentiles might now have access to the blessings 
of the Gospel, nevertheless in every place they entered 
into the Jewish synagogues. The Jews already believed 
Moses and the Prophets, and therefore expected Messiah. 
Hence they would necessarily be in a much better attitude 
of mind to receive the Gospel Message than would be 
the Gentiles, who knew nothing of such matters and who 



therefore would require more instruction. Indeed, probably 
the larger proportion of converts between the time 
of our Lord's resurrection and the fall of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70, were made amongst the Jews; and up to 
that time comparatively few Gentiles accepted Christ. 

The missionary tour probably consumed considerable 
time, as the three went from village to village, preaching 
Christ, until they reached the city of Paphos, at the far 
end of the island. There they found Sergius Paulus, a 
man of good judgment, the governor of the island. Even 
before the missionaries got there, he had a hearing ear; 
and the Adversary, noting this, was at work upon him 
through Elymas, a Jewish sorcerer or magician, who 
had ingratiated himself with the proconsul and was 
esteemed his friend. We are not to wonder that a man 
of sound judgment, as the proconsul is represented to 
have been, should be so interested in the magician and 
his doings. On the contrary, we should remember that 
similarly there are some men of ability today who are to 
some extent under the influence of the same Adversary 
and his agents— spirit mediums. Besides, the magicians 
in olden times were mixtures of scientist and miracle 
worker, and usually very bright men. 



CONFLICT BETWEEN TRUTH AND ERROR 

When the proconsul heard something respecting Paul 
and Barnabas, he sent for them, desiring to know more. 
Then came a conflict between the powers of light and the 
powers of darkness, between Truth and Error. There is 
no harmony between the two; they are opponents at every 
point. And so in this case, as soon as the magician discovered 
that the proconsul was coming under the influence 
of the Truth, he used his every power to prevent it. This 
furnished occasion for a remarkable manifestation of 
Divine power through the Apostle Paul, who denounced 
the magician by a plain statement of his case and declared 
that he would become so blind that he could not 
see even the sun for a season. The blindness came upon 
Elymas gradually— first, a mistiness, which subsequently 
settled into complete darkness. 

This manifestation of Divine power was convincing to 
the proconsul. It was not that this incident converted 
him; but that having already heard the teachings, and 
being in the process of comparing these with his previous 
views and with the presentation of Elymas, he was 
enabled by this incident to reach the right conclusion and 
to decide his matters on the Lord's side. 

R5889 : page 124 

DEPARTURE OF JOHN MARK 



St. Paul and his company did not tarry at Paphos, 
but departed for Asia Minor. When they came to Perga, 
in Pamphylia, there John Mark discontinued his service 
and returned to Jerusalem. Hardship or discouragement 
or home-sickness— we know not what— evidently quenched 
his zeal as a servant of the Lord for a time, assuredly 
much to his disadvantage. Whatever the cause, the 
Apostle Paul evidently considered it quite insufficient, for 
on another occasion, when Barnabas suggested that Mark 
accompany them similarly, St. Paul declined. OActs 15:36-40'.) 
This he would not have done had Mark's 
desertion been fully justified by necessity. 

There is an element of encouragement in Mark's experience, 
however. Later on, he evidently became a devoted 
soldier of the Cross and was again accepted to the 
Lord's service; and we find that the Apostle Paul made 
acknowledgment of appreciation of his faithfulness. 
PColossians 4:10 v ; v 2 Timothy 4:1 P.) The Lord is very 
merciful to us in our weaknesses and imperfections; and 
as He restored Mark, undoubtedly He is willing also to 
restore all who will similarly learn a lesson from their 
failures, and who earnestly strive for reinstatement and 
for the privilege of service. 



PREACHING AT ANTIOCH IN PISIDIA 

The first stop in Asia Minor was made at Antioch of 
Pisidia. The usual custom was followed— of going first 
to the Jewish synagogue. There the missionaries were 
recognized as strangers and also as men of talent. After 
the regular services of the synagogue had been introduced 
by the reading of the usual lesson from the Law, the two 
were invited to address the assembly— Jews by birth and 
Jewish proselytes from the Gentiles. 

The Apostle Paul was the speaker and made a telling 
address. He recognized the fact that his hearers had 
faith in God's promises regarding the coming Messianic 
Kingdom. He did not need, therefore, to emphasize the 
Kingdom feature in his discourse. Rather, his hearers 
needed to see that there could be no Kingdom and no 
permanent blessing of all the families of the earth, such 
as was implied in the Promise made to Abraham, unless 
in some manner Divine forgiveness of the sins of the 
world could first be obtained. 

The trend of the Apostle's address, therefore, was to 
show that in the past God had established a typical kingdom, 
which had never reached the grand stage essential 
to the fulfilment of the Abrahamic Promise; and that 
the thing necessary and lacking was a REDEMPTION of 
the world and the forgiveness of sins. Then he presented 
to their attention Jesus as the Messiah— not merely a 
crucified Messiah, but also a risen One, who, because of 
His death for the sins of the world, was able to save to 
the uttermost all that should come unto God through Him. 
Having put the matter squarely before them, the Apostle 



offered his hearers forgiveness of sins as the very essence 
of the Gospel of Christ. 

Forgiveness of sin is still the essence of the Gospel, 
although mankind now, as then, are generally loth to 
accept it thus. It disappoints them by condemning them 
and declaring that all are sinners; that "there is none 
righteous, no, not one"; that all need just such a redemption 
as God has provided in the Sacrifice of Christ. It 
disappoints also in that it shows a necessity for repudiation 
of sin in the heart and, so far as possible, in resisting 
it in all the conduct of life. 

Few have an ear to hear this Message. The majority 
are ready to say, "Preach unto us smooth things! Praise 
us for our religious fervor! Point out to us how far 
superior we are, not only to the heathen world, but to 
the masses of those about us. Tell us that we are God's 
people, and that He could not get along without us. Do 
not tell us that we are sinners, under condemnation as 
others are; and that all who would come unto God through 
Jesus Christ must come by the same narrow gate of faith, 
repudiation of sin, and heart-consecration to do God's will." 



TWOFOLD EFFECT OF THIS DISCOURSE 

The Apostle's discourse had a twofold effect. The 
honest-hearted realized the Truth regarding God's perfection 
and their own imperfection, and recognized their 
need of just such a Savior as the Apostle had preached. 
These were speedily drawn to the missionaries, who 
recognized their right attitude of heart and assured them 
that they were already in God's grace, or favor; that now 
the Message of salvation through Jesus was an additional 
unfolding and development of the same favor that had 
already been extended to the Jews; and that they should 
continue in the grace of God— continue to let God guide 
them in His way— continue to be the recipients of His 
mercies and blessings, which now were multiplied to them 
through Christ Jesus and the Atonement work which He 
had accomplished. Others were much less prepared for 
the Apostle's words, and rather inclined to be envious of 
the attention shown the missionaries and their teachings. 

News of the new religion— supplemental to the Jewish 
—spread throughout the little city, in which Judaism had 
evidently gained a good foothold and great respect. The 
next Sabbath the whole city gathered to hear the Message 
of the missionaries— the majority probably coming merely 
out of curiosity, to see the difference between these doctrines 
and those of the regular Jewish teachers. Such 
attention to two strangers and their new doctrines, which 
threatened an overthrow of Judaism, naturally awakened 
a spirit of jealousy in those interested in forms and ceremonies, 
honor amongst men, and denominational pride. 

As a result, they contradicted St. Paul's statements with 
blasphemy. This does not mean that they blasphemed 
God's name, but that they slandered, or blasphemed, the 



Apostle and Barnabas, speaking evil of them. We may 

surmise that they misrepresented the motives and the 

characters of the missionaries, etc. This is the usual 

course of those who fight against the Truth. It has ever 

been thus. The Truth cannot be gainsaid; it is irresistible. 

But it can be misrepresented; it can be denied. The presentations 

of the Truth can be distorted, and its messengers 

slandered, vilified. The Adversary seems to adopt 

this method on every occasion. It is the method now in 

vogue. Those who oppose Present Truth dare not meet 

it openly in public discussion; but they distort and misrepresent 

it, and speak evil of its advocates. 



TWO LESSONS FOR OUR DAY 

The missionaries were not discouraged by the opposition. 
Rather, they were the more courageous, and 
brought to the point where they explained to their vilifiers 
the fact that they were rejecting God's favor, God's 
Plan, to their own loss. The two pointed out that 
God had in His mercy long favored Israel; and that in 
sending the Message of Messiah to them first He was 
still favoring them; but that according to His instructions 
it was the duty of His representatives to proceed and to 
tell the Gospel to whoever had ears to hear— to the Jews 
first, but also to the Gentiles. They showed that the 
Lamp of Truth which God had now lighted was not for 
the Jews exclusively, as had been His previous favors; 
but, as the Prophet had already declared, it was to be "a 
light to lighten the Gentiles" also— salvation unto the ends 
of the earth.- v Luke 2:32 v ; 'Isaiah 42:6'; v 52:10\ 

R5889 : page 125 

This feature of the Gospel especially aroused the opposition 
of such Jews as were in the wrong condition of 
heart, but was proportionately attractive to the few who 
were in the right attitude. So it is today. The Message 
now due to Christendom is— more Light! It shows that 
the Lamp of God's Word of promise, which at the beginning 
of this Age was permitted to bless both Jews and 
Gentiles in proportion as the eyes of their understanding 
were opened to see it, is shortly now to give place to a 
greater Light; that whereas the Word of God has been 
a Lamp to the feet and a Lantern to the footsteps of 
the faithful for over eighteen centuries, the Sun of Righteousness 
is soon to rise and flood the whole world with 
the light of the knowledge of the goodness of God. 

Those of God's people in the right attitude of heart 
will be gladdened by this unfolding of the Truth. No feelings 
of jealousy will be theirs. But the majority, full of 
sectarian plans and selfish sentiments, and blinded largely 
by false theology and by misrepresentations of God's 
Word, are violently opposed to any thought of Divine 
mercy being extended to every creature— not only to those 



who have not yet gone to the prison-house of death, but 
also to the twenty billions who have already gone down 
into death in ignorance of the only name given under 
Heaven or among men whereby we must be saved. But 
the faithful, the honest-hearted, will ultimately rejoice 
in the lengths, the breadths, the heights and the depths 
of God's Plan, to be consummated during the Millennium 
by the glorified Christ, Head and Body. 



"ORDAINED TO ETERNAL LIFE" 

Many of the Gentiles were glad as they heard that 
God's favor was broader than they had previously supposed. 
Some, we may infer, were merely pleased that 
something had been shown up that was broader than the 
Jewish teachings. But some others, we are assured, believed 
in the true sense of the word— accepting Christ 
as their Redeemer and their Lawgiver. And so today 
we see two classes amongst those who favor Present 
Truth. Some hail it with joy, and gratefully serve the 
Lord more fervently than ever. Some are merely glad 
to find that there is no Scriptural ground for the popular 
theory of eternal torment for the vast majority, but are 
not especially drawn by Divine love and mercy. 

The more the Truth spread, the more angry became its 
opponents, the Jewish leaders; and what they could not 
oppose with argument or with logic they did oppose successfully 
with prejudice and superstition, arousing these 
baser sentiments by misrepresentation. Thus they secured 
the cooperation of some of the most honorable and notable 
people of the city to such an extent that the missionaries 
were obliged to depart. 

The record is that "as many as were ordained to 
eternal life believed." The word "ordained" here may 
properly be translated disposed. Thus we get the thought 
that as many of those as heard the Gospel and its offer 
of everlasting life, and who were disposed to accept the 
terms, became believers— obedient to the faith. So it 
still is. Wherever the Truth goes there are some who 
like it, and others who dislike it; some who appreciate the 
doctrines and rewards which it represents, and some who 
prefer the pleasures of sin or the affairs and rewards of 
the world. This is the time for each who has heard the 
Message to make his choice. Soon the number of the 
Elect will be complete; and then their work will begin— 
the blessing of mankind— the blessing of the non-elect. 



R5886:page 125 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENT OF BRETHREN 



"There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. 
Who art thou that judgest another?"— "James 4:12 s . 

IN THIS Epistle, St. James has been discussing 

the fact that partiality had been shown 

in the Church— that some, without proper 

reason, were esteemed unworthy of as 

high honor as others. This is particularly 

brought out in the Second Chapter. Some 

who were rich and influential were given 

the choicest seats in their assemblies and 

treated with great deference and respect. 

Others, who were poor and humble, were 

given obscure places and treated with scant courtesy, as 

though they were inferiors. Judgment was passed upon 

the brethren contrary to the instructions of the Lord. 

The Apostle points out the sin of judging and of having 

respect of persons aside from the standpoint of character. 

He declares that as there is but one Lawgiver, Jehovah, 

so there is but one great standard. He who gave that 

standard, that Law, is to be the Executor of His own Law, 

although He may appoint various representatives. His 

special Representatives are to be Christ and the Church 

associated with Him in glory as judges. But they will 

judge by that standard given by the great Lawgiver; and 

there will be no other law in competition with it. 

Since this is the case, and since there is an arrangement 
by which we are accepted as God's children, who is 
he who undertakes to say what degree of Divine favor or 
disfavor each of this class may have? Who is to say 
which will be destroyed in the Second Death and which 
saved to life? God has a personal dealing with each one 
of those who are accepted into His family. Hence the 
very fact that one has been thus accepted is a proof that 
God has seen something in that person pleasing in His 
sight. If He who is the Lawgiver has seen something 
sufficiently favorable for Him to choose such a one and 
anoint him with His Holy Spirit, what right has any one 
else to condemn him whom God has seen fit to approve? 



THE CHURCH INCAPABLE OF JUDGING NOW 

We might see in an individual certain traits which 
would seem more or less unjust, unrighteous. But we are 
not to judge. We cannot see into the heart. We might 
suppose a certain one to be an overcomer, and he might 
not be. Or we might suppose him not to be an overcomer, 
and he might be one. Therefore we are to "judge nothing 
before the time." We should avoid judging the brethren. 

This does not mean that we would not be able to discern 
acts of positive disloyalty to God. But instead of 
setting up standards of our own, we should recognize for 
ourselves and everybody else the one standard which the 
Lord has given; namely, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 



thy mind, and with all thy strength; and thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." ('Luke 10:27'.) This is the very 
essence of the great Law of God. We should judge ourselves 
by this Law, to see to what extent we are loving 
God thus, and are loving our neighbor as ourselves. This 
is our primary work of judging. 

The Apostle Paul, particularly, has pointed out that if 
any one in the Church is living in violation of the Law of 
God, then the matter should be taken up by the Church. 
This does not apply to any case except that of an outward 
departure from the Lord's Law. It would not apply if the 
individual happens to say "Tweedledee," when we think 

R5887 : page 126 

he should say "Tweedledum," or if he should in some way 
violate the ideas of some one else. It should be a positive 
violation of the principles of righteousness laid down in 
the Word of God. If any one is known to have done us 
a real injury, we are to go to him alone. If he refuses to 
listen, then we may take two or three others of the Church. 
If he still refuses to acknowledge his wrong, the matter 
may be brought to the attention of the Church in a 
proper manner. During all this time, however, the 
brother is not to be cut off from recognition. It is only 
if he still persists in doing the things contrary to the 
Divine arrangement, or refuses to make reparation for a 
serious wrong, that he should be cut off from fellowship. 

It is not our place to judge others, but to judge ourselves, 
to bring ourselves up to the highest possible standard. 
Let others see our good works, that thus they may 
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. It is the Lord 
who will judge His people. We are to assume, then, that 
if any one in the Lord's family should violate his covenant, 
the Lord will attend to his case. We are not to pass 
judgment upon his motives; we can only see when his 
outward conduct is wrong. And we may err even here. 
But we may not judge the heart. God alone is competent 
to do this. God gave the Law, and He is the One to 
decide whether the person is seeking to keep that Law. 



STANDARD OF JUDGMENT FOR NEW CREATURES 

The Apostle Paul says to the Church, "Ye are not 
under the Law, but under grace." ('Romans 6:14'.) But 
here in our text St. James seems to say that we are under 
Law and under the Lawgiver. How shall we harmonize 
these two texts of Scripture? We reply. When St. Paul 
said, "Ye are not under the Law," he meant the Law 
Covenant. The Law Covenant which God made with 
Israel of old was a different thing from the Law of God 
itself. It was an agreement between the Lord and Israel 
as to what they would do and what God would do. They 
were under this Law Covenant. Gentiles never were under 
this Law. They were without God. 



The Apostle Paul intimates ("Romans 8:4") that "the 
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit." Although Natural 
Israel were not able to keep the Law of God under their 
Covenant, we, the Gospel Church, are able to keep it under 
our Covenant. Under God's arrangement for the Gospel 
Age the New Creature alone is recognized; the flesh is 
reckoned dead. The New Creature, having been accepted 
into God's family, is still in possession of his imperfect 
fleshly body and must operate through it. He must do his 
best to control this body and use it to the glory of God. 
In his heart, his mind, his endeavor, he can, as a New 
Creature, keep God's Law perfectly. 

It is not the imperfect actions of the mortal body that 
will determine anything, but the heart intentions and endeavors 
of the New Creature. The body must be kept 
under and brought into subjection, as the Apostle Paul 
tells us. It is the New Creature that will live or die, so 
far as the Church is concerned, under the judgment of the 
Divine Law, the Divine Lawgiver. 

In harmony with the thought of our text, the Apostle 
Paul declares that neither the world nor the brethren were 
capable of judging him— that only the Lord, who can read 
the heart and know all the conditions, testings and weaknesses 
to be striven against, can properly judge. He even 
declares, "Yea, I judge not mine own self." ("1 Corinthians 4:3".) 
We should neither condemn others who claim to be 
walking conscientiously as children of the Lord, nor condemn 
ourselves, if we know we are truly striving to thus 
walk. We should simply press along day by day, doing 
the best we can by the Lord's assisting grace to cultivate 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit and serve our Master, leaving 
all the results with Him. 



R5888:page 126 



INTERESTING LETTERS 



SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I am not giving any name or address, as I think it wiser 
not to, and please do not notice this note if you do not think 
it advisable, otherwise if you can spare a short paragraph 
in THE TOWER I should appreciate it, and others also. 

A Sister recently arrived from tells us that the Class 

there are teaching that the Church must not expect to be 
glorified until 1925, and that this is your thought; consequently 
it is producing a spirit of apathy, and many are 
taking a greater interest in business and worldly things. 
Whether or not it is so, to me it seems that I have to be 



on my guard and "watch and wait," with loins girded and 
Lamp burning, that I may be ready. 

I have realized and accepted this glorious Message of 
"Present Truth" for five years; and it grows more precious 
all the time. I grew up in the Church of England, and living 
at Oxford with the College Set, was extremely High 
Church, so you know what I have had to unlearn. 

I praise God for raising you up, dear Brother, as "that 
Servant." May He bless you still more, that you may give 
us the "meat in due season." I also thank the dear Lord 
that He brought me to this country before this awful war; 
and made me to realize "where are the dead," as all my 
people are being shot and I should have been in despair. 

There is another little matter I would like to mention. 
At the Class I attend the presiding Elder never seems prepared. 
He does not know where the MANNA Text for the 
day is, and although it is a Prayer and Testimony Meeting, 
he occupies most of the time with his views on the present 
state of affairs and the war crisis. No one else can have 
much time. 

I hope you will not think I am too critical, but in the 
little old Church I had been accustomed to reverence, and 
for an Elder to be gaping, sleeping or picking his teeth and 
nails— well it jars awfully! He also brings with him a child 
of three years that disturbs the Class very much. No one 
likes to say anything to him, as he says that he has been 
in the Truth for fifteen years. But we do not feel spiritually 
helped, especially as he is a business man. Before the meeting 
he talks business; and the moment it is over, shop. 

O dear Brother, I don't want to think evil, or speak 
evil, but this does worry us! Many of us have prayed about 
it. The children do bother us; but I dare not speak of that, 
as I am told that I have too strict English ideas. I would 
not wound his feelings in any way, so if I am in the wrong 
please ignore what I have written. The dear Lord knows 
that I am trying to follow in His footsteps, and to keep my 
pride under and make myself of no reputation, as the dear 
Master did. 

Apologizing for encroaching on your valuable time, I 
am, dear Pastor, YOUR SISTER BY HIS GRACE. 



EDITOR'S REPLY 

The Apostle declares that God gives His people the 
spirit of a sound mind— His Spirit, His Mind. But we receive 
this in proportion to our earnestness and heed to the 
Lord's Word. The longer we have been in the School of 
Christ, if apt pupils, the better we should know Him and 
the better be able to exemplify His character and teachings. 

As the letter is anonymous, we have not the slightest 
idea who the Elder may be. We will assume that he 
means well. We might also, however, assume that he has 
not been sufficiently wide-awake to well exemplify the spirit 
of a sound mind in the matter of the service of the Lord. 
Otherwise, would he not be more careful of his actions and 



words, in order that he might glorify the Lord and be 
assistful to His people? 

Lack of reverence is manifest everywhere, but it seems 
especially out of place in assemblages of the Lord's consecrated 
people. As we have said before, we may say again, 
that no matter how limited our talents we can by our actions 

R5888 : page 127 

and manner speak volumes in the praise of Him who called 
us from darkness into marvelous light. 

We cannot help it that many of the dear friends continue 
to tell what THE WATCH TOWER believes, and to misrepresent 
its teachings. Our kindest thought must be that they 
are not giving much heed to its teachings. Otherwise they 
would know from its columns that we are not looking forward 
to 1925, nor to any other date. As expressly stated 
in THE WATCH TOWER, we are simply going on, our last 
date or appointment having been passed more than a year ago. 

We believe that the dates have proven to be quite right. 
We believe that Gentile Times have ended, and that God 
is now allowing the Gentile Governments to destroy themselves, 
in order to prepare the way for Messiah's Kingdom. 
The Lord did not say that the Church would all be glorified 
by 1914. We merely inferred it and, evidently, erred. We 
see, however, that the different times and seasons which the 
Lord's providence sent to His people in hope of resurrection 
"change" correspond closely with the different places to 
which Elijah, the Prophet, was sent before his translation. 
The last place to which he was sent was Jordan, which, we 
believe, corresponds to October, 1914. After that, Elijah 
and Elisha went on without having any definite point in view. 

Our thought is that something very important to us all 
is implied in Elijah's use of his mantle in smiting the 
waters of Jordan and dividing them. After so doing, Elijah 
and Elisha continued to go on until the chariot of fire parted 
them. It was after that that Elijah went up to Heaven in 
the whirlwind. We may discuss these matters more at 
length again, but now suggest that we have no different 
time in mind from the Scriptures on the subject, and do 
not expect to have any. However, the division of the waters 
might require either years or months— who could say? 



FROM BRETHREN OF FRANCE 

BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I do not know whether anybody at the Tabernacle can 
read French or not; but I cannot resist the impulse to assure 
you of my entire devotion to the cause of Truth. 

You have helped me to so much joy, and been the means 
of my accepting salvation. Through your labor I have been 
brought to an appreciation of the love of our Heavenly 
Father, to such an extent that I find my sentiments aptly expressed 



by St. Paul to his brother Philemon. ("Philemon 7\) 

Being delighted at recognizing this fact, I find delight also in 

expressing it to you. 

In all my painful moments, when the cross is heavy to bear, 
I think of you and say to myself, dear Brother Russell, too, 
has suffered, and is suffering, and I must not wonder if my 
share is to suffer also. Then my soul goes up to the Father 
of Mercies in gratitude for His favors (the privilege of suffering 
with Christ), and I earnestly beg of Him ever to 
bless and guide you. 

During the past year I have appreciated much, very much, 
your excellent advice, and it has profited me greatly. 

In my present trials, after having been compelled to leave 
my wife and three children in the invaded territory of our 
dear France, the daily partaking of the Vow and of the 
Morning Resolve has helped me much. These helps alone 
have developed in me much of the love of the Father— and 
all this during the past year. Because of it I bless the Father 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Therefore, let me by this message assure you that my 
petitions ascend to the Father in your behalf, that He may 
bless you abundantly, to the end that His blessing upon you 
may redound through your ministry upon every one of us. 

Yours sincerely in Him, E. LARVENT. 

P. S.— Have found here a refuge since December, 1914, 
when I had to leave my home at Denain (Nord). Am here 
with several brothers and sisters who also are refugees from 
Lens, Lieven and Denain. We have each of us signed the 
accompanying brotherly message: 

FRENCH RESOLUTIONS. 

The undersigned brethren and sisters, members of the 
I.B.S.A. (French Ecclesia of Bruay-Auchel), in meeting 
assembled this 1st day of January, 1916, send their most 
brotherly greetings to the well-beloved of the Household of 
Faith, fighting the same spiritual fight under the Captain of 
our Salvation, Jesus Christ, at the Brooklyn Bethel and 
everywhere. 

After having studied "Psalm 1 16" (especially dwelling on 
"Verse 15", "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His saints," also the motto for this year, "Strong in 
Faith"), we express the sincerest wish that each of you, 
when tried, may be found faithful unto death and then present 
at the approaching Rendezvous in eternal joy! SIGNED BY 25. 



LOVE IN THOUGHT, WORD AND DEED 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
Greetings and much love to you, dear Brother, as we 

come to the end of this wonderful year. What a glorious 
year it has been for the development of the saints, particularly 

along the lines of love and patient endurance! I am incapable 



of expressing my love and appreciation of you and your service 
to me personally. I am constantly praising my Heavenly 
Father for allowing me to come in contact with your precious 
Volumes, which God used to bring me out of the kingdom 
of darkness and into the light of the glorious Gospel. 

I thank you, dear Brother, for the suggestion that we each 
pray that "God would bless us in the cultivation of love in 
thought, word and deed." I immediately acted upon the suggestion, 
and oh, joy, what grand results! I never knew that 
there was so much in "loving in thought." Now, dear 
Brother, you said we might report to you as to our success, 
and that is why I am intruding upon your precious time. 
The results with me have been away beyond my highest 
expectation. 

We thought there might be some in the class who had not 
yet taken the "Vow" nor sent in their names. So we opened 
up a sheet and to our surprise, there were fifty-two who 
wished their names sent in. Please find the same enclosed. 
Loving Greetings from Sister Heard and 

Your Brother by Divine favor, 

C. E. HEARD.-Vancouver, B.C. 



FROM THE VANCOUVER CLASS 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

We the undersigned, members of the Vancouver Ecclesia, 
take this opportunity of expressing our love and gratitude to 
you for the inestimable service you have rendered to us, in 
that through your ministrations we have been led into the 
light of Present Truth. And now recognizing that we are in 
"the evil day" and the danger of slipping is so great, we 
desire to "make straight paths for our feet," and believing 

R5889 : page 127 

that the special "Vow" is a great means to that end, we wish 
to add our names to the many who have already taken it, and 
thereby make it our own. 

Praying our Heavenly Father's rich blessing upon you. 
dear Brother, and asking a continued interest in your prayers. 
We are: [Fifty-two signatures follow.] 



THE DIAGLOTT 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I have in my possession a copy of the EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, 
and esteem it very highly. I have compared it with the works 
of the great English commentator Clarke, and all of his 
citations to the Greek are identical with the DIAGLOTT; I 
have been comparing the Septuagint with it, and where the 
DIAGLOTT makes reference to the Old Testament, I find the 



text the same. 

The good I have received from its study, plus the increased 
value of it by comparison, has greatly endeared the 
work to me. 

I am engaged in the work of the ministry and in circulating 
sacred literature, including Bibles and Testaments. I 
would be glad to handle a few copies of the DIAGLOTT. if 
you can give me a fair commission on them. 

I have an order now for one copy. If you will 
quote me agents' terms, I shall be glad to handle some for 
you. Please include your pamphlet on ARMAGEDDON. 

Respectfully yours, REV. 



SEES GETHSEMANE EXPERIENCES AHEAD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Just a line, dear Brother, to wish that our dear Lord and 
Master continue to bless you, as He has so richly done in the 
past. I remember you every morning at the Throne of Grace. 

We in this country seem to be on the verge of Gethsemane 
experiences, as the conscription bill has passed. 

One of my sons has now reached the age of 19. He has so 
far given a good witness for the Lord by refusing to enlist 
in the army, and if it should come that it will mean being shot 
for still refusing, I trust he will receive the Heavenly Grace to 
stand firm to the principles of truth and righteousness. 

Brother, we ask your prayers for us during this evil hour. 

Yours in the one hope, W. O. WARDEN.-Scotland. 



page 128 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 129 
