Announcements
● Beginning the week of June 5, 1983, and continuing through the week of December 25, 1983, the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth is to be studied at Congregation Book Studies.
● If the brother who receives shipments of distributors’ magazines will be away temporarily for any reason, he should notify the local Post Office and make arrangements for shipments to be properly handled in his absence. This will prevent delays in delivery or having shipments returned to the Society marked “Unclaimed.”
● No break was scheduled for Congregation Book Studies during the convention week. However, the material scheduled for that week may be split so that half of it is studied the week prior to the convention and the other half the week following, in addition to the material scheduled for those particular weeks. If necessary, the reading of the paragraphs may be omitted during these two studies in order to cover the material.
● Literature offer for May: Watchtower subscription for one year, $3.50. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00 each. June and July: The book “Let Your Kingdom Come” may be offered for 75c. Otherwise, any 192-page book may be placed. When publishers meet individuals with limited education, foreign-speaking persons or parents with young children, the brochure Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! may be offered for 25c. August: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, for $2.50. If this is not available, My Book of Bible Stories may be used.
● Selective service regulations require that all men register for the draft when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of this matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian’s obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have in mind when young brothers are nearing the age of 18 and give them appropriate reminders. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● New Publications Available:
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 14, Ec-El)—Italian
Happiness—How to Find It—Indonesian, Swahili
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Wallisian
Are We Nearing Armageddon? (Kingdom News No. 31)—Portuguese
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Good News According to Luke (set of three)—Spanish
To the Romans (single cassette)—German
To the Hebrews, The Letter of James (single cassette)—Spanish
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)—Spanish
A Revelation to John (set of two)—Spanish
Beware of Losing Faith by Drawing Away From Jehovah—Drama (single cassette)—Indonesian

