Auxiliary Pioneering—A Stepping-Stone
1 A stepping-stone can be very helpful for one to reach a desired place. Stepping-stones may help you to cross a stream or lead you to a beautiful spot in a garden or a park. Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary defines “stepping-stone” as “a means of progress or advancement.” Could serving as an auxiliary pioneer be a stepping-stone in your theocratic advancement?
2 As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, undoubtedly you are interested in advancing spiritually, making your progress manifest. (1 Tim. 4:15) In this regard, do you feel the need to strengthen your faith and draw closer to Jehovah? Would you like to handle the Bible with greater ease and be more confident in making door-to-door presentations? Would you like to conduct more Bible studies? Are you reaching out to become a ministerial servant or an elder? Or have you ever seriously thought about serving as a regular pioneer, a missionary or a member of the Bethel family? Auxiliary pioneering can be a stepping-stone to help you make your progress manifest. How?
HOW CAN IT HELP YOU?
3 Enjoy greater spirituality. Auxiliary pioneering will increase the time you spend talking about God. What effect can this have on you? One auxiliary pioneer said: “I am filled with joy, rejoicing, happiness, contentment, a sense of satisfaction, encouragement.” Another young auxiliary pioneer said: “I have just got baptized. I encourage all the young ones to draw closer to Jehovah.” She was able to start many studies. There is no question about it, the more you talk about Jehovah and the more you read from his Word, the more spiritually minded you become. Auxiliary pioneer service will help you advance in spirituality.—Ps. 119:97-100.
4 Conduct more Bible studies. Part of our service to Jehovah includes making disciples. This is primarily done by means of Bible studies. Therefore all should be interested in conducting Bible studies. Auxiliary pioneer service can help you. A congregation recently reported that out of 61 publishers, 38 served as auxiliary pioneers in one month. The result? A total of 66 new studies were started! One auxiliary pioneer said: “I feel very happy because I am doing something Jehovah is pleased with. I started five new studies.” Another stated: “For the first time I have two studies. I give thanks to Jehovah who has helped me to cultivate the love needed to help people.” Regularly going in service will undoubtedly give you the opportunity to find honest-hearted ones who would like to study the Bible.
5 Reach out to serve as a ministerial servant or an elder. Those who serve as elders and ministerial servants should take the lead in field service and should know how to deal with people. Meeting all kinds of individuals in field service will help you develop qualities such as patience, good judgment, reasonableness and especially the art of teaching. Learning to use the Bible effectively will be especially helpful to those serving in a position of oversight. Auxiliary pioneer service will assist brothers advancing toward this privilege of service.
6 Reach out for other fields of full-time service. The experience you gain as an auxiliary pioneer can be very valuable training leading into regular pioneering or Bethel service. Many who are now in missionary service or special pioneer work started as auxiliary pioneers. Auxiliary pioneer service can help you see how to schedule your time most efficiently. You too can learn to arrange your personal affairs to qualify for full-time service privileges. Have you thought about reaching out for a career in full-time service? Auxiliary pioneer service can be the stepping-stone.
7 Draw close to Jehovah with strong faith. In this day and age we cannot consider lightly the need to be strong in the faith and close to Jehovah. Auxiliary pioneering will help keep you from slipping off into the “torrent” of this wicked world by filling your time with wholesome and righteous works. Take advantage of this provision because ‘the drawing near to God is good for you. In the Sovereign Lord Jehovah you have placed your refuge, to declare all his works.’—Ps. 73:28.
8 May your desire to progress in Jehovah’s service be accomplished. Prayerfully consider auxiliary pioneer service as a stepping-stone for further advancement in doing his will.—1 Cor. 15:58.

