Bearing Witness to the Truth
1 Jehovah is “the God of truth.” (Ps. 31:5) His Word and his law are truth. The psalmist prayed: “Make me walk in your truth and teach me, for you are my God of salvation.” (Ps. 25:5) What a change it would make in this world if everyone spoke the truth and walked in it! There would be no reason for mistrust of one’s mate or suspicion that business matters were being misrepresented. Courts would no longer have the tremendous task of trying to determine who is speaking the truth.
2 Especially vital to all of us is knowing the truth found in God’s Word, as it holds out the promise of everlasting life. (1 John 5:13) Yet the Roman ruler Pilate seemed so perplexed after listening to Jesus’ testimony concerning His Kingdom and the truth that he asked, “What is truth?” (John 18:36-38) Despite the fact that he found no fault with Jesus, he was willing to bow to the pressures of religious opposers of the truth. We certainly do not want to follow his course.
BRINGING TRUTH TO OTHERS
3 Many persons today, like Pilate, do not recognize the testimony of truth when it is presented to them. Others oppose it. But Jesus said that some persons, sheeplike ones, would hear his voice as his message is carried to them by persons of faith. To bring this spiritual freedom and truth to such persons, we need to handle the Word of truth aright.—2 Tim. 2:15.
4 To do this, do you take time to prepare for service? Do you work with others in the field to improve your ability and effectiveness? What can you do to make your presentation more interesting? One thing is to review the Topic for Conversation beforehand or when meeting for service. Then you will know just what to say when you go out. You should have an enthusiastic introduction. Will the presentation appeal to others? Help your family with such preparations also.
OBTAINING SUBSCRIPTIONS
5 Since The Watchtower is a primary channel for dispensing the truth to others, we need to be well acquainted with each magazine we present. This means reading it through first and then looking for points we would like to use in the field. In each issue we can find points that tie in with our Topic for Conversation. If the scriptures we use are mentioned in an article, we have a natural and effective bridge for our presentation.
6 We must stimulate the householder’s interest in taking a subscription. Telling why we find the magazine interesting and of value may help the person to decide that he would also benefit from receiving this fine spiritual material. Is the person religiously inclined? Does he believe the Bible or perhaps attend church? Then he should find the material in The Watchtower enlightening, faith-strengthening and revealing. On the other hand, many people believe in God but are not associated with any religious group. They may have been disappointed by what they saw in organized religion. The Watchtower will appeal also to them.
7 It shows that false religion is a divisive force but that following the teachings of the Bible unites people of all races. Additionally, it holds out the hope of a united world by means of God’s heavenly Kingdom. It does not present a false hope of converting the world. Neither does it advocate a “kingdom” of faith found only in the heart of believers and without impact on others.
8 Yes, The Watchtower covers a wide range of Scriptural topics. It has helped many of its readers to make over their personalities. It is our hope that by offering the yearly subscription of 24 issues for $3.50 ($2.00 for monthly issues), we may help many more to know and accept the truth of God’s Word. As we appeal to Jehovah to send out the light and truth to others, let us take every opportunity to bear witness to the truth by offering this fine source of truth and encouragement to them.—Ps. 43:3.

