Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING MAY 1
Song 109
 5 min: Welcome and local announcements. Outline field service arrangements for the week. (1 Tim. 2:7) Mention importance of turning in field reports promptly.
20 min: Review of “Bearing Witness to the Truth.” A talk on opening three paragraphs can serve as an introduction to the part, with the balance being covered by questions and answers. In conclusion, report number of subscriptions obtained during April and, as time permits, briefly interview some who obtained subscriptions.
20 min: Our United Efforts in Accomplishing Our Ministry. Handled by elder as outlined in Society’s letter of February 1, 1983.
Song 16 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 8
Song 81
 7 min: Local announcements, including congregation field report for April, national report for February and accounts report.
20 min: Question-and-answer coverage of “Presenting the Good News—By Developing Magazine Routes.” Include brief interviews with any in the congregation who have magazine routes. For paragraph 7, have two publishers who do well in the magazine work discuss briefly the article in each current magazine that they plan to highlight. Then demonstrate presentation in paragraph as a return visit on a person who took the magazines. Encourage support for second Saturday magazine activity.
18 min: Handling the Word of Truth Aright. After book study elder discusses with publishers need for personal research and study in order to be able to handle ‘the Word of truth aright.’ (2 Tim. 2:15) He has heard that the brothers at the Society’s office are getting an increasing number of phone calls and letters asking Bible questions, when oftentimes a little research in the indexes would provide the answers to these questions. Imagine the problem if each of the approximately 600,000 publishers in the United States would write in, asking just one question a year! Good to do personal research or ask help of husband, study conductor or another elder, if necessary. Sister mentions she has trouble finding answers to questions. Group mentions Aid book as good source or Watch Tower Publications Index if specific scripture is involved. Another asks about smoking; not mentioned in Aid book or referred to in Scripture, as it was not a practice in Bible days. Brother explains principles to be found in Index under that topic. Mentions 1976-1980 Index reference, under subhead “addiction,” to January 8, 1978, Awake!, pages 27-8; briefly discusses key scriptures. Group agrees it is satisfying to do own research and do want to save brothers at the Society unnecessary questions if they can find the answer themselves. Encourage use of congregation library if publications not available at home. Conclude with audience review of Question Box.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 15
Song 116
 5 min: Local and Our Kingdom Ministry Announcements.
15 min: Consideration of “Our Sacrifices to Jehovah.” May wish to cover first three paragraphs as introductory talk and then handle remainder with audience discussion.
25 min: Discussion of “1983 ‘Kingdom Unity’ District Convention” insert from beginning to section on “Fine Conduct” on page 4, column 2. Read key paragraphs if time permits. Stress importance of making arrangements now to attend so as to enjoy spiritual benefits. Encourage all in congregation to set good example by following recommendations on conduct and listening intently.
Song 5 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 22
Song 85
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage magazine distribution fourth Saturday in month. Highlight one article in each of current magazines that would make good talking point for magazine distribution. Encourage all, including interested persons and Bible students, to attend Congregation Book Study regularly and enjoy study of Live Forever book. Especially encourage families to help children prepare to share in book study.—Deut. 6:6, 7.
25 min: Audience discussion of balance of convention insert from “Fine Conduct” to conclusion, including “District Convention Reminders.” If any in congregation foresee problems in getting to entire convention, encourage them to talk with others to see if arrangements might be made so that no one will miss any of this fine spiritual provision from Jehovah.
12 min: “Auxiliary Pioneering—A Stepping-Stone.” Questions and answers. When considering paragraph 2, ask audience to comment on how auxiliary pioneering has personally benefited them in their field ministry.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.

