Our Sacrifices to Jehovah
1 What do we have to offer our Grand Creator? In the days of Israel various sacrifices, or offerings, were presented to Jehovah. There was the communion offering denoting peace with Jehovah. The thanksgiving offering expressed appreciation for God’s provisions and loving-kindnesses. Sin offerings were presented for forgiveness of many kinds of sin, while guilt offerings were for special sins by which a person had contracted guilt. The offerings could include a number of things, depending on the reason for the sacrifice and one’s personal circumstances. It could be a valuable bull, sheep or goat, or perhaps a turtledove or pigeon. Grain offerings of fine flour or cakes might be offered or perhaps a drink offering. All served to emphasize the need for a favorable relationship with Jehovah.
2 We have this same need today, but since we are no longer under the Law covenant given to the Jews, our sacrifices are of necessity different. As Christians, we are to offer “a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to [God’s] name.” (Heb. 13:15) We are encouraged “to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.” (1 Pet. 2:5) What about our sacrifices of praise? Are they acceptable to Jehovah?
3 There are certain things acceptable to Jehovah that all of us can offer. As in the days of Israel, we may have certain material things that can be used to advance the Kingdom interests. (Mark 12:41-44) But whether we have little or much in a material way, we do have time and a certain amount of energy. Also, of importance for all of us is our knowledge and appreciation of the truth. Does our heart motivate us to share this good news with our neighbors? Whether we started in Kingdom service many years ago or just recently, our efforts can be well pleasing to Jehovah. (Matt. 20:1-16) He knows what we can do and is pleased to see us share the good news with others according to our circumstances.—John 15:5.
ENLARGING OUR SERVICE
4 The way to move ahead in the service is to take advantage of the opportunities you have. Are you regularly conducting a study with your family? This will help your children get firmly set on the way to life. But if your service is primarily limited to the family study, what about others who may be lovers of righteousness? Can you help them also by having a larger share in the public ministry? (Rom. 10:14, 15) You will find much joy as you reach out to bring the good news to others in your area. And having started, look for ways to enlarge your service. We all know that the more we do, the greater the results will be. Are you satisfied that your present level of activity represents whole-souled service? When you make arrangements for field service, why plan on one hour of service if your circumstances permit you to do more?—Gal. 6:9, 10.
5 In some areas the brothers report that they just get a good start in the service, only to run out of territory. Then what can be done? In city territory, there is usually opportunity to do street work, approaching others with the message. And usually if you plan for it, you will have some return visits or not-at-homes that could be called on. So let us try to extend our service as much as we can. How often have we heard of publishers finding someone really interested when they worked a little longer than they originally planned? One sister missed meeting the group for service altogether, but she did not give up. She started approaching people on the streets, and when she finished a few hours later she found she had done very well, having witnessed to many persons and placed more literature than usual.
WORKING WITH OTHERS
6 Our sacrifices of praise involve not just ourselves but others we can help. Perhaps some of these are persons already coming to the Kingdom Hall. In many congregations there are persons who appreciate the truth and attend meetings quite regularly, yet who have not shared in the field ministry. If you know that they qualify to share in field service, why not encourage them to come along with you? Help them share the desire of the apostle Paul “to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing him as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God.” (Col. 1:10) This way they can share with you and your family in offering a sacrifice of praise to Jehovah.—Rom. 12:1.

