Grateful to Be One of Jehovah’s Witnesses
RECENTLY the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society received the following letter. It speaks for itself.
“Dear Brothers,
“I just wanted to write to tell you how happy I am to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses. I am so grateful to my parents for teaching me about the truth. I am fifteen years old and I attend high school. Sometimes it doesn’t seem easy to maintain integrity at my age, because it is natural to want to be accepted by others. But I am so satisfied when I see the contrast between this system of things and Jehovah’s witnesses. And it makes me feel glad that I have stayed away from the bad influences of this system of things.
“Sometimes during a study hall at school I look at the other students. They, for the most part, seem to have a far-off look on their faces. You can see in them that they are desperate and uncertain about the future.
“Yesterday in a speaking class we were assigned to try to convince the class of something. One boy spoke of the war in Vietnam. Three friends of his had recently been killed there. He was so bitter about it. He said, ‘If someone doesn’t do something about the condition this world is in, who knows what might happen?’ All the students fear the future because they have no hope. I thought to myself how grateful I can be to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses. On Monday it will be my turn to give a speech. I’m going to prove to them that God is alive. I don’t know what their reaction will be. I’m going to tell them about the hope the Bible offers. But do they want it?
“Some time ago a girl came up to me and asked me if I believed in God. I told her Yes and started to explain why. She said ‘OK! OK! All I wanted to know is if you believe in him or not.’ I later found out that she was taking a survey.
“Another time I got into a discussion about evolution with a girl in my class. She believed in it strongly, and nothing I said to her really sunk in. It did make her think, though, and I’m glad of that.
“I’ve come to believe that they don’t want to believe in God. Religion in any form is a mockery to them. One girl said to me, ‘My boyfriend is Catholic, I’m Protestant, but we’re both atheists.’
“Half of the students here are drug addicts. Almost all of them are alcoholics. I think I’m the only person in school who doesn’t smoke. This is a residential town too.
“This system of things is searching for something. They don’t know what it is, and they can’t find it. They are dissatisfied with the conditions of the world, but they don’t know how to improve it.
“Seeing the corruption in the world, I am proud and grateful to be able to say that I’m not part of it, and that I am one of Jehovah’s witnesses.”
Jesus plainly said that his followers would be “no part of the world,” that they would stand out as separate and distinct from it because of living by godly principles. (John 15:19) They are a people with a purpose in life; their hope is firmly rooted in God’s promise of a righteous new system of things. (2 Pet. 3:11-13) Is that true of you?

