Questions From Readers
● How do Jehovah’s witnesses view people who are users of “drugs,” including narcotics, LSD, and so forth?—V. K., U.S.A.
This is not something that can be answered with one broad, sweeping statement, since in different parts of the earth people use many things to stimulate and awaken or relax and calm themselves. The Bible does not name all the things being so used today; hence, what we must do is consider the effect of taking a certain substance and then consider how this effect is to be viewed by Christians in the light of Bible principles and commands.
We can gain insight into the Scriptural viewpoint by examining what the Bible has to say about alcoholic beverages. The Scriptures do not condemn the use of alcoholic beverages, either as a stimulant or as a relaxant. We read of wine as making “the heart of mortal man rejoice.” (Ps. 104:15; Prov. 31:6; Eccl. 9:7) However, caution is needed if alcoholic beverages are used, since certain dangers are involved. God’s Word condemns “excesses with wine, revelries, drinking matches,” and it shows the sorrows coming to those getting drunk and losing self-control. (1 Pet. 4:3; Prov. 23:29-35; 20:1; Eph. 5:18) In fact, it says that drunkards, that is, those who make a practice of drunkenness, should be expelled from the Christian congregation; they “will not inherit God’s kingdom.”—1 Cor. 5:11; 6:9, 10.
In order to produce a certain effect on the body, people in some localities brew nonalcoholic beverages out of herbs, leaves or beans. Others chew special seeds, leaves or twigs. What is the effect on the individual? Does he lose control of body and mind when under the influence of one of these things? Or, even though he is stimulated or relaxed, does he retain his senses and self-control? If he retains self-control, then he must decide on a personal basis whether he will occasionally use such a product in moderation.
Even with many of the more common and accepted stimulants, one can become quite dependent on their use. Though taking such mild stimulants in moderation is not in itself wrong, some have so accustomed themselves to their use that they become nervous and irritable if deprived of them. It is up to each person as to what he will do in regard to such habits, but it is good to keep in mind that Christians are to display the “fruitage of the spirit,” including love, kindness and self-control, at all times. (Gal. 5:22, 23) If one found that a custom or habit made it difficult for him to do that at times, a reevaluation might be in order.
Another thing to consider is that sometimes the way in which a stimulant is used makes it undesirable. Chewing certain stimulants is quite messy, making the chewer unsightly, as well as staining things near him. Each one can ask himself, ‘How do the people in my community view this practice?’ ‘Does it encourage respect for one as a minister of God?’ As one progresses toward spiritual maturity, such questions are of increasing importance to him, since, as Christians, we desire “that our ministry might not be found fault with.” (2 Cor. 6:3, 4) The Bible sets before Christians as an example to be imitated the standard to be met by overseers and ministerial servants in the Christian congregation. They are to be “irreprehensible” and “free from accusation.”—1 Tim. 3:2, 10.
With increasing frequency today people are turning to narcotics, chemicals such as LSD, and other things to get hallucinations or “thrills,” to escape from the realities of daily life or to satisfy a craving for sensual pleasure. Though a person’s reaction to such things is unpredictable, oftentimes their use results in a loss of self-control. Under their influence one may become violent, irrational and even insane. Since such a person often is unable to use good sense and is unable to discern the difference between right and wrong, he can easily succumb to obscene, immoral or illegal conduct that he might normally avoid.
What difference is there between a person drunk with alcohol who engages in wild, uncontrolled conduct, or who becomes a disgraceful incompetent, and the one who does the same things under the influence of some modern drug or chemical? From a Scriptural standpoint there is no difference! (Rom. 13:13) If a person deliberately pursues a course that causes him to lose self-control, causing mental aberrations so that he does not realize what he is doing or why, then he is just as reprehensible as a drunkard. He has allowed himself to get to the point of acting as a drunk man and so should be dealt with as a drunkard and as one who has lost self-control.
If a person who formerly shared in such unrestrained living sincerely wanted to bring his life into accord with the Bible, becoming a Christian, Jehovah’s witnesses would be willing to help him, pointing out the marvelous blessings available now and in the future for those living up to God’s requirements. Jesus preached to sinners of all kinds and helped them. (Luke 7:34-47) But he did not join in unscriptural conduct.
What if someone in the Christian congregation unwisely lost control of himself as a result of alcohol or some other stimulant? That would be a rare thing. But if it did happen, possibly that one could be lovingly helped to regain the right way, the way that would have God’s approval. (Gal. 6:1) If, though, a person made a practice of it, bringing reproach on himself, his family and the congregation, then he would be disfellowshiped from the Christian congregation so as to maintain the moral purity of God’s people.—1 Cor. 5:11-13.
What if one receiving medical treatment is advised to accept some narcotic in order to induce sleep or control pain? The one faced with the situation will have to decide. It is not as if he were taking it for sensual gratification or in order to get some “thrill.” True, he may be rendered unconscious, but not in the manner of a drunkard who passes out because of lack of self-control. This would be under proper supervision and because of a severe physical problem that seemed to warrant such an extreme measure.
It would be well, though, to keep in mind the dangers involved with addictive drugs. To accept needlessly over a period of time something that could become addictive would certainly be unwise. Even if such treatment is medically recommended, is one prepared to face the hard consequences if he becomes addicted to a narcotic? After the physical problem is resolved, what will he do? Many narcotic users have abandoned their families and all moral sense, stealing and even murdering in order to obtain money to purchase illegal drugs. Aside from the depravity that addiction could lead to, there is the illegality of the matter to consider, since Christians are to be in subjection to governmental superior authorities. (1 Pet. 2:13, 14; Rom. 13:1) How would the addict render to Caesar that which is Caesar’s? These questions should emphasize the importance of retaining control of one’s mind and body so he can render to God ‘a sacred service with his power of reason.’—Rom. 12:1.

