From Our Readers
ABORTION
There are 29 students in my class at the vocational school that I attend. The subject “Abortion​—Yes or No” came up for class discussion. I turned out to be the only one that considered abortion to be murder. I had taken along several copies of “Awake!” on this subject and I gave the teacher a copy. She read it and even had the “Diary of an Unborn Child” mimeographed and passed out to the class. Many of the students thought about the arguments presented during the discussion and finally changed their original view. When the teacher asked us again how we felt about abortion, almost everyone agreed that it was murder.
S. U., Germany
Your series of articles on abortion were really moving, and the illustration of the ‘little feet​—aborted at 10 weeks’ is truly touching. I delivered this issue to a woman on my route. Recently she told me of the excellent effect that the information had on her. This lady was pregnant, and at the time she received the magazine she had completed arrangements for an abortion. When she read the magazine there were nights she could not sleep. Precisely the night before she was to have the abortion she prayed to God to give her strength so as not to commit such a bad act as to take away the life of an unborn creature. Moved by what she had learned in her reading of “Awake!” she canceled the arrangements for the abortion. Both she and her husband are very thankful for the fine information that helped them to act wisely.
J. A., Spain
While engaged in the preaching work, I discovered several doors, hidden in a small passageway between two buildings, that I had overlooked before. I pushed a copy of “Awake!” under one of them. It contained the articles on abortion. After calling back several times, I finally met a young girl. She told me her mother was in the hospital, where she had just given birth to a baby. Three weeks later I called back and met the woman, who immediately invited me in and proudly showed me the newest addition to the family. It seems that on the very day she had made arrangements with her doctor for an abortion she returned home to find the magazine I had left under her door. Thanks to “Awake!”, what originally was to have been an abortion turned out to be the couple’s “pride and joy.”
G. D., Germany
SMOKING
I’m an agnostic who was forced into a premature disability retirement because my employer would curtail employee smoking only to protect the machines, such as computers. I surely appreciate the articles you’ve written on smoking. I was raised as a Catholic and have a strong sense of reverence for life. It has long been my belief that smoking wouldn’t be our nation’s number one health problem if more clergymen and their congregations were to practice what they preach about love for their fellowman. The Catholic Church is against abortion, suicide, child abuse and self-abuse, except when caused by smoking. Thanks. I know you’ll keep up the good work.
E. C., Arizona

