The Real Brotherhood of Man Today
AN outstanding demonstration of Christian brotherhood was given at the close of World War II.
Sachsenhausen, the German concentration camp near Berlin, was filled with excitement and apprehension. It was April 1945. Allied forces were advancing from the west and the Russians from the east.
However, Nazi leaders were determined to destroy the 26,000 prisoners in the camp. Their satanic scheme was to murder the sick in the infirmary and march the others to Lübeck, a seaport, put them on ships, and sink the ships at sea.
When the order was given to leave, the prisoners were mustered in groups according to their nationality​—with the exception of one group made up of six different nationalities. This group included dedicated Christians, plus some 36 men who had accepted their beliefs in the camp.
At the risk of their lives, these Christians had rescued their spiritual brothers from the infirmary. Then the long column of prisoners and SS guards set off. The guards were in a hurry, as they could already hear the guns of the Russians. For days they marched, their food not much more than weeds, roots and bark. Any who fell exhausted were brutally shot by the guards. In fact, 10,700 died along the road. Hence it was called the “death march.”
But those in the Christian group constantly helped one another, the strong supporting the weak. Wrote a member of the group: “Through Christian love and solidarity not one was left by the wayside to be killed by the SS.” After 12 terrible days, the guards fled.
Who were those Christians? They were Jehovah’s Witnesses. Can anyone deny that they demonstrated the marks of a true brotherhood? But what relation exists between them and the little group who met with Jesus on the night before his death?
Following the Pattern
Those who make up the true brotherhood today must follow the pattern set by Jesus and his disciples. For example, what was the attitude toward war of that first-century brotherhood?
Origen, a third-century Christian writer, stated: “We no longer take up ‘sword against nation,’ nor do we ‘learn war any more.”’ (Isa. 2:2-4) Also, in his book Paganism to Christianity in the Roman Empire, W. W. Hyde states: “During the first three centuries . . . Christians were opposed to serving as professional killers in the Roman armies.” It was for the same reason that Jehovah’s Witnesses were put in Nazi death camps during World War II. They refused to serve in Hitler’s armies.
Another pattern of the first-century Christian brotherhood was the absence of priests or clergy. The older brothers who had the maturity and spiritual qualities did the teaching and organizing. (Titus 1:5-9)a But they were brothers, not “fathers.” Jesus said: “You are all brothers. You must call no one on earth your father, since you have only one Father, and he is in heaven.” (Matt. 23:8, 9, The Jerusalem Bible) Peter had specifically admonished his fellow older brothers not to ‘lord it over God’s people.’​—1 Pet. 5:1-3.
So in those days of the original Christian brotherhood Jesus’ disciples did not use presumptuous titles such as “Reverend,” “Most Reverend,” “Monsignor” (my lord) or “Father.” In the book The Old Roman World, John Lord says that early Christians “called each other brother and sister . . . they knew of no distinctions.” So, too, among Jehovah’s Witnesses today, there are no clergy-laity distinctions, no presumptuous titles. All are “brothers” and “sisters,” with older, spiritually mature men taking the lead in serving others.
Jesus also told his followers that they would suffer bitter persecution. This would be not only at the hands of political leaders but also at those of religious leaders who had become part of the world. He stated: “Because you are no part of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, on this account the world hates you. . . . the hour is coming when everyone that kills you will imagine he has rendered a sacred service to God.”​—John 15:19; 16:2.
Who is it that has suffered worldwide persecution in our times because of being no part of the world? It is Jehovah’s Witnesses. For instance, in 1933 Hitler tried to annihilate them in Germany because they would not support his Nazi party or his wars. They persisted in preaching God’s incoming Kingdom government as the only hope for mankind. At one point, Hitler screamed hysterically: ‘I will exterminate this brood in Germany!’ Thousands of Witnesses were arrested, many suffering death in concentration camps.
However, eventually Hitler and his Nazi party were exterminated, but not Jehovah’s Witnesses. Today there are about 100,000 Witnesses in the Federal Republic of Germany alone. In congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide the active publishers of the good news of the kingdom numbers over 2,200,000.
Identifying the Brotherhood Today
Of course, it is not numbers that identify the true international brotherhood today. Jehovah’s Witnesses are actually few compared with many other religions. Jesus said: “Narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are the ones finding it.”​—Matt. 7:14.
Do Jehovah’s Witnesses today fit the pattern, as suggested by the few examples given above? As a guide for you to identify which one of the thousands of sects and religions fits the original Christian brotherhood, note the box on the previous page. It lists some of the basic principles of that brotherhood. Test for yourself who it is that fits the description given in the Bible.
What Others Say
While many slander Jehovah’s Witnesses, as Jesus said would happen, not all people do so. Let us take a look at these Christians through the eyes of some people who are not Witnesses.
In Mozambique, Jehovah’s Witnesses have suffered bitter persecution due to their political neutrality. But a Catholic nun wrote in a Catholic Portuguese publication: “At the moment [1978], in these new ‘Gulag’ [concentration] camps for reeducation installed in [Mozambique], 25,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses from Malawi and Mozambique have been imprisoned together. . . . they are worthy of our admiration . . . How different the world would be if we all woke up one morning firmly decided not to take up arms again, whatever the cost or the reason, just like Jehovah’s Witnesses!”
Regarding the general conduct of the Witnesses in Africa, the London Daily Telegraph had this to say: “Jehovah’s Witnesses have shown themselves, through Africa, to be decent, orderly citizens living up to a high moral code. . . . The promiscuity and polygamy characteristic of African society is simply inconceivable among Witnesses. The sect inculcates habits of thrift, punctuality, honesty and obedience.”
Bryan Wilson, professor at Oxford University, England, made a study of “the recent rapid growth” of the Witnesses in Japan. He wrote: “Witnesses offer a wide range of practical advice . . . on marital relations, moral issues, the rearing of children, and other practical matters.” Wilson asked many of the Japanese what had attracted them to Jehovah’s Witnesses. Among the replies were: “The kindness of the Witnesses.” “The lack of any smell of religious formalism and the absence of show.” “I was surprised to find such meek people.” “I was impressed by the unity of the organization.” “The love and warmth among Jehovah’s Witnesses.”
In Spain, a writer for the publication Hoja del Lunes de Gijón reported after a convention of over 10,000 Witnesses in that city: “Jehovah’s Witnesses have impressed me by their good citizenship, . . . If Gijón en masse were to be converted to the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Gijón would be the cleanest and best kept city in the world.”
When a large convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses was held in New Orleans, Louisiana, the paper States-Item said: “A sense of brotherhood filled the Louisiana Superdome as young and old, black and white Jehovah’s Witnesses settled down to begin a 5-day learning and sharing experience. . . . racial discrimination . . . is not a problem for Witnesses.”
Practical Help
In Mexico a few years ago, two villages were virtually at war due to a deadly feud that made life cheap. The police could not solve the problem. However, one family started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Others followed, and before long most of the people in the village had sold their weapons and bought Bibles instead. Peace returned to the area. It was a miniature modern fulfillment of the ancient prophecy, “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares”​—a foretaste of what will take place globally under God’s kingdom.​—Isa. 2:2-4.
This is just one of countless cases that could be cited where Jehovah’s Witnesses have given practical help to people with all sorts of problems​—drink, drugs, divorce, depression and many more. Mainly it is done by Bible study plus sincere help and encouragement, at no cost to those who benefit.
Not “Just a Dream”
“By their fruits you will recognize” the true brotherhood, Jesus indicated. (Matt. 7:16) The “fruits” prove that a true brotherhood of mankind is not “just a dream” but a modern-day reality.
In over 200 lands throughout the world, Jehovah’s Witnesses can find true brothers and sisters who will welcome them lovingly​—even if they did not know one another personally before. And when one considers all the efforts to crush this brotherhood, it is truly a modern miracle that it is flourishing worldwide. But this is God’s doing, since ‘his ways are higher than our ways.’​—Isa. 55:9.
Thus, the seemingly impossible has happened. The pattern set by Christ and his disciples is indeed being followed today. Of course, it is not being followed perfectly, as the early Christians did not follow it perfectly. Perfection will come only under God’s kingdom. But what is taking place today involves the actual nucleus of a society of people that will someday fill the entire earth.​—Isa. 11:9; 2 Pet. 3:13.
Yes, the facts of history, and the fulfillment of the Bible’s requirements and prophecies, show the truthfulness of a remark made by a social worker in Copenhagen, Denmark. He had noted the fine help given to elderly people by Jehovah’s Witnesses, and remarked: “On occasions when I have dealings with the clergy I get very disappointed. You have the only international brotherhood in the world. I admire your courage in preaching. Keep up the good work!”
Millions of people today agree with those sentiments. And unitedly they look forward to the time soon when all earth’s woes will be past, and when God will shower down his blessings in his new order here on earth. Then all who really want true brotherhood will enjoy peace, prosperity and happiness that can hardly be imagined today.​—Rev. 21:4.
[Footnotes]
Commenting on Titus 1:5, the Catholic Jerusalem Bible says: “In the earliest days each Christian community was governed by a body of elders.”
[Box on page 13]
THE BASIC PATTERN OF BROTHERHOOD
All should be . . .
. . . loving Jehovah, the heavenly Father, with their whole heart, soul, mind and strength (Mark 12:29, 30)
. . . loving their neighbors as themselves (Matt. 22:39)
. . . real brothers and sisters; no clergy-laity distinctions (Matt. 23:8, 9; 1 Pet. 5:2, 3)
. . . free from racialism (Acts 10:34, 35; Rev. 7:9, 10)
. . . humble and meek, not proud and presumptuous (Ps. 37:9-11; John 13:14, 15; Jas. 4:6, 10)
. . . united, not terribly divided like Christendom (John 17:11, 21; 1 Cor. 1:10; Eph. 4:1-6)
. . . neutral as regards politics (John 17:14; 18:36)
. . . not nationalistic, although obedient to “Caesar,” except where God’s law overrules (Matt. 22:21; Acts 5:29)
. . . guided by God’s Word, the Bible, and living according to its high moral standard (John 17:17; 2 Tim. 3:14-17)
. . . subject to Christ, earth’s new ruler (Matt. 7:24-27; Phil. 2:9-11)
. . . faithfully witnessing for Jehovah, Christ and the Kingdom (Isa. 43:10-12; Matt. 24:14; Acts 1:8)
. . . prepared for opposition, persecution, even death if necessary (Matt. 5:11; 1 Pet. 5:8-10; Rev. 2:10)
HOW DOES YOUR RELIGION COMPARE WITH THE ABOVE?
[Picture on page 12]
True brotherhood exists today!
[Picture on page 14]
Millions throughout the earth today are practicing true brotherhood

