What Obstructs Universal Brotherhood?
IN 1469 C.E. a man named Niccolò Machiavelli was born in Florence, Italy. He wrote a book on politics entitled “The Prince,” using as a model Cesare Borgia, son of Pope Alexander VI. Borgia, according to one historian, was “an artist in ‘power politics,’ using without scruple and remorse such measure of force or fraud as may enable him to extend and secure his conquests.”
The Encyclopædia Britannica says that Machiavelli “founded the science of politics for the modern world.” “Machiavellianism” is now a word meaning the political principle “that any means however lawless or unscrupulous” may be used by a ruler to maintain his power.
Such politics has plagued this 20th century. Wars, coups, corruption, horrible violence and terrorism are all manifestations of it. Politics divides the East from the West. It divides nations, cities (such as Berlin) and even families. Politics is one of the most divisive influences of mankind.
Closely related to such politics and often exploited by political leaders is the spirit of . . .
Nationalism
On this subject an amusing story is told about an army chaplain in Scotland who, at a new military camp, asked for volunteers to convert an old barn into a chapel. In the absence of the chaplain the volunteers painted in large letters above the altar: “Scotland forever and ever.” The surprised chaplain asked them to make the sign a bit more religious. They did. The inscription then read: “Scotland forever and ever. AMEN.”
Scotsmen are known for being very proud of their country. But they are not alone in this. For example, English children, especially in the days when the British Empire was dominant in the world, were fed nationalistic fervor from earliest childhood. They were taught to believe that ‘Britannia Rules the Waves,’ and that the English are a superior nation, blessed by God.
In every nation similar feelings are promoted by politicians who know that a strong nationalistic spirit serves their purposes well. But their purpose may not be in the best interest of people. In an article entitled “Nationalism Is Alien to True Patriotism,” columnist Sydney J. Harris observed: “Nationalism means ‘going along’ with a Hitler or a Stalin or any other tyrant who waves the flag, mouths obscene devotion to the Fatherland, and meanwhile tramples the rights of people.”
Too, as the story of the chapel in Scotland shows, nationalism and religion often go together. Wrote Dr. Robert L. Kahn, a rabbi: “Religion and Nationalism always tend to go hand in hand. In times of war, particularly, . . . ‘For God and Country’ becomes a sort of battle cry. This has always been so. [In World War II] one of the popular songs was the war-whoop of a chaplain, ‘Praise the Lord and Pass the Ammunition.”’
A nationalistic spirit has even seriously affected sports. For example, at a European soccer championship match between the teams of England and Belgium held in Turin, Italy, play was held up for several minutes while English fans fought a battle with Italian riot police, resulting in many persons being hurt.
Racism
On many farms in South Africa the white children of the farmer and the black children of the laborers spend some of their early childhood playing together in a peaceful, almost brotherly way. Race prejudice is not a feeling people are born with. However, as they grow up they absorb the attitudes of their respective races. So, in most cases, that early, charming innocence disappears. Feelings such as animosity, pride, resentment and frustration take over.
However, racism is not confined to Africa. Many people in the United States are ashamed of the treatment given to the Indian tribes in their country. Also, the way blacks were treated in the days of slavery, and the ghastly conditions in which they were transported across the Atlantic and sold like cattle in the Americas, are well known. Ugly race riots still break out in the U.S. In England, too, racial tension is rising as immigrants from the West Indies, India and other places flood certain areas.
Those who suffer because of racism in Africa or elsewhere can be glad that they were not Jews living in Germany under the Nazi regime. Looking back, it seems incredible that in a country of Christendom, under a leader (Hitler) who was a Roman Catholic, millions of Jews, people of Slavic origin and others were massacred because of their nationality.
The fact that such atrocities were committed by people forming a part of Christendom raises doubts as to whether that system of religion is genuine. Is it, instead, a colossal fraud? Let us carefully consider the effects that the religions of this world have upon true brotherhood.
[Map on page 5]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
Politics is one of the most divisive influences of mankind
DIVIDED BERLIN
FRENCH SECTOR
BRITISH SECTOR
AMERICAN SECTOR
RUSSIAN SECTOR
EAST GERMANY
EAST GERMANY
BERLIN WALL
[Picture on page 5]
Little children are not born racist

