From Our Readers
Sexual Morals
I just read the article on the Sexual Revolution in the September 8, 1984, Awake! When I found out I had herpes, I wanted to run away and have somebody tell me I didn’t have it. It is very painful and will never go away. However, I have put fornication behind me. I enjoyed your article very much.
D. G., Missouri
I have never seen an article so slanted in my life. This promiscuity, as you call it, is the affection felt between two persons and shouldn’t be called wayward conduct. There is no mention at all in the Bible of a marriage ceremony between Adam and Eve, but Adam called Eve his wife and Eve called Adam her husband. As far as homosexuals go, Jehovah looks at the heart. (1 Samuel 16:7) Our Creator provided sex as a means of expressing deep love, and being heterosexual doesn’t appeal to everyone. As long as homosexuals have that mutual love and respect, can they not still follow Bible principles? Some people adhere to godly principles in the way that they feel God approves of, not in the way man approves of by one-sided articles such as this one.
D. J., New York
When Eve was presented to Adam, he acknowledged that they belonged to each other with his expression: “This is at last bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh.” And there could be nothing more binding than God’s own official statement: “That is why a man will leave his father and his mother and he must stick to his wife and they must become one flesh.” (Genesis 2:23, 24; Matthew 19:5) What God approves of is not determined by the feelings of individuals but by what he has specifically stated in his Word. In Hebrews 13:4 it is stated: “Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.” God’s condemnation of homosexual actions is clearly outlined in Leviticus 20:13; Romans 1:27, 32 and; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.​—ED.
Treating Burns
At a local restaurant, my youngest daughter was burned with scalding water. Because of the knowledge of how to deal with burns, which I gained from reading Awake! (July 22, 1966; March 22, 1980; April 22, 1980), I immediately poured cold water on the burns that were covered with clothes, put an ice compress on the exposed skin, and rushed her to the local hospital about a mile away. At the hospital the staff asked how we knew that this was the best on-the-spot treatment. I explained that I was able to respond decisively because of being an avid reader of Awake!
F. D., California
Sewing Machines
Recently my daughter came home from school and said that her sewing teacher wanted to meet me. The new Awake! (October 8, 1984) had arrived in the mail with the article on sewing machines. I arranged to meet my daughter’s teacher and I showed her that magazine. A couple of days later, the teacher called the attention of the entire class to the article, wanting them to read it so as to know how to maintain, oil, and thread the machine.
S. W., Oregon

