VOL. XXII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1901. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 275 

The Breach Widens 278 

A Modern Reformation 279 

Respecting Foreign Missions 281 

Preach the Gospel to Every Creature 282 

The Watered Lilies 284 

Quarterly Review 284 

Intemperance 285 

Interesting Questions Answered 286 

Public Ministries of the Truth 288 

Items: Preserve Your Towers, etc 274 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE CLEVELAND CONVENTION. 



Notice that lower rates have been secured— $1.00 per day. 
Inquire of your own ticket agent, in good season, respecting 
"G.A.R. Excursion Tickets." Notify us at once if you desire 
lodgings secured, as rooms will be scarce. 



PRESERVE YOUR TOWERS. 



Those who have preserved their WATCH TOWERS for some 
years back will be glad, especially in view of the new Bible 
with references to the DAWNS and past six years of TOWERS. 
Order sample copies for circulation among your friends. We 
advise friends to get their back TOWERS from 1895 to Aug. 1901 
bound. Together they make a splendid volume. Any binder 
can do it. 

WALL CHARTS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. 



We have had some copies of "The Chart of the Ages" 
painted in German, Swedish and Dano-Norwegian to correspond 
with the English— 5 ft. long. These cost 50c additional, namely, 
$2.00 each, carriage paid in U.S. Gotten up singly they would 
cost at least $5.00 each. 

THE LEATHER BOUND DAWNS. 



We are of the opinion that few have noticed the remarkably 
low price at which these are supplied. The present lot is 
very handsome. See next column. 



R2866 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



RIGHT AND WRONG VIEWS OF THE PRESENT SITUATION. 



IF WE but remember that nothing in the world's 
history offers any comparison to present social 
and financial conditions, we may well regard with a 
great deal of charity the conflicting views of able and 
conscientious men respecting the causes, the disadvantages, 
the proper remedies, and the outcome, of 
the movements now on foot throughout the civilized 
world. God's people, justified and sanctified and 
separate from the world, with new aims and spiritual 
ambitions before them, and with the instruction and 
enlightenment of the divine revelation— the Bible- 
should be able to take a calmer, a clearer, a more 
comprehensive, and therefore a more true, view of 
affairs, past, present and to come, than others; for 



we are to remember that it is prejudice and self-interest 
which generally has much to do with the blinding 
of those who see not from the divine standpoint. 

From this standpoint we see that neither the rights 
nor the wrongs of motive or of action lie all on one 
side of these questions; and, seeing this, we are better 
able to take a sympathetic position, and to exercise 
our influence amongst those with whom we 
come in contact, in the interests of peace. All of the 
Lord's people should be peace-makers; none of them 
should be strife-makers. There are generally a sufficient 
number of selfish forces at work in and about 
every individual to stir up his mind, to breed in him 
discontent, and to arouse the passions of anger and 
malice and hatred; there are few influences, at work, 
on behalf of gentleness, meekness, patience, brotherly 
kindness, love. Hence there is the more necessity 
that the Lord's people continue pouring oil upon 
the troubled waters— the oil of the holy spirit, with 
which their cup is to overflow; the oil of joy as 
opposed to the spirit of heaviness and discontent; 
the oil of hope, which illumines the future gloriously, 
and thus offsets and counteracts the darkness of present 
discouragements. 

As an illustration of how good and wise men sometimes 
fail to get a correct view of matters, take the 
following extract from a Philadelphia journal: — 

A SPECIES OF INSANITY. 



"A terrible trouble is disturbing the earth at the 
present time. It more resembles a species of insanity 
than anything else. As we know, among members of 
an undeveloped society the maniacal tendency is not 
common; that tendency is an accompaniment of civilization. 
All must have noted the fact that the possession 
of extraordinary endowments and a facile loss 
of mental balance, or great wits and madness, as the 
poet has told us, are somehow near allied. They have 
a way of going together. Just so here. To-day it is 
not the dull nations, but the bright ones, the most 
advanced in refinement and everything of that sort, 
that seem craziest in the craze at this moment sweeping 
the world. The dementia is practically an exclusive 
possession of the Great Powers of Europe, 
troubling England worst, but reaching out and affecting 

R2867 : page 275 

us in this country in some ways, perhaps, 
worst of all. It seems a madness of the Anglo-Saxon, 
as he loves to call himself, more than of any other 
people. And plainly this madness is the result of a 
disease; it is the outworking of the greed microbe, 



or it comes from the yeasting in the human blood of 
the lust for property and dominion. And because 
of this frenzied, grasping tendency, which, as a sort 
of demonism, has taken possession of the leading nations 
of men, and of our own people and the ruling 
element among them particularly, the whole earth is 
plunged into a condition of singularly disastrous feud 
and conflict at the present moment. 

Leading nations have simply fallen into a veritable 
madness in their scramble for trade. That is precisely 
the way things are. Commercial interests, so 
called, stand ready and are eager to sacrifice everything 
—untold treasures of the people at large, along 
with their highest rights and profoundest welfare— in 
order to keep or attain supremacy for themselves and 

R2867 : page 276 

for the furthering of their ends. Think what, under 
this influence, not only Great Britain and we in America, 
but Russia also, and Germany and France and 
Italy, are ready to spend in this desperate rivalry! 
Millions on millions of the people's money are these 
nations hot to lavish in outlay so as to buy or bribe 
the chief advantage in trade lines, the one against the 
other. This is at the bottom of our militarism. Here 
is what our wars mean.... War, we may rest assured, 
is always precisely as General Sherman characterized 
it. There is no good in it for anybody; only 
evil— the consummation of evil. A trade war is 
the same as any other. Greed is behind it; and we 
have the highest authority for holding that greed is 
behind all wars. They come of men's lusts. But to-day, 
greed in the elaborations and marvelous complications 
of modern life has become an overmastering 
disease. The whole land is swept by it. Society 
quivers in its sway; so do our churches and our 
homes. Commerce is maddened by it. It is a craze 
in the heart of the nations. It has well nigh come to 
be a veritable demoniacal possession, driving the 
whole wide world, and especially the peoples that 
ought to be conspicuous in light and leading, into a 
desperate frenzy, making the immediate outlook for 
highest human welfare very dark and foreboding." 

This is all a mistake. The present agitation and 
grasp for power and trade is not the result of a special 
disease of greed and selfishness— not a new form 
of insanity. On the contrary, it is the result of a larger 
amount of reasoning on the part of humanity in 
general, and especially on the part of statesmen and 
financiers, along lines which the writer of the above 
article, however otherwise intelligent, has not fully 
appreciated. The fact is that the present movement 
is the result of conditions, and not the result of theories. 
Theories, aggressive theories, selfish theories, have 
prevailed in the world for centuries, and probably prevail 



no more to-day than in the past. It is not a new 
microbe of greed that has attacked mankind, but new 
conditions which appeal strongly to what for a long 
time has been known as the first law of nature- 
self-preservation. 

Statesmen and financiers the world over have realized 
that the new conditions brought into the civilized 
world during the past fifty years mean a revolution 
—an irresistible revolution. They mean that 
machinery and steam and electric power have become 
the servants of men, and that these servants 
can be multiplied at a comparatively small cost, and 
that the necessities of Christendom can now or shortly 
be supplied by one-third the population; which 
means that, now or shortly, two-thirds of Christendom's 
population will be in enforced idleness. Statesmen 
and financiers seek to ward off such a condition 
of things, realizing that it would mean calamity, financial, 
social and political. This is the secret, then, 
of the effort on the part of the most highly civilized 
peoples in the world to obtain new markets for their 
goods and to retain their hold upon the markets already 
established, at home and abroad. 

There are people who tell us that business should 
revert to old-time methods, moderation, fair prices, 
limited production, and general contentment; but 
such people fail to recognize the great change that 
has come upon the world in respect to conditions. 
They fail to see that the business pressure which is 
now exerted is not a voluntary one, but rather an enforced 
one; for those who would persist in following 
old-time methods in manufacturing or business 
would speedily find themselves bankrupt. Consequently 
all find it necessary to bestir themselves and 
adopt new methods of business adapted to our day. 
As they are pushed on by others, so others in turn are 
pushed on by them. The civilized world is like a 
great crowd; at the head are the world's notables, 
backed each of them by the hundreds and thousands 
and millions of humanity, willingly or unwillingly depending 
upon them for guidance, for life's comforts, 
yea, for its necessities. The entire crowd has tasted 
of the conveniences and blessings of civilization, and 
the determination of the whole is that they will not go 
back into barbarism and savagery, but will press on; 
and a fear of personal or class or national disadvantage 
is continually goading the great majority of this 
struggling mass, bidding each look out for himself 
and his own interests, and let no opportunity escape 
his grasp. 

With the majority the impelling fear is an undefined 
one; and yet, in a general way, all seem to apprehend 
that some sort of a check to the world's advancement, 
and to their individual progress, is imminent. 
Whether they can discern the ramified influences 
connecting them individually as factors in 



the problem or not, they can realize that the more 
lucrative situations in life are few in comparison to 
the numbers of humanity; and they can see, too that 
prosperous waves come to the world occasionally, 
through an increased demand for the products of machinery 
and the soil. They can see that if the Chinese 
Empire, for instance, with its hundreds of millions 
of population, were thrown fully open to the 
commercial enterprise of Christendom, it would cause 
the wave of prosperity in Christendom to have that 
much longer roll, because it would require time for 
the Chinese to fully adapt themselves to the new 
conditions introduced by machinery; it would require 
time for them to learn how to install and to operate 
the machinery, and thus that the evil day of 
over-production would be put off the further into the 
future. Instead of calling these men "insane" shall we 
not, on the contrary, say that they are wise in their 
generation;— that they are acting out the only part 
they could be expected to take, as wise men of the 
world, laboring under the law of personal and national 
selfishness,— the law under which all the world has 
for centuries been operating? We hold that the 
energy of these politicians and financiers is an energy 
begotten of wisdom, and remember the words of 
Solomon, "The wise man foreseeth the evil and hideth 
himself, while the foolish pass on and suffer for 
it."-Prov. 27:12. 

As our Master said at the first advent, so we may 
now repeat,— "The children of this world are wise 
in their generation"— wiser, sometimes, than are the 
children of light. Therefore the latter need to take 
the more earnest heed to the divine revelation, which 
is able to give them the "spirit of a sound mind" beyond 
all others. 

R2867 : page 277 

The Scriptures give the key to the present situation: 
they show us clearly that the divine law of love 
has always condemned the law of selfishness, under 
which fallen humanity has long governed itself. The 
law of selfishness is no worse a law to-day than it has 
always been. It has been the cause of wars, injustices, 
sufferings, slaveries, etc., in all the periods of 
history. It is neither worse nor better to-day; but 
new conditions have come upon us: civilization has 
lifted one-fifth part of the world to a higher plane of 
thought and sentiment, and upon these, since the beginning 
of "the day of his preparation," 1799, the Lord 
has been gradually lifting the veil and granting a discernment 
of the secrets of nature, which has resulted 
in great chemical and mechanical discoveries. 
These, while proving great blessings to mankind, are 
sure eventually to bring great calamities, by reason 
of conflict with the law of selfishness now prevailing. 



All thinking men realize that under the laws of selfishness, 

competition, etc., it is only a question of time 

when the vast resources and possibilities of machinery 

in the hands of the brightest and keenest of the 

world's population will reach the point of a death-struggle 

with the masses of Christendom,— not even 

waiting to reach the masses of heathendom. All wish 

to avoid this crash, for all instinctively realize that it 

will be terrible when it comes; but many seek to avoid 

the matter by saying to themselves, It will not come 

in my day, anyway. And meantime each feels as 

though he is powerless to stem the current, or to resist 

the pressure which is behind him. 



As an illustration of the forces at work in Christendom, 
a result of the new conditions introduced to the 
world during the nineteenth century, note the strife 
between the United States Steel Corporation and the 
Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers. 
Much can be said on each side of the question, but it 
all resolves itself in harmony with the foregoing. 
The capitalists, representing the money invested and 
the machinery, are pressed by competition and seeking 
to maintain their own standing financially and 
to make progress. They do not desire the degradation 
of their workmen in any sense or degree; but 

R2868 : page 277 

would much prefer that they were all comfortable 

and provided with steady employment. The more intelligent 

amongst the workmen realize that captains 

of industry and accumulations of capital are necessary 

to progress and prosperity; and while wishing 

to be comfortable, well-to-do, and to share in the 

comforts and luxuries of life, the better class of workmen 

have no special complaint to make that their 

employers are better housed, surrounded with greater 

luxuries every way than themselves. They have 

no desire to bring disaster either upon their employers 

or the trade in which they are engaged, or the 

country which is their home. Their interests in large 

measure lie in the same direction as that of their employers 

—they desire prosperity, and extension of 

trade to this end. The majority of them are not so 

anxious to become wealthy as they are anxious lest 

they should become poor— lest they should lose, in 

whole or in part, the comforts and advantages which 

they now enjoy, and which are far beyond those enjoyed 

by their parents at any time in the past. 

Why, then, is there need of a rupture? Why, with 
admittedly satisfactory wages, and admittedly satisfactory 
hours of work, should there be a strike and 
more or less of a paralysis of important business interests? 



The reason is fear. As the Scriptures declare 

respecting the present time, "Men's hearts are 

failing them for fear, and for looking after those 

things which are coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26.) 

Present conditions are satisfactory enough, all 

will admit— both employers and employed. The 

whole question is one pertaining to the future— fear. 

The Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel 

Workers demands that all the works of the United 

States Steel Corporation should be "unionized"— that 

the affairs and interests of all the workmen, nearly 

one hundred thousand in number, should be recognized 

as under the care and supervision, and subject 

to the arrangements and contracts, of the officers of 

the Amalgamated Association. The United States 

Steel Corporation refuses this demand, and claims 

that this in effect would mean that they would compel 

all of their workmen to join the Amalgamated Association; 

and, this they have insisted, would be an unreasonable 

thing to do, and one which they could not 

do. 

To the unsophisticated it will seem strange that 
there need be any serious ruction or quarrel over a 
matter of this kind; for, on the surface, as stated by 
both parties, benevolence would seem to be the object 
of both. The Amalgamated Association benevolently 
wants to assist the non-union men, and the United 
States Steel Corporation also benevolently wishes to 
protect the non-union men in their rights. Where 
pure love and benevolence of this kind controls on 
both sides of the question, why need there be any 
dispute or strike? 

Ah! there it is. In this question, as in nearly every 
other question, selfishness hides itself under a cloak 
of benevolence, and would fain deceive others, and itself 
also. Not pure benevolence, but almost pure 
selfishness, is actuating both parties. The United 
States Steel Corporation reasons that if all of its mills 
and employes were under the control of the union, 
it would be thoroughly at the mercy of the officers of 
that union, to whose generosity and justice they are 
unwilling to entrust themselves and their varied interests, 
valued at a thousand millions of dollars. 
They say, No ! So long as some of the mills are independent 
and under our control it will not matter 
so much if others of them are under the control of 
the union, for then we will not be completely at the 
union's mercy, and the latter will be obliged to treat 
us with a measure of consideration and justice. It 
is, therefore, a very serious question with us, and we 
prefer to lose millions of dollars now, than to risk, 
to jeopardize, our interests under the complete control 
and perhaps tyranny of a labor union. 

The Amalgamated Association is laboring, also, 
along lines of selfishness, and not from pure benevolence 
and good-will toward the non-union men. They 



say to themselves: It is all right as it is, so long as 
times are prosperous, as at present; but as there have 
been hard times before, so we may reasonably expect 
them to come again, when there will be overproduction, 
idle mills and idle men. At such a time we may 

R2868 : page 278 

be sure that the Steel Corporation, recognizing us as 
the protectors of skilled labor, and the maintainers of 
its interests as respects time and pay and conditions, 
and realizing a future time of still sharper competition 
and lower prices, would grasp such an opportunity 
to do all in its power to destroy our union, 
and thus to have labor unresistant at its command. 
We feel sure that in a season of dullness the 
non-union mills would be given the preference as 
respects steady employment, while the union mills 
would be at the disadvantage, to the intent that our 
organization might be disrupted. Now, therefore, is 
our time, while business is good, while our labor is 
in demand, while the mills are behind with orders— 
now is the time for us to strike, if thereby we can 
unionize all the mills and place ourselves and all 
workmen upon a firmer footing for the maintenance 
of our rights in the future, when the final desperate 
struggle between capital and labor must come. 

We cannot say that either party in the conflict is 
foolish or insane. We must admit that both are wise 
as respects their own interests. 

If these were all Christian brethren; if the spirit of 
Christ dwelt in them all richly and abounded; if the 
spirit of love had wholly or even half supplanted the 
spirit of selfishness, the matter might very easily be 
adjusted; for we remember that love is not puffed 
up, vaunteth not herself, seeketh not her own, but 
is the very embodiment of generosity and kindness. 
But, again, it is not a theory we have to deal with, 
but facts. In theory the civilized world is all Christian, 
sometimes called, "The Christian World," and 
"Christendom." But these are misnomers; the fact is 
the world is not Christian except in name; they are 
still "kingdoms of this world," still children of this 
world, and only a remarkably few belong to the Kingdom 
of the Lord, and either know him or desire to be 
controlled by his spirit of love. 

What can we do? Can we hope to convert these 
millions, to whom the message of the gospel has come 
with more or less clearness all their lives? We cannot 
so hope. We must remember, on the contrary, 
that this is not the divine plan; that in the divine plan 
part of the important lesson which the world is now 
learning is the very lesson which it was intended it 
should learn, viz., that selfishness always brings misery, 
—directly or indirectly. The world must thus 
learn the lesson that the only true peace and prosperity 



is that which God purposes, and will eventually 

establish through the Kingdom of his dear Son. The 

world is learning the lessons that wealth does not give 

complete happiness, but still leaves an aching void; 

and that all the comforts and conveniences of civilization, 

coming to the world of mankind, with good 

food, good clothing, and much advantage every way, 

do not change the heart nor bring in true happiness. 

In a word, the world must learn that civilization 

is not Christianization. 

For centuries the Lord's wheatfield, the Church, 
has been overgrown with tares, who are not the offspring 
of the Lord's spirit at all— who have never 
been "begotten again," who are not of the "wheat" 
class in any degree. These "tares" have been passing 
under the name of Christian, while really and truly 
they are worldlings— not bad people, many of them, 
not all immoral by any means, some of them generous, 
kind, and, in a worldly sense, good— but not "begotten 
of the spirit." We are in the harvest-time, 
"the end of the age," and a complete separation must 
be made. For not one tare is to be gathered into the 
kingdom garner. On the contrary, a complete demonstration 
shall be made, as between the wheat and 
the tares. There are grains of "wheat," so far as we 
know, interested on both sides of this question, but 
the vast majority on both sides are of the "tare" 
class. The wheat, therefore, are not to expect to be 
understood, or to have the true position appreciated 
by the others; but nevertheless are to be content and 
to rejoice in what the Lord discloses to them through 
his Word, viz., that this time of trouble that the whole 
world sees impending, will be the final lesson by 
which the Lord will demonstrate to the world the difference 
between the reign of sin and the reign of 
righteousness— between the reign of selfishness and 
the reign of love. 

In the great time of trouble, when all their various 
systems, religious, political, social, financial, go down 
in a maelstrom of anarchy, there will be a great opening 
of eyes,— a passing of present illusions. "When 
the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
They will come to see that the Lord's way is the right 
way,— the only satisfactory way; that the law of love 
is the only law which can bring everlasting happiness 
and blessing to any and to all who will obey it. 
They will come to see, what they do not now realize, 
that the Lord's true Church in the world was a "little 
flock," a "peculiar people," guided by the Lord's eye, 
and by his Word, who, through much tribulation, 
trials of faith, trials of patience, etc., will become 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord, in the glorious Kingdom which will be established 
upon the ruins of present institutions, for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, with a righteous 



government. Let us then continue to pray, 

"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it 

R2869 : page 278 

is done in heaven." 

THE BREACH WIDENS. 



Not long since it was announced that all "union 
workmen" would withdraw from the volunteer State 
and National Guards, lest they should be called upon 
to protect properties when strikes were on, or 
to suppress riots in which fellow-workmen might 
be engaged. Now we have the announcement that 
the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel 
Workers will start a military organization of its own. 
Indeed the movement took definite shape on Saturday, 
August 3, as announced in the Wheeling, W. 
Va., Register of August 4, as follows: 

"A.A. OF IRON & STEEL WORKERS TO FORM MILITARY 
COMPANIES." 

A movement was started in this city yesterday for 
organizing a strong military branch of the Amalgamated 
Association of Iron, Tin and Steel Workers. 
The organization is designed to band the members 
closer together, to promote a better fraternal and social 

R2869 : page 279 

feeling, to protect the property of mill owners in 
cases of strikes, and for self-defense. 

The Register has been in possession of information 
for more than a week, to the effect that the idea 
has been agitated among Amalgamated men both in 
Wheeling and elsewhere. Not until yesterday, however, 
did the matter assume anything like tangible 
shape. Crescent Lodge, comprising the workmen 
employed at the Whitaker mill, held a regular meeting 
in the afternoon, during which the subject was 
broached. 

The matter was generally discussed, and several of 
the speakers were enthusiastically applauded. The 
details of the plan had previously been discussed 
among the men, and they were familiar with the subject 
when they came to the meeting. 

Crescent Lodge heartily approved the idea, and 
decided to enroll membership in the military branch at 
the next meeting of the lodge. It is expected that 
other lodges in this section will take the same course, 
now that Crescent has taken the initiative, and endorse 
the military plan. 



The discussion at the meeting evolved the following 
reasons for the organization of a military branch 
of the Amalgamation: 

First— It would band the members into closer union, 
promote fraternal and social feeling, and familiarize 
the members with the manual of arms of the United 
States army. Military organizations are regarded 
as beneficial to other bodies, and the same degree of 
benefit could be extracted by the Amalgamation. The 
opinion was expressed that no difficulty would be experienced 
in organizing companies of 100 members 
each, in nearly all the lodges in the order. In a short 
time a National military branch would be the outcome, 
and beneficial features might be added. 

Second— In cases of strikes and lockouts, the 
lodges would be in position to tender their services 
to mill owners for the protection of their property. 
It has been frequently charged, and it is claimed by 
Amalgamation men that it has been proven, that the 
lawless element has been incited to deeds of violence 
against capital, for the specific purpose of creating a 
public sentiment antagonistic to unions and strikers. 
In the discussion in Crescent lodge, it was stated that 
labor leaders have consistently contended for law 
and order, and that they have never sanctioned 
violence. 



It is expressly understood among the members of 
Crescent lodge that the military body will not be subject 
to orders from any government authority, except 
as individuals. Their position is the direct antithesis 
of that. They will not place themselves in 
positions to be called upon by State authorities in 
cases of strikes and labor disturbances, but they take 
the position that labor troubles may be obviated if 
mill owners will accept their services in the spirit in 
which they are offered. 

We cannot blame the managers of the trusts if they 
call in question the benevolence of this movement, 
and surmise that it means an eventual resort to carnage 
and anarchy between the two great companies 
of fellow creatures now being pressed into the vortex 
of strife for mastery by the inexorable laws of supply 
and demand and supported by constitutional selfishness, 
and both parties goaded on by fear. 

Temporarily the power is in the hands of wealthy 
and wise captains of industry; who, at any cost, will 
strive to hold on to all the advantages they have already 
attained; for the mills may stand idle for a time 
with only the loss of dividends, while the mechanic's 
necessities continue and his credit is necessarily small. 
Besides, by the laws of nature, his competitors are 
increasing even in his own family, not to mention the 
attractions which his employment, and hours and 



wages present to labor from other fields, which can 
soon learn to operate machinery successfully. 

Unquestionably capital must win in this contest 
under present conditions; but unquestionably also 
the ultimate result will be a grinding of the masses, 
between upper and nether millstones of supply and 
demand, until the danger point has been reached and 
the great explosion follows;— anarchy and destruction, 
born of fear and despair and not of preference or 
a love of lawlessness. "There shall be a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation."— Dan. 12:1; 
Matt. 24:21. 

Our advice to "brethren" in connection with all 
such troubles is, Yield— bend— submit to the inevitable 
as quietly and kindly and peaceably as possible. 
Seeing the outcome be "content" to let the Lord fight 
your battles. Accept whatever "rights" you can secure 
by lawful and peaceable means, and wait for the 
King Immanuel and his Kingdom of equity for the 
remainder of your "rights." Consider that you already 
have and enjoy more blessings and rights and 
privileges than your fathers, and more than as members 
of the fallen race you could justly demand; and 
be ye thankful. Additionally you can think generously 
of those on both sides of this conflict seeing 
that both are forced to the issue by present-day conditions. 
And thank the Lord for the light of his 
Word, which permits you to see matters thus in their 
true light. 

A MODERN REFORMATION. 



From the "London Daily Chronicle." 

While the attention of the British public has been 
divided between South Africa and China, events of 
far-reaching importance have occurred in France, 
Portugal, and Spain. With little comment from the 
Press, and scant notice from people not directly affected, 
laws have been promulgated or revived in 
France and Portugal that aim a dangerous blow at 
the priestly brotherhoods whose directors are in the 
Vatican, and whose ramifications extend all through 
the Latin countries. Students of Continental life 
have seen the slow approach of an anti-clerical movement 
in the countries overrun by the powerful militant 
associations of the Latin Church, but not a few 
have thought that the agitation would spend itself in 
protests. 

FRANCE AND THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS. 



In France the feeling against the religious houses 
(Jesuits, Assumptionists, Dominicans, Benedictines, 
Carmelites, and other Orders) has been growing year 
by year. 

R2869 : page 280 

It is unlikely that the full power of the Roman 
Church in matters beyond its proper jurisdiction was 
perceived by the men at the head of French affairs 
before the Dreyfus case, and then the gravity of the 
situation impressed itself upon the few strong men 
left on the side of the Republic. That the Church 
would overthrow the Republic if it could, was apparent 
to all thinking people, and in the meantime the 
Vatican's campaign was making the army unmanageable. 
It must be left to the historian to say what 
France owes to the Marquis de Gallifet and to M. 
Waldeck-Rousseau, who tempered courage with prudence 
at a very critical time, and to estimate the 
events that would have followed General Roget to 
the Elysee had he accepted the invitation of the half -mad 
enthusiast and patriot, Paul Deroulede. While 
the loudest outcry of the Nationalists has been directed 
against the Jews, at the instance of the Jesuits, 
who have never forgiven the Jewish financiers for 
breaking up the "Union Generale," it has been evident 
that the Republic is the offender in their eyes, 
the various groups that make up the National party 
finding, in hatred of the Republic, their one common 
sentiment. As the Latin Church has nothing to hope 
from the Republic, and everything to expect from 
a Pretender of the type of the Due d'Orleans, it has 
befriended the Nationalists, and sought to capture the 
power in times of crises. And it has very nearly 
succeeded. 

It is reasonable to believe that the new law for the 
regulation of Associations will be strictly enforced, 
and, unless the unexpected happens, the brotherhoods 
of the Latin Church, now working in Paris under 
orders from Rome, will become illegal communities 
by the end of the year, liable to suppression. 
Their members will be liable to fine and imprisonment. 
If M. Waldeck-Rousseau succeeds in a task 
that is well nigh completed, the Jesuits will no longer 
be able to train the young officers of the French 
Army; they will not be able to exert secret influence 
over the heads of the army, nor to evade taxes due 
upon such of their property as is not returned to 
them; they may even be unable to draw the hard-earned 
money of the French peasantry, as they and 
their brethren, the Assumptionist Fathers, have done 
so successfully in the past. Moreover, the Bill relating 

R2870 : page 280 



to Associations enables the Government to break 
up any union whose objects are deemed by the Cabinet 
to be inimical to the Republic, and thereby to 
control movements that, while they appear to be the 
outcome of the popular will, are in reality promoted 
or financed by the clerical associations through the 
medium of men of straw. 

THE PARALLEL WITH PORTUGAL. 



One of the curious points about the new French 
Law of Associations is that it is not an original conception, 
but is founded on the Portuguese law of 
1834, which abolished religious congregations in Portugal, 
confiscated their property, forbade the formation 
of new congregations, and, out of the profits of 
confiscation, pensioned the monks and nuns whose 
property was taken away. Portugal, at the time when 
the law was enacted, had been passing through a terrible 
crisis. Queen Maria Gloria, a girl of fifteen, was 
hardly secure upon the throne; Dom Pedro was dying; 
Dom Miguel, the Pretender, had been defeated 
after a sanguinary campaign; the clergy had been 
active intriguers on his behalf; and the country was 
in an uproar. The Queen's advisers saw that they 
must break the clerical power, or be content to suffer 
rebellion to smoulder in every village, whose ignorance 
responded to priestly direction. A very curious 
parallel may be drawn between Portugal in the 
early thirties and France in the late nineties, the only 
difference being that the recent civil war in France 
was waged on paper. The Portuguese law was a success 
for a few years. Associations of nuns having less 
than twelve members were dissolved, and members 
sent to other convents, for the nunneries were not 
treated as harshly as the monasteries. The nuns were 
to die out, and in Lisbon to-day is an old lady in her 
ninety-second year, relic of those troubled times, and 
the last survivor of the old regime. She saw the uprising, 
and has lived to see the religious associations 
creep back to their old places, in spite of the law. 
Monasteries and nunneries have sprung up again, 
the power of the Jesuits has waxed strong, and their 
procedure has become so unbearable that a crisis was 
reached little more than two months ago. Some 
Jesuit Fathers, of Oporto, tried to remove a young 
girl to a convent against the wishes of her parents; 
the action was made public, and served to fire the 
smouldering discontent. There were riots and bloodshed 
on a scale that alarmed the authorities. 

The popular feeling was strengthened by the regular 
clergy, whose antipathy to the foreign brotherhoods 
is very great. Queen and Cabinet have been 
on the side of the Jesuits; Dom Carlos, the King, 



alone is liberal in his views. Popular passion led to 
an unpleasant incident while the King was driving 
out in the early part of last month, and on the following 
day the Law of 1 834 was put into force once 
more, Queen, Cabinet, and Jesuits being unable to 
stem the current of the King's anger. It was a striking 
episode in Portugal's latter-day history, more 
suggestive of the Orient, than the Occident. Several 
religious houses have been closed in the last few 
weeks, and the inmates sent away to their own countries. 
The Jesuits are fighting hard, but not wisely. 
They issued a proclamation a week or two ago calling 
upon the people to petition the Throne to restore 
their privileges. These proclamations have been torn 
down in several towns; at Setubal riots and bloodshed 
were the order of the day. In the meantime the King 
has ignored the tendencies of the Government, and 
assured a deputation of Liberals that the 1 834 Law 
shall be enforced rigorously. They say in Lisbon that 
the beginning of the popular revolt may be dated 
from the exodus of the Assumptionist Fathers from 
France. Many came to Portugal, where their procedure 
served to exhaust popular patience. The Conservative 
and Reactionary Ministry of Portugal is tottering 
to its fall. 

THE JESUITS AND THE CARLISTS. 



In Spain the outcry against the clerical brotherhood 
is very strong. Throughout that unhappy country 

R2870 : page 281 

the very lowest orders of clergy seem to find a home. 
They have a comparative immunity from punishment, 
and are for the most part men of little or no education. 
So long as Carlism offered reasonable hopes 
of success, they encouraged the Carlists, by orders 
from Rome, for the presence of a Carlist King in 
Madrid would be meat and drink to the Vatican. 
The revolt against the Latin Brotherhoods is a 
very serious factor in the social and political situation 
for the time being. It is not unlikely that the Franco-Italian 
entente will spread the trouble in Italy, 
and that we shall see the movement working from Paris 
to Madrid, and from Lisbon to Naples. But while 
Governments change and Ministers pass away, Rome 
remains, and it would be unwise to rely upon a permanent 
change in the relations between Latin 
Church and Latin countries until the standard of education 
is far higher than it is to-day. In the temporal 
service of Rome, Cardinal Rampolla marshalls 
some of the keenest intellects in Europe. Rome will 
bend before the storm of popular opinion, and when 



it passes, renew her stature as of old time. Financial 
crises are within view in Portugal, Spain and Italy, 
and the Latin Brotherhoods find plenty of material 
for denunciation of irreligious Governments when 
food is at a premium and the maximum of taxation 
pursues the minimum of wages. Yet in the hands of 
unscrupulous Governments crises are a two-edged 
weapon, and many Latin Governments owe the Latin 
Church little affection. 



The above, taken in connection with the "Los von 
Rome" (away from Rome) movement, which, as already 
noted in these columns, is rapidly gaining headway 
in Austria, shows that the screws of superstition 
are being gradually loosened,— preparatory to the 
great, great political, social, financial and religious 
"earthquake" (Rev. 16:18), which is shortly to dismay 
all except those who have some knowledge of 
the final outcome of the divine plan of the ages. 



R2871 : page 281 

RESPECTING FOREIGN MISSIONS. 



WE HAVE heard from three dear sisters in 
Christ, who have been for a long time deeply 
interested in foreign missions, to the effect that they 
were greatly disappointed that in our last issue we 
quoted certain criticisms of foreign missions. They 
find no fault with our own utterances in the article; 
but think the quotations false when they refer to the 
missionaries as having taken part in the looting of 
Peking. One of the Sisters says,— "I ask you, in 
justice to the missionaries, to publish in the Tower 
the enclosed extract from an article in the May 
number of the North American Review,— by Rev. 
Judson Smith, Corresponding Secretary of the 
American Board of Foreign Missions." We give the 
extract cheerfully, following, and will explain later 



"THE MISSIONARIES AND THEIR CRITICS." 



"The efforts of the Boxers were directed especially 
against the native converts, because of their connections 
with the foreigners. These converts were 
crushed by heavy fines, were robbed, were driven 
from their homes, and, in due time, were slain by 



hundreds and thousands. When the siege of Peking 

was raised the missionaries were left with large 

bodies of native Christians dependent upon them for 

everything. The missionaries themselves were left 

without homes, without resources, with these hundreds 

of homeless, helpless people looking to them 

for aid. Chaos reigned in Peking and in the country 

around it. The missionaries of different Boards felt 

that it would be intolerable for them to suffer these 

Chinese refugees, who had helped during the siege 

and had won encomiums for the share they had 

borne in it, to perish, as they must if something 

were not done in their behalf. The case was urgent. 

They were without food and without the means of 

obtaining it. Food and shelter for the very next 

day and then for days after that, must be found. 

Delay meant starvation and death. In the absence 

of all native authority with the knowledge and approval 

of Mr. Conger and other Ambassadors, two 

colonies were established in different parts of Peking, 

in courts abandoned by their owners, and were 

supported by the resources found in these courts, 

just as the Ambassadors and all others in the siege 

had been kept alive by what they found within their 

reach from the British Legation. As to the charge 

of looting by the missionaries, besides their own denials, 

we have the explicit testimony of one wholly 

outside their number whose position gave him exceptional 

facilities for knowing the facts. Mr. R. E. 

Bredon, Deputy Inspector General for the Imperial 

Maritime customs of China, who was in Peking 

throughout the siege and remained there some time 

afterward, wrote October 3, to the North China Mail, 

I heard in the Legation, before we were enabled 

to leave it, that missionaries had taken quantities 

of loot. I took special pains to investigate the 

truth of the assertion, and found absolutely nothing 

to confirm it.'" 

LET THE TRUTH PREVAIL. 



Although we quoted the Literary Digest article as 
a whole, we had no special desire to refer to the 
"looting" practiced at Peking. The leading journals 
have had much to say for and against the conduct 
of the missionaries in this respect; but for our 
part we considered that they treated the matter too 
severely,— seeming to overlook the fact that anarchy 
prevailed, and that it was not only necessary to take 
possession of palaces as temporary shelters, but necessary 
also to procure food for the starving— either 
by seizing food or by seizing goods which could be 
turned into money wherewith to buy food. 

There is no doubt, however, that missionaries did 



adopt this plan of confiscating goods, called "looting"; 
for they have confessed it. The article by Rev. 

R2871 : page 282 

Judson Smith was called out as a defense of the 
course; and on close examination will not be found 
to be a denial of the facts admitted by missionaries 
Ament and Tewksbury. For instance Dr. Ament 
says,— 

"In explanation of anything the missionaries may 
have done in the line of looting, it is only right to say 
that a famine was predicted for the coming winter, 
that they had hundreds of people in their charge 
who were in immediate need of food, clothing, and 
shelter, and who looked to the missionaries for assistance. 
It is but justice to them to say that if in 
the ardor of their desire to provide for their people, 
they did some things that attracted criticism, they 
did it with the best of intentions." 
The New York Sun of May 4, says:— 
"In an interview at Kobe, Dr. Ament, while on his 
way home to this country in Mr. Conger's company, 
gave an amazing picture of his experience in 'selling 
stuff that did not belong to him. We are now quoting 
from the Kobe Herald of April 6: 

"The Tungchau mission, through Mr. Tewksbury, 
were selling things at Prince Yu's residence, 
and Miss Smith, of the London Mission, was selling 
off stuff from Boxer premises she had taken for her 
people. Mine was the last sale of the three. There 
were no especially valuable things on our premises 
—the owner was a broken-down Mongol prince; one 
sable robe, numbers of fox and squirrel-skin garments, 
and a large number of garments of inferior 
quality. The sale lasted two weeks." 
'"Did you have it at stated times of day, then?" 
'"No, at any time when the officers came. I had 
an experienced Chinaman put a value on the things, 
and I then charged about one-half or two-thirds of 
the value they would have brought in ordinary times. 
The officers were very glad to purchase at those 
rates." 
"Then there was no regular sale?" 
'"No, the things were marked, and the officers 
would come and go prowling around the rooms, 
bringing to me what they wanted while I was going 
on with my work, and this, as I say, went on for 
about a fortnight. When they saw what things were 
wanted, some of our Christians borrowed a little 
money and went on the streets and purchased fur 
garments from Russians or Sikh soldiers, and 
brought them in and sold them to the officers at a 
good profit.'" 

"Thus was the palace occupied in the absence of 
its proprietor, by the Rev. Dr. Ament turned into a 



receptacle and mart for stolen goods; not stolen, he 
asserts, by the 'Christians' who brought the stuff in, 
but by them purchased on speculation from the 
original looters and sold under Dr. Ament's supervision 
at a good profit. ..If the Rev. Dr. Judson 
Smith blinks the word loot, the Rev. Dr. W. S. 
Ament doesn't. We wonder whether the first-named 
divine has really read all the evidence afforded by his 
own chief witness." 



But while we thus give both sides to the looting 
matter and thus establish the truth of all we published 
in our last, that shocked some of our readers, 
nevertheless we have heretofore avoided all reference 
to the matter, feeling that considerable excuse 
should be made for departure from Christian and 
civilized usages, considering that anarchy prevailed 
and that money from other sources was probably not 
available. Nevertheless we cannot commend the 
course. It would have seemed questionable to a 
"business man" and should not have been even 
thought of by ministers of the gospel of justice are 
love. The missionaries evidently were misled by the 
worldly looting spirit prevailing in that anarchy and 
did what they would not do again, and would not 
have done then under less temptation. 

NOT MEN BUT FALSE DOCTRINES DO WE ATTACK. 



Our article was not intended as an attack upon 
missionaries, nor yet upon missions; but rather it 
was an attack upon the false doctrine which has been 
the mainspring of energy in connection with missionary 
efforts; viz., that the heathen are going into 
eternal torment by the hundreds of thousands yearly; 
—for lack of the knowledge carried to them by the 
missionaries. If Christian people desire to go to the 
people of China, Japan, India, Turkey, etc., as doctors, 
nurses, hospital-attendants, teachers of school-children, 
general teachers of morality, and illustrators 
of our Western civilization, well and good. And 
if incidentally then they get an occasional person or 
many to accept Jesus as their Redeemer and Lord 
so much the better. But it is high time that the false 
pretense, the pride and vanity bubble, of "converting 
the world" were burst, and that its baneful influence 
upon Christendom terminated. 

The missionaries know full well that it is as reasonable 
to talk of a trip to the moon as to talk of 
"capturing the world for Jesus:" neither would be 
possible without a miracle,— the interposition of super-human 
power. It is time that Christian people 



learned that the only hope of the world's conversion 
—the only hope that the Lord's will shall ever be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven— lies in the 
promised second coming of our Lord Jesus, to be 
earth's King, and to set up the Kingdom of God 
which we are assured will triumph over Satan and 
sin and every evil, and scatter blessings to every 
creature, and make possible to all a full return to divine 
favor and life-everlasting. 

PREACH THE GOSPEL TO EVERY CREATURE. 



"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations."— 

Matt. 28:19. 
"Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to 

every creature."— Mark 16:15.* 
"The gospel which ye have heard, and which was 
preached to every creature which is under heaven."— 
Col. 1:23. 
"This gospel of the Kingdom shall be declared in all 
the world, for a witness unto all nations; and then shall 
the end [of this age] come."— Matt. 24:14. 



*This verse is not found in the oldest Greek MSS. 
They end with verse 8. Thus the basis of the Christian 
Science, and Christian Alliance, and Mr. Dowie's Christian 
Catholic systems falls.— See Revised Version, margin. 

R2872 : page 283 

If the expectation that the world is to be converted 
by missionary effort, before the Lord comes 
a second time, is a mistake, how shall we understand 
the foregoing Scripture statements? 

We reply, that nothing in the above passages of 
Scripture or any others say one word about the 
world's conversion as the result of the preaching. 
On the contrary, the general tenor of Scripture is to 
the effect that this age will end as did the Jewish 
age— with a great time of trouble— because of the 
"tares" out of accord with the Lord and his Kingdom 
of righteousness. 

The Lord's words here are to be viewed in the 
light of his previous instructions to the same apostles. 
He had told them to "Go not into the way of 
the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter 
ye not;" explaining that for the time his mission 
was exclusively to the Jews, "the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel" (Matt. 10:5,6; 15:24). Now he 
would give them to understand that the Jewish favor 
was drawing to an end, and that ultimately they 
would be privileged to tell the good tidings to all 



that have an ear to hear— to Gentiles, all nations, 
as well as to Jews. 

That this is the correct view of the commission is 
evident from the third text quoted above. The 
apostle announces that the time had come when the 
gospel privileges were open to every creature under 
heaven who had "ears to hear" and a heart to appreciate 
it. To interpret his language otherwise 
would be to charge him with falsehood; for neither 
then, nor since, has it been a fact that even one in ten 
of the human creatures under heaven have heard the 
gospel. 

The key is in the last of these texts. It points out 
distinctly that the mission of the gospel is not to convert 
the world, but to "witness" to it. The true converts 
under this witnessing will be in all but a "little 
flock"; but to these "elect, according to the foreknowledge 
of God, through sanctification of the spirit 
and a belief of the truth," God proposes to give a 
share with Christ in his Kingdom;— his agency for 
uplifting humanity and blessing all who, after being 
enlightened, seek a blessing— even unto life 
everlasting. 

Anyway, it is the "Gospel of the Kingdom" that is 
to be preached in all the world, and not "another 
gospel"; and we fear that very few of the missionaries 
know much about the Kingdom gospel. Nevertheless 
the "gospel of the Kingdom" is clearly set 
forth in the Scriptures, which are now published in 
all the languages (not dialects) of earth. Furthermore, 
the Watch Tower literature is in the hands of 
all the missionaries in every quarter of the world; 
and through some of these— we know not— God can 
and will find the true "wheat" for his "garner." 



One Sister inquires, Should not we carry to the 
darker parts of the earth our superior ideas respecting 
health, cleanliness, care of the sick, civilization, 
etc.? 

If by we is meant the Lord's consecrated people, 
our answer would be, No. God's commission to us 
through Jesus and the apostles is restricted— "The 
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the gospel to the meek,"— the 
teachable. "He that hath an ear to hear, let him 
hear!" We are not to force the gospel of the Kingdom 
upon any, by sword and gun, or in any other 
manner. Thus the Apostle Paul witnesseth for Jesus 
and the resurrection and the Kingdom to come, 
seeking only so many as the Lord our God had 
called. He gave special attention to the instruction 
of these few, to the intent that they might be made 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light— the 
Kingdom. He never dreamed of general conversions 



and taking the world for Christ, knowing that 
such was not the divine plan,— except through the 
Kingdom. 

As to whether the world (nominal Christendom) is 
doing well or ill for the heathen, is an open question. 
The fact that we, born and reared under Western 
civilization, would be miserable if obliged to live 
along the lines of Eastern civilization proves little; 
for so far as we can discern the people of China and 
India prefer their own methods, customs, etc. A 
canary bird, reared in captivity, may greatly enjoy 
its gilt cage with its swing, bath, etc., so as to feel 
lost indeed if deprived of them; but would the bird 
reared under other conditions, be happier in such a 
cage? We know that it would not. And may it not 
be so with different races of men, accustomed to different 
ideals and methods? Will the Chinaman be 
happier in a European cut of coat, shoes, shirt, collar 
and tie? Are we certain that the Chinawoman 
will be happier with larger feet, and shoes of our 
pattern and with corsets and Paris fashioned gowns? 

Ah! you say, it is not these alone we would take 
them. We would supplant their Joss houses with 
what we term churches; and their weird musical instruments 
with our organs, and we would give them 
Jesus instead of Brahm and Buddha. 

Even so ! are we quite certain that this would increase 
their happiness? Are there not millions, in 
Europe and America, who have these very blessings, 
who are among the most discontented and unhappy 
people in the world? Are these foreign heathen 
either better or worse in God's sight than many in 
so called Christian lands who attend "church" regularly, 
wear fashionable clothing, etc., of whom the 
Lord says, "This people draw near me with their 
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have 
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men."— Isa. 29:13. 
Let us not forget the Lord's words to some 
very zealous for mission-work in his day;— "Ye compass 
sea and land to make one proselyte; and when 
he is made, ye make him two-fold more the child of 
Gehenna than yourselves."— Matt. 23:15. 

"Even as many as the Lord your God shall call," 
said the apostle; and accordingly God's people, realizing 
that the chosen will be few, should seek to labor 
in harmony with the Lord's callings. Eighteen 
centuries show us that while no nation under heaven 
is refused or discriminated against, and some out of 
all have been called, nevertheless God's favors have 
been chiefly toward the white or Caucasian race. 
If we have done all we know how to do in this the 
Lord's special wheat-field, then by all means let us 

R2872 : page 284 



go into other fields. But if through the delusions of 
Satan the "gospel (?) of damnation" has been substituted 
for the "gospel of the Kingdom," so that 
the majority of those who profess the name of Christ 
have no knowledge of this gospel, then, by all means, 
let us who do know of it, bend all our energies to 
labor in this field which is "white already to the harvest," 
and its harvest work rapidly progressing. 



R2870 : page 284 

THE WATERED LILIES. 



The Master stood in His garden, 

Among the lilies fair, 
Which his own right hand had planted, 

And trained with tend'rest care; 

He looked at their snowy blossoms, 
And marked with observant eye 

That the flowers were sadly drooping, 
For their leaves were parched and dry. 

But the Master saw, and raised it 
From the dust in which it lay, 

And smiled, as He gently whispered, 
"This shall do My work to-day: 

"My lilies need to be watered," 

The Heavenly Master said; 
"Wherein shall I draw it for them, 

And raise each drooping head!" 

Close to His feet on the pathway, 

Empty, and frail, and small, 
An earthen vessel was lying, 

Which seemed no use at all; 

"It is but an earthen vessel, 

But it lay so close to Me; 
It is small, but it is empty,— 

That is all it needs to be." 

So to the fountain He took it, 
And filled it full to the brim; 

How glad was the earthen vessel 
To be of some use to Him! 

He poured forth the living water 

Over His lilies fair, 
Until the vessel was empty, 

And again He filled it there. 



He watered the drooping lilies 

Until they revived again; 
And the Master saw with pleasure 

That His labour had not been vain. 

His own hand had drawn the water 
Which refreshed the thirsty flowers; 

But he used the earthen vessel 
To convey the living showers. 

And to itself it whispered, 

As He laid it aside once more, 

"Still will I lie in His pathway, 
Just where I did before. 

"Close would I keep to the Master, 

Empty would I remain, 
And perhaps some day He may use me 

To water His flowers again." 



R2872 : page 284 

QUARTERLY REVIEW.--SEPT. 29. 

Golden Text:— "The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting 
to everlasting, upon them that fear him."— Psa. 103:17. 

OUR TEXT is a forceful reminder of our studies 
in the past quarter. It was a lack of reverence 
for the Lord that permitted mother Eve to be deceived 
and to become the first transgressor. It was 
a lack of reverence for the Lord that led our father 
Adam into disobedience, into practical suicide, because 
of his love for Eve, and because he had not yet 
learned the proper reverence for God which would 
have led him to be obedient and to trust the results 
of Eve's disobedience to divine wisdom. It was lack 
of reverence for the Lord which operated in Satan to 
an evil ambition, and thus to his fall. It was lack of 
reverence for the Lord and for his rules of government 
that permitted the angels of the first dispensation 
to leave their own condition, and thus to get into 
sin with humanity. It was a lack of reverence for 
the Lord on the part of the world in general that 
caused the world to be full of violence and ready for 
destruction in the flood. 

It was a proper reverence for the Lord that controlled 
Noah and his family, and kept them separate 
from the evil of their time, and that brought to them 
ultimately the divine blessing and preservation 
through the flood. It was a proper reverence for the 
Lord that enabled Abraham to forsake home and 
country in response to a divine promise, and that 



guided him throughout his pilgrimage and kept him 
separate from the Sodomites and the evil influences 
of that time. Similarly, on Isaac's part, it was reverence 
for the Lord which kept him in his father's 
footsteps; and we have just seen how fully Jacob was 
imbued with this reverence for divinity, and for all 
the gracious promises by which the Lord represented 
himself to him. We have seen the hand of the Lord 
with all those who had this reverence, and that even 
though they passed through numerous and severe 
trials, difficulties, etc., they were not forsaken, but 
upheld. 

On the other hand, we have seen Lot's insufficiency 
of reverence, which permitted him to associate with 
evil-doers, and which ultimately brought upon him 
a share of their trouble. We have seen Ishmael's lack 
of reverence, and Esau's lack of reverence, and how 
these though not injured of the Lord, nevertheless 
missed greater blessing which a different course 
might have brought to them. 

The lesson for us is that which Joshua expressed 
to Israel later, saying, "Choose ye this day whom ye 
will serve; as for me and my house we will serve the 
Lord." (Josh. 24:15.) Let others reverence whom 
and what they will; we, who have tasted that the Lord 
is gracious, we, who have come to know him through 
his Word, and through his providences, and through 
the power of the spirit by which we are begotten 
again to newness of life— we can do naught else than 

R2873 : page 285 

reverence our God; and reverencing him we must 
trust him implicitly; and trusting him implicitly we 
will gladly walk in whatever way he may mark out for 
us; and thus trusting, and thus walking we are content, 
whatever lot we see, since 'tis his hand that leadeth 
us. And let us be assured that following the true 
Shepherd after this manner, we shall ultimately reach 
the heavenly fold. In these assurances we have joy 
and peace and blessing of heart, even in the house of 
our pilgrimage, before we reach the heavenly city. 



R2873 : page 285 

INTEMPERANCE. 

PROV. 23:29-35. -SEPT. 22. 

Golden Text:— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— Prov. 20:1. 

INTEMPERANCE is one of the most dreadful 
curses afflicting humanity, and even those who 



are its slaves will admit the force and truth of our 

text. It would appear that everyone coming under 

its baneful influence becomes more or less its slave— 

the more so in proportion as he has become weak 

through the fall, and the six thousand years of increasing 

loss of physical and mental strength and 

vigor. Only those who realize that inherited weakness 

has much to do with drunkenness, can sympathize 

with a fallen one, or rightly appreciate why intoxicants 

have so much stronger influence over some 

than over others. But while pity and sympathy are 

properly called for, they must be exercised in moderation, 

if we would benefit the fallen and the weak. 

None are so weak, so degraded, as to be without some 

base of character; and our aim should be to strengthen 

and build up character, and encourage and stimulate 

resistance to these weaknesses, rather than too 

freely to condone them. 

The weak and degraded should be encouraged to 
know that they have a will-power which will greatly 
assist them in the cultivation of character if they will 
but use it. But they and all should know that the 
greatest strength and stimulus to character comes 
from above; and that the weakest as respects depravity 
of the flesh, may obtain such help of heart and of 
intellect from the promises, exhortations, admonitions 
and encouragements of the Lord's Word as will make 
them strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might. We need power and strength of our own wills 
every day in overcoming the weaknesses of our fallen 
condition; but we need more than this,— we need 
"grace to help in every time of need;" and we need 
to learn whence it is to be obtained, and how to approach 
the throne of heavenly grace with confidence, 
so as to obtain the needed blessing. 

Here comes in the necessity for an appreciation of 
the doctrines of Christ— to assure us that our weaknesses 
are understood and sympathized with by the 
Lord in every proper sense, and that his provision in 
Christ is such that he can be just and yet justify believers 
in Jesus;— that he can be just, and yet forgive 
us our sins and grant us needed strength and help in 
overcoming. 

To those who have friends or neighbors addicted 
to intemperance, over whom they desire to exercise 
a helpful influence, we advise that they appeal to the 
will, to the self-respect, and to the rewards of temperance 
and intemperance, viewed from a worldly and 
social standpoint: but we advise that they go further, 
and urge that in view of the weakness of their own 
wills, as manifested by their intemperance, they 
should recognize that while all men need the Savior, 
and the help which he alone can give, yet the weaker 
the will the greater the need. When we are weak 
in the matter of self-reliance, and are thereby led to 
make a covenant with the Lord, and to lean upon his 



strength, then we are strong.— 2 Cor. 12:9,10. 

We will make this lesson a short one, since we have 
no reason to believe that any particular number of our 
readers are slaves to intemperance; indeed, we know 
that whom the Son makes free is free indeed; and 
we urge upon all that the greater freedom which we 
receive in Christ, through a clear knowledge of the 
divine plan, should lead us more diligently to bring 
every talent and power of mind and of body into full 
subjection to the divine will, and into the service of the 
divine plan. And those who are imbued with this 
thought will surely realize that they have neither mental 
nor physical powers to dissipate— that they belong 
to the Lord, and are to glorify him in their bodies and 
their spirits, which are his (1 Cor. 6:20). They will 
perceive that they are merely stewards, and that any 
misuse of talents, either through intoxication or otherwise, 
would be a misuse of their stewardship, and 
lead surely on to that condition in which the Lord 
could not say to them, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." 

But while disposed to encourage temperance, and 
to discourage intemperance in respect to intoxicants 
of every kind, we feel that the special lesson needed 
by the Lord's consecrated people is in respect to the 
intoxicating influences of the world, as they come to 
and affect us as "new creatures." There is an intoxication 
in wealth, in luxury, in ease, which tends to 
say to the soul, "Take thine ease; forget they covenant 
of sacrifice— to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, 
and be dead to the world and its aims with him." 
There is an intoxication of pleasure, of fashion, of 
pride and fond desire, which appeals to the "new 
creature" very strongly, through various avenues of 
the mortal body, and seeks to intoxicate, to stupify, 
the new mind, to make us dull of hearing as respects 
spiritual things, to make us lax as respects our zeal 
for the Lord, for the truth, and for the brethren; and 
to make us covet the things that would be approved 
by the world, and pleasurable to our own flesh, and 
harmonious to the wishes and exhortations of our 
friends. To all of these intoxicating allurements the 
answer must be, No; we have sworn off, we have 
covenanted our lives that we shall henceforth be dead 
to earthly interests and alive toward God. Our joys, 
our pleasures, our intoxications, must be of the spiritual 
kind. We must become so enthused, enraptured, 
with the heavenly things, with the joy and 

R2873 : page 286 

peace and blessing which accompany the eating and 
drinking at the Lord's table, and being filled with his 
spirit, that the intoxications of earthly joys will have 
less and less attraction for us.— Eph. 5:18. 



"My soul be on thy guard; 

Ten thousand foes arise: 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 



R2873 : page 286 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE RANSOM. 



Question.— Is an understanding of the philosophy 
of the ransom essential to justification? 

Answer.— Justification is the name for that standing 
in the sight of God in which He can accept us and 
deal with us no longer as sinners but as perfect human 
sons. This relationship or standing has been 
accounted to the friends of God ever since the day 
of Abraham, surely, and evidently to some others previously. 
Neither Abraham nor David nor Samuel 
nor the prophets understood the philosophy of the 
ransom. They could not understand it, for it had not 
yet been revealed in any sense or degree: it had merely 
been hinted at in types and through indefinite 
promises. 

But they could and did have faith in God, and the 
Apostle Paul (Rom. 4) shows that it was that faith 
that justified them. They had faith to the full of the 
revelation of God's will and plan made to them. The 
extent of the knowledge of God possible to be possessed 
has increased considerably since Abraham's 
day. In Rom. 4:24, the Apostle makes faith in God 
the basis of our justification as it was the basis of their 
acceptance, though now faith in God includes faith in 
the Lord Jesus as our Redeemer. It was impossible for 
any to believe on Him of whom they had not heard; 
but Abraham believed God in His statement that in 
his seed (afterward shown to be Christ) all the families 
of the earth should be blest. Abraham's faith 
was reckoned as justifying him in God's sight. It was 

R2874 : page 286 

such an active, obedient faith as would have accepted 
Christ personally, as it accepted the promises concerning 
him. In due time his faith shall be perfected 
—at our Lord's second advent. 

Coming down to the first advent of our Lord: His 
teaching evidently brought a great light to them that 
had the eyes of their understanding opened, and he 



declared the ransom. We have no reason to suppose 
that even those who heard our Lord speak in dark 
sayings and parables grasped the philosophy of the 
ransom; and so through the Gospel age to the present 
time. We must therefore suppose that in God's 
wisdom it was quite sufficient that his people should 
believe the fact which his Word does clearly state, 
that Christ's death paid the penalty for the sins of the 
whole world somehow or other, not understood. 

The ransom was necessary, so far as God was concerned, 
as the basis of our justification. But so far 
as we were concerned, the thing necessary was to "believe 
God" and to accept God's statement, that 
through the death of Christ the reconciliation for the 
sins of the whole world was effected, for all who would 
believe it and act accordingly. 

The philosophy of the subject is needful in our day, 
and is "meat in due season;" now, because we have 
come down to a time when there is in progress a special 
sifting and testing in connection with Christ and 
his sacrifice, and when it is necessary to have the 
philosophy of the subject in order to be able to appreciate 
and hold on clearly to the fact that we were 
redeemed by the precious blood. 

It will be noticed that the prophet declares that all 
the tables of Babylon are full of vomit— rejected 
things. They had some very good things upon their 
tables, among others the doctrine of the ransom; but 
failing to be in the right condition of heart now, the 
Lord is rejecting Babylon; and those of his people in 
her are called away from her tables to the meat in due 
season, while her tables, served by those who are rejected 
from being the Lord's mouth-pieces ("I will 
spue thee out of my mouth"), are in the light of the 
dawning day being despised; and even the good 
things from the Lord's Word (the ransom, etc.), 
which once yielded them refreshment, are now defiled 
in their eyes along with the rejected nonsense 
of the dark ages. 

THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY. 



Question.— What did the Lord mean when he said 
(John 2:19), "Destroy this temple, and in three days 
I will raise it up?" 

Answer.— A suggestion as to his meaning is found 
in verse 21— "But he spake of the temple of his body" 
—the Church, he being the head of the Church. 

A day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day. The first advent was in 
the beginning of the fifth day or thousand years (over 
four thousand years being past, and the fifth thousand 
begun). During the fifth and sixth days his Church 
has been selecting, and early in the seventh (the Millennium), 



the third day, his body, the Church, will be 
perfected with him— the spiritual temple. He himself 
was raised from the dead "on the third day," literally, 
but it was not by his own power— God highly 
exalted him. The words of the text can not, therefore, 
refer to our Lord's personal resurrection. 

"WHOM NO MAN HATH SEEN NOR CAN SEE.' 



Question.— Do you believe that the restitution class 
will ever enter heaven, and "see the King in his 
beauty"? 

Answer.— No, we have no reason whatever to expect 
that any of the restitution class will ever enter 
heaven, or ever see spiritual beings. It would be entirely 
contrary to their nature; man is adapted to the 
earth, as a fish is adapted to the water. If man were 
taken out of the earth into heaven he would be like 
the fish out of water— out of his element. Nor is 
there any suggestion in the Scriptures of any change 

R2874 : page 287 

of nature; human nature being perfection on its own 
plane, so designed by the Creator; and those perfect 
on the human plane will be just as satisfied with 
their perfection as will the perfect on the angelic 
plane, and those on other planes of being. They will 
see the King in his beauty in the same sense that we 
now see the Lord when we are "looking unto Jesus." 
More than this, when mankind is perfect they will see 
in each other the very image of God; and all through 
the Millennial Age they will see in the princes who 
will be in charge of their government, the likeness of 
God, for these princes or ancient worthies will be 
perfect human beings. 

THE CHRISTIAN ALLIANCE. 



Question.— How far are the Christian Alliance 
views correct? 

Answer.— In our opinion not very far. They look 
for the second coming of the Lord, but mistakenly, as 
do many friends in the various denominations. They 
hold nearly all the false doctrines held by nearly all 
denominations. In our understanding many of the 
Christian Alliance people are earnest, and probably 
as a whole, a more holy people than most of the denominations; 
but this is about all that we can say for 
them. We must consider their system as a branch 
or ward of Babylon, and would warn all to come out 
of her, that they be not partakers of the woes that 



are shortly to come upon her, and that they be upon 
the Lord's side and accounted worthy to see further 
light of present truth. 

Question.— What is your understanding of the call 
and work of a minister or preacher, as taught in God's 
Word? 

Answer.— (1) That in a general sense all Christians 
are anointed of the spirit to be preachers, and 
are such in proportion as they exercise their talents 
in spreading the truth. 

(2) That any Christian (man), having knowledge 
and ability as a herald, who feels drawn to devote all 
his time to the spread of the truth, an open door being 
seen, is justified in changing his field of labor 

from temporal to spiritual, in part or in whole, giving 
more and more of his time and energy to his direct 
vocation of an ambassador for God and less and less 
to his avocation earthly. 

(3) That these heralds shall trust in God to supply 
their needs; and receiving only free will offerings 
from the brethren and others should "labor" for 

the things needful, accepting these conditions of the 
Lord's providence. 

(4) That when one of these finds every door of 
opportunity closed, he shall accept it as an evidence 
of work done in that field and should seek to know 
whether for some reason his service is not acceptable 
longer or whether the Lord has another field for 
him, or whether all the work is done. In any case, he 
should recognize that his vocation is that of an ambassador 
for the truth, and that earthly affairs are only 

his avocations, and should seek to prosecute as best 
he can the ministry of the Word, through evil and 
good report, through trials and encouragements, 
through sorrows and joys. 

WHAT WAS JEPHTHAH'S VOW? 



Question.— What attitude are we to assume toward 
the account of Jephthah's reckless vow which brought 
death to his daughter? Is there any redeeming feature 
in the incident? 

Answer.— We are to accept the scriptural statement 
that Jephthah was amongst the faithful— acceptable to 
God. As such he must also be acceptable to us. In 
respect to his offering his daughter in sacrifice our 
conclusion must be that the divine arrangement then 
and now differs materially. We may say, however, 
that as Abraham was about to offer his son Isaac, not 
willingly, but through obedience to what he understood 
to be the divine will, so did Jephthah with his 
daughter; and he was not hindered by an angel from 
the Lord. I do not know if the lamentation has any 
significance. 



Answer.— A totally different view of this matter is 
possible, and we merely suggest it; namely, that the 
vow was one of full devotion to the Lord— one of 
chastity and sanctity— seclusion from society, deadness 
to the world as a priestess. The daughter's request 
for time for lamentation, and the subsequent 
annual celebration by the virgins, would agree well 
with this view. The chief objection to this view is 
the statement respecting "a burnt offering," and this 
seems almost insurmountable. 

"WHOM NO MAN HATH SEEN NOR CAN SEE.' 



Question.— In what sense can the statement in Job 19:26 
be true, since we understand he will not have 
power to "see God" as a human being? 

Answer.— The passage might be understood in two 
different ways: (a) As an expression of Job's trust 
in the Lord that notwithstanding the serious disease 
with which he was afflicted, and the apparent utter 
destruction of his skin, by a loathsome disease yet he 
hoped for recovery and that he should yet praise the 
Lord in the flesh and in health. Or (b) it may be 
understood to refer to a future life and Job's confidence 
that tho his sickness should result in death, 
complete dissolution, yet it did not mean in him an 
everlasting extinction. As previously stated, God 
would call and he would answer in his flesh. His seeing 
God in the flesh should not be understood as that 
which is impossible, of which our Lord says, "No man 
hath seen God at any time," and of which the Apostle 
says, "Whom no man hath seen nor can see." It 
should be understood in the way in which it is commonly 
used today, viz., that God's people see him in 
his works, as we sometimes say, "I see God's hand in 

R2875 : page 287 

this." And again, we are informed that "all flesh 
shall see the salvation of God." And again, "Look 
unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth." 



page 288 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



THESE SERVICES ARE WITHOUT CHARGE, AND NO COLLECTIONS ARE TAKEN UP. THE 

FRIENDS AT EACH 

PLACE GENERALLY PROVIDE THE MEETING PLACES AND ARE PLEASED TO ENTERTAIN 

THE 

LORD'S SERVANTS (AND NOTHING UNUSUAL OR ELABORATE IS EXPECTED.) 



THE CLEVELAND CONVENTION. 



Our general Convention for the year is appointed 
for Cleveland, Ohio, commencing Thursday, Sept. 12 
at 2 P.M., closing Sunday night, Sept. 15. 

Special rail-road rates can be obtained;— on western 
roads as low as 1 cent per mile— account "G.A. 
R. Encampment"; but those using such tickets must 
reach Cleveland some time before midnight of Sept. 12. 

Special arrangements have been made by the 
Cleveland friends for our comfortable entertainment 
at one dollar per day, each, for food and lodging (one-half 
what we had expected). And further, they kindly 
offer free entertainment to such as cannot afford this 
small price. Send us word, at once, if you decide to 
attend, that arrangements may be made for your party. 
The city will be crowded and accomodations hard to 
find at the time. State married couples and whether 
the others are males or females, for of course separate 
rooms, etc., could not be had for each at the price. 

A VERY INTERESTING PROGRAM IS BEING ARRANGED. 

We are looking for a large attendance from all 
parts of the country and from Canada. However, we 
are still more anxious for the Lord's spirit to be with 
us than that the numbers should be large,— tho there 
is an enthusiasm and inspiration in numbers also. 

The general testimony is that each of these yearly 
conventions out-does all of its predecessors. We hope 
it may be so this time also. Why should it not be so 
if, as the Lord's people, we are continually growing 
in grace and knowledge and love? Come, seeking to 
bestow as well as to receive a blessing. "He that 
seeketh findeth." "To him that knocketh it shall be 
opened." "Your heavenly Father is more willing to 
give [increasingly] the holy spirit to them that ask 
[seek] it, than are earthly parents to give good [earthly] 
gifts unto their children." 

FT. WAYNE, IND.-AUG. 25. 

Morning session, specially for the interested, will 
be a Convention Welcome and Rally, at 10:30 a.m. 



Afternoon session, specially for the public, at 3 p.m. 
In the evening at 7:30 the discourse will be specially 
for the household of faith. 

All meetings will be held in Knights of Columbus 
Hall, Lau Block, Cor. Calhoun and Washington Sts. 

Friends from near-by places are cordially invited; 
and all in introducing themselves are requested to 
mention their home address, that we may the better 
identify them. Come praying the Lord's blessing- 
seeking to receive a blessing, and to be used as a channel 
of blessing to others. 



ROCHESTER, N.Y.-SEPTEMBER 29. 
RICHMOND, VA.-OCT. 12, 13. 
Particulars in due season. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 