From Our Readers
Overcoming Acne
I would like to thank you for the article in the series “Young People Ask . . ” entitled “Can’t I Do Something About My Acne?” (February 22, 1987) This article came along at a moment when I was starting to despair, and it helped me enormously in carrying out my treatment. I now realize that only perseverance can really bring an improvement.
S. C., France
A Birth or an Abortion?
At 20, already married and the mother of a three-year-old son, I almost had an abortion. I am so happy that I did not. I was spared so many sorrows I would otherwise have had. Today my two sons, nine and six years old, are both readers of your magazine. Keep on publishing good articles like this. (April 8, 1987) Maybe it will help other women not to have abortions.
E. B., Federal Republic of Germany
Beating Stress
Until recently I was terribly afflicted with stress, unable to cope with it. Last December I finished my schooling, took up employment as a technician in nutrition and diet, but within four weeks I gave it up. I judged myself to be incapable of assuming any responsibility, a coward, a failure. So great was my anxiety over this that everyone and everything made me cry or get angry, or even want to die. I tried several remedies but with little success. Then along came the article “Young People Ask . . . Can I Beat Stress?” (April 8, 1987) How relieved I was to know that we all have stress in some form or another and that it can be reduced and controlled. Now I know that I can cope with it.
N. V. O., Brazil
College Education?
When I first read your article “College Education​—A Preparation for What?” I thought to myself: ‘Another put-down for a college education.’ (January 8, 1987) But after careful consideration, now that I have finished college, I can truly appreciate the advice given. Although it’s too late for me, I hope young people who read the article realize that a college education prepares you for absolutely nothing. I look back and regret those years of my life.
S. B., United States
Benefits of Reading Awake!
I really appreciate reading your magazine. Its contents are truly food for thought. It deals with a variety of difficult subjects in a simple, precise way, making them easy for all to understand. Also, the advice given is practical and inexpensive. I personally have always found it worth following. I recommend your magazines to young people who are studying foreign languages. I suggest they subscribe to the magazine in French and in the language they are learning. In this way they have choice texts scrupulously translated.
R. M., France

