Announcements
● Literature offer for June and July: Survival Into a New Earth or Happiness​—How to Find It for contribution of $1.00 each. August: One of the following 32-page magazine-size brochures for 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size books are $1.50.
● The presiding overseer or someone designated by him should audit congregation’s accounts on June 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● If the Congregation Book Study will not be conducted during the convention week, half of the material assigned for that week can be studied the week before the convention and the other half the week following the convention. In this way none of this important information will be missed.
● In response to the January Our Kingdom Ministry article “Do Not Let Your Hand Rest,” many publishers are preparing to work unassigned territory or to assist a congregation temporarily in the coverage of its territory. Since many more now know when their summer or fall vacation period will be, perhaps more can buy out time as a family or as a congregation and share in working such territory where it is available.
● Contributions that congregations send to the Society for the advancement of Kingdom work, as well as contributions to the Society Kingdom Hall Fund or special contributions for other designated purposes, are acknowledged on the Society’s monthly statements to the congregations. These acknowledgments include brief expressions of appreciation. The presiding overseer should observe such acknowledgments and have these called to the attention of the congregation each month when the accounts report is given. The Society wants the brothers to know that their contributions have been received and that they are appreciated.
● Congregations that have in stock the books The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life and Is This Life All There Is? in the English language on a better grade of paper should not use such publications in literature campaigns featuring older publications at a reduced price. Rather, these should be placed in the field at the regular price for pocket-size bound books.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, (Deluxe pocket edition; DLbi25), available in maroon​—Japanese
True Peace and Security​—How Can You Find It?​—Papiamento, Portuguese
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Hiligaynon, Papiamento
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Fijian, Hindi, Moore
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Gilbertese
Tract No. 13​—Arabic
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Jehovah Delivers Those Calling Upon His Name (single cassette; congregation and public: $2.00; pioneers: $1.75)​—Japanese
Album for The Watchtower on cassette (empty) (Blue vinyl album for 24 cassettes with pressure-sensitive year label; congregation and public: $7.00; pioneers: $5.50)​—English
● Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Tamil

