Experience the Benefits of the Reasoning Book
1 What a tremendous work Jehovah has commissioned his dedicated people to accomplish in these last days! (Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20) Without divine help to carry out this worldwide campaign, it would be an insurmountable task. How thankful we are for angelic assistance in declaring the everlasting good news!​—Rev. 14:6, 7.
2 It requires genuine effort on the part of evangelizers in order to reach the hearts of people of “every nation and tribe and tongue.” But by means of his earthly organization, Jehovah has provided the needed help for us to do this. One such provision is the book Reasoning From the Scriptures, which contains a wealth of material on 76 subjects that can be used in discussions with people from varied backgrounds and walks of life.
3 No doubt the consideration of this publication in the Theocratic Ministry School is benefiting you spiritually. But are you endeavoring to use this information in your ministry? Can you see improvement in your ability to reason with people? Although you may personally answer yes, it has been reported that many brothers and sisters are not using the Reasoning book, and some do not carry it with them when engaging in the ministry. Why is this so? Perhaps it is because they have not become familiar with the book’s valuable features. Many who have applied themselves in using the Reasoning book have found that they can count on it for help at the right time, providing answers to a multitude of questions that people ask.
4 One of its many helpful features is the index starting on page 439. It does not list every aspect of each principal subject, but it does provide many references that you will find beneficial when addressing certain situations.
5 For example, we sometimes meet people who question the Bible’s reliability. They may attempt to discredit the Scriptures or the beliefs of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They may ask a question such as, “Where did Cain get his wife?” Although you will not find this listed under “Principal Subjects” in the front of the book, if you look in the index under “Cain,” you will find that the answer to that question is on pages 301-2. Or someone may say that the love of God is violated by the destruction of the wicked. If you look under “Love” in the index, you are referred to page 48, where you will find a way to reason with the person.
6 Another helpful feature, found on page 445, is “Scriptures Often Misapplied.” A householder may raise a question about a Bible text or try to use it in support of a false belief. He may cite 1 Thessalonians 4:13-18 in support of his belief that some will ascend to heaven without dying here on earth. Reference is made to page 312 for a discussion of these verses. If someone argues that the earth will be burned up and refers to 2 Peter 3:7, clarifying information can be found on pages 113 and 436. So if you are asked to explain a scripture, have your Reasoning book handy, and see if the scripture is listed in this part of the book.
7 Young and old alike can experience the benefits of this publication. Using it is not difficult, but it does require effort and practice. Become familiar with the 41 introductions presented on pages 9-15. Also, there are 47 ways to work around potential conversation stoppers listed on pages 15-24. Are you making an effort to use some of them, especially those that would be effective in talking with people in your territory?
8 We are delighted with the privilege of preaching in this time of the end. Jehovah certainly has given us what we need to make our work effective. Let us continue to use one of our most valuable instruments, the Reasoning book.

