Giving Cheerfully as a Pioneer
1 “God loves a cheerful giver.” (2 Cor. 9:7) The apostle Paul appreciated Jehovah’s generosity and reflected this in his unstinting labors among the Thessalonians. Accordingly, he later wrote to them: “We were well pleased to impart to you . . . the good news of God.”​—1 Thess. 2:8.
2 Do we feel the same way about sharing this spiritual treasure with others? If so, can we take a serious look at our prospects for serving as an auxiliary pioneer this summer and possibly entering the regular pioneer service in September?
WHAT YOU CAN DO
3 Getting into the auxiliary or regular pioneer work is not likely to happen if left to chance. Positive effort springing from a rightly motivated heart will bring Jehovah’s blessing. Take the matter to Jehovah in prayer. Express to him your heart’s desire. (1 John 5:14; 2 Thess. 3:1) Make an honest appraisal of your circumstances to see wherein you can make adjustments so as to meet the requirements. Rising a little earlier in the morning to join other pioneers in field service may be all that is necessary for you to meet the pioneer schedule. Or perhaps evening witnessing will help you to achieve this.
4 A frank discussion with other pioneers, your service overseer, or your Congregation Book Study conductor could provide helpful suggestions. (Prov. 15:22; 16:3) Family members can also be of encouragement, especially if they are fellow worshipers. The experience of many auxiliary and regular pioneers with family obligations to care for has been that their family members rally to their side and rejoice over the improved spiritual atmosphere in the household that results from a member’s pioneering.
DEVELOP A GOOD ROUTINE
5 Learning to schedule your activity is very important. Even in material giving, Paul recommended that the brothers in Corinth follow a pattern of regularity so as to be sure of carrying out the good intentions of their hearts. (1 Cor. 16:2) Holding firmly to a well-thought-out routine for sharing in the urgent preaching work is of even greater importance. Self-discipline, initiative, and determination are necessary.​—1 Cor. 9:23, 25, 27.
6 Be realistic in your approach to the auxiliary and regular pioneer service. You will not find totally ideal circumstances in this old system. Jesus said that those putting the Kingdom first should expect tribulations along with promised joys and blessings now, and “in the coming system of things everlasting life.” (Mark 10:29, 30; Acts 14:22) So it is good to imitate the faith and example of the many who pioneer in spite of poor health, limited finances, or other serious obstacles. They avoid making anything in this old system the big thing in their life. (1 Cor. 7:29-31) As some pioneers put it, they have just learned to ‘work around their problems’ in order to pioneer.​—Compare 2 Corinthians 12:7-10.
7 Indeed, all who willingly give out of a good heart according to their individual circumstances are pronounced happy by Jehovah. (Isa. 65:14) They reap bountifully in the way of inner peace and contentment along with increased fruitfulness by helping people to come on Jehovah’s side. Such blessings and many more can be yours if you take up the invitation to give cheerfully as an auxiliary or regular pioneer.​—2 Cor. 9:6; Prov. 11:25.

