Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will not outline a Service Meeting for the week starting July 18, thus allowing an open week for attending the “Divine Justice” District Convention. The Service Meeting for the week starting July 25 will be outlined to allow 10 minutes for local announcements and 35 minutes for a review of the convention program highlights. Those congregations having earlier conventions will adjust their schedules and fit in the outlined Service Meetings accordingly. In this way all the material in Our Kingdom Ministry for June and July will be covered. Publishers should bring the appropriate issue of Our Kingdom Ministry to the Service Meeting for the weeks thus affected. The day-by-day review of the convention program may be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers. This well-prepared review will focus on key points for personal application and use in the field. Any experiences used or comments from the audience should be brief and to the point.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 6
Song 57
10 min: Local announcements. Suggest appropriate presentations for current magazines, and encourage all publishers to participate in magazine work on second Saturday in June.
20 min: “Imitating Jehovah by Exercising Justice.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. After discussing paragraph 6, demonstrate one or two ways to witness informally while traveling or attending conventions. Include brief appropriate experiences from audience as time allows.
15 min: Maintain a Good Service Record During Summer Months. Encouraging talk by service overseer or other qualified brother. Travel, attending convention, and vacation trip may tend to disrupt a good service schedule. Help brothers see need to be regular in field service during summer months, even when away from home. Make practical suggestions. Encourage attending meetings and going out in field service with congregation where vacationing. Also, have well-prepared publisher demonstrate how current literature offer may be made in house-to-house ministry.
Song 20 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 13
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. “Divine Justice” District Conventions begin this week. Accounts report. Express appreciation for financial support of congregation. Include Society’s acknowledgment of any contributions sent by congregation.
20 min: “Giving Cheerfully as a Pioneer.” Questions and answers. Use final five minutes to interview publishers who are starting to auxiliary pioneer this month or next. Or interview regular pioneer who started as auxiliary pioneer. What has helped these publishers to enter pioneer service?
15 min: Local needs. If no particular need, presiding overseer or service overseer can give encouraging report and talk on progress of local ministry. Include comments on coverage of territory, average hours, studies being conducted and new studies started, number who have pioneered thus far during service year, and so forth. Commend brothers for fine work being done.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 20
Song 26
10 min: Local announcements. Two or three brief demonstrations of appropriate magazine presentations for this Saturday. Additional talking points may be suggested by audience as time permits.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—From House to House.” Questions and answers. Illustrate point made in paragraph 3 by a prepared brief local experience. After discussing paragraph 4, have one or two publishers prepared to express how they personally have benefited from engaging in house-to-house ministry. Encourage all publishers to have scheduled time each week for witnessing from house to house with regular literature offer.
15 min: “Jesus’ Life and Ministry.” Spirited talk with illustrations of ways to use this series of articles in The Watchtower. Are parents using these articles to help children grow in love for Jesus and in appreciation for what he did for mankind? Adults too benefit from consideration of these articles. As time permits, relate selected experiences on use of these articles.
Song 21 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 27
Song 71
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Encourage publishers to be out in field service on first Sunday in July. Relate preselected experiences highlighting placement of Survival and Happiness books from house to house.
20 min: “Experience the Benefits of the Reasoning Book.” Audience discussion. Intersperse brief local experiences to illustrate suggested uses of Reasoning book. As time permits, have publishers comment on how they have improved their ministry by using the Reasoning book in field service.
15 min: “Young People Ask . . . ” Elder presides over discussion by several exemplary young publishers about value of these articles in Awake! Can include comments on how they have benefited personally or how they have used these articles to help others.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.

