Presenting the Good News​—From House to House
1 Our work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom is commanded by the greatest authorities in the universe, the Sovereign Lord Jehovah and his enthroned Son, Jesus Christ.​—Matt. 28:18; Rev. 14:6, 7.
2 Jesus set the pattern by “journeying from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 8:1) His disciples did not miss the lesson he taught both by word and by example. (Matt. 13:51, 52) They appreciated the importance of the public preaching work. Even after being flogged because of their outspokenness, they did not stop but continued daily in the temple and from house to house “declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.” (Acts 5:41, 42; 20:20) In modern times this work is being accomplished only by Jehovah’s Witnesses, who spent over 739 million hours in the preaching activity last service year, much of which involved house-to-house work.​—Hag. 2:7; Isa. 60:22.
WHAT HOUSE-TO-HOUSE WORK ACCOMPLISHES
3 As indicated at Ezekiel 33:33 and Eze 38:23, our house-to-house preaching activity plays an important part in the sanctification of Jehovah’s name. The good news of the Kingdom is set squarely before individual householders, giving them opportunity to show where they stand. (2 Thess. 1:8-10) Hopefully, they will be moved to take their stand on Jehovah’s side and receive life.​—Matt. 24:14; John 17:3.
4 Regular house-to-house work also strengthens our hope in God’s promises. Our ability to use the Bible effectively is enhanced. We are aided in overcoming the fear of men. Greater empathy can be cultivated as we note firsthand what people suffer because of not knowing Jehovah and not living by his righteous standards. We are also helped to develop the fruitage of God’s spirit in our own lives.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES
5 Do you find that many are not at home when you call during the day? What about ingrained indifference, especially in frequently worked territory? Do not allow these things to discourage you. Pray to Jehovah, and he will help you to approach the territory with a proper frame of mind. Look upon each door as potentially having a sheeplike person behind it. As Jesus instructed, let the individual show whether he is deserving.​—Matt. 10:11-14.
6 Even in territory that is frequently worked, there may be many people who are not witnessed to often because they are rarely found at home. Calling at various times in order to meet different members of the household and keeping an accurate house-to-house record make for more thorough territory coverage.
7 The God-ordained proclamation of the good news from house to house is fast nearing completion. We want to be able to report back to Jehovah and say in all good conscience: “I have done just as you have commanded me.” (Ezek. 9:11) Zealous house-to-house activity will enable us to do this.

