Physically Weaker, Spiritually Stronger
ONE of Jehovah’s witnesses in West Germany relates the following: “I was on my way to make some back-calls, but before I got far I had gotten so weak that I had to turn back. I had been suffering for some time from a disease similar to multiple sclerosis. I returned home, and since then, the year 1958, I have been outside my apartment only a few times.
“By Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, I was still able to conduct two Bible studies. The persons I studied with came to my home. In this way I was able to maintain an average of about fifteen hours a month. I felt everything was all right, but I was mistaken.
“From then on, my health steadily worsened. I fell in my apartment several times, becoming more of an invalid. Now it was that I began to appreciate more and more the love shown by my Christian brothers. A sister, although having a family to look after, took time to drive me to several doctors, who recommended several forms of treatment, none of which helped much. One day I called up an older sister and asked her if she knew of a nurse who might be available to help look after me, since I was no longer able to get around from room to room. This sister’s husband had pounded braces into the various doorposts in my apartment, and this was a great help for me, since I could use them as supports while going from room to room. But now even these supports were no longer sufficient. She told me to call a certain brother who knew of a nurse who was one of Jehovah’s witnesses. I called him up, and the next morning this sister came and has been very unselfishly looking after me.
“My health steadily worsened, and I became almost totally paralyzed. A new situation faced me. Since I could no longer write and could just barely speak, I debated how I could keep on witnessing. I thought of dictating letters to persons who had had a recent death in the family. After having thought up a good witness, I arranged for a sister in our congregation to come so she could take dictation for me. She has been doing this regularly ever since.
“In 1961 I suddenly got worse and was on the verge of death. But Jehovah had given me much to do and it had to be done. I was privileged to receive a special assignment of work from the branch office—something I could do in spite of my infirmities. Then, too, there were letters to write, as well as my two home Bible studies. It is apparent that, whereas one may be getting weaker and weaker physically, he can at the same time be getting healthier spiritually.
“I keep in touch with the congregation by means of a tape recorder. A brother records the theocratic ministry school and also the service meeting every week, so I get to hear it all, including the congregation servant’s closing comments and the Society’s letters that are read to the congregation. Every five weeks one of the servants in the congregation brings me the written review paper and lets me answer the questions orally, as best I can.
“I now appreciate the Society’s publications much more than I formerly did. I read the Watchtower and Awake! magazines from cover to cover and then wait impatiently for the next ones. It always seems to take so long for the newest issues to come!
“Though often in pain, I try not to let my troubles get the better of me. I have so much to occupy me that I barely have time to think about them. I must not forget to mention that a person of goodwill with whom I studied in my apartment was baptized at the assembly in 1961, in Hamburg. Also the man who used to drive an hour to come to me to have a Bible study wrote that he plans on getting baptized. So I have much joy, and this comes not only from being regular in witnessing but also because of the help from brothers and sisters who have made it possible for me to grow spiritually stronger though I have become physically weaker.”

