True Witnesses, like the “Word of God”
“THE name he is called is The Word of God.” Most fittingly, the Christian Bible writer who thus refers to Jesus Christ is also the one who makes more references to the subject of witnessing than any other.—Rev. 19:13.
Jesus Christ, as the Word or Spokesman of God, certainly lived up to his title. He fulfilled the purpose for which he had come to earth: “For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth.” He could, some sixty years later in heaven, refer to himself as “the faithful and true witness,” and his apostle John referred to him as “the Faithful Witness,” the one “Faithful and True.” The apostle Paul testifies to the same effect: “Christ Jesus . . . as a witness made the fine public declaration before Pontius Pilate.”—John 18:37; Rev. 3:14; 1:5; 19:11; 1 Tim. 6:13.a
All persons who have dedicated themselves to do the will of Jehovah God and to follow in the footsteps of Jesus Christ, the Word of God, must be true witnesses as he was. Not that they can perform miracles or do perfectly as he did. No, not that. But they can be true witnesses to the best of their ability, each one according to what he has.—2 Cor. 8:12.
Among the many ways in which Christians can be true witnesses, like the Word of God, is in giving all honor to Jehovah, for the Word of God at no time called attention to himself: “Jesus said to him: ‘Why do you call me good? Nobody is good, except one, God.’” “I cannot do a single thing of my own initiative; just as I hear, I judge; . . . I seek, not my own will, but the will of him that sent me.” Yes, to be a true witness like the Word of God one must at all times be careful that his words call attention, not to himself, but to Jehovah God.—Mark 10:18; John 5:30.
More than that, the Word of God made use of every opportunity to witness, as when he was a guest in the home of Simon the Pharisee and when resting by the well of Sychar. So being a true witness today like him means being alert to all opportunities to witness.—Luke 7:36-50; John 4:5-26; 2 Cor. 9:7.
Then again, the Word of God featured the Scriptures in his witnessing, always appealing to them as his authority: “You are mistaken, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God.” “Did you not read what was spoken to you by God?” “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said: “You are gods”’?” Are you familiar with the Scriptures and do you feature them in your witnessing, not tending to make them secondary to your reasoning or to the corroborative testimony of imperfect men?—Matt. 22:29-32; John 10:34.
The Word of God put the interests of his Father’s name and kingdom first in his life, not only preaching, “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and [God’s] righteousness,” but also practicing it. He did not needlessly encumber himself with worldly goods. He had a consuming zeal for his Father’s worship. True witnesses today, having the same attitude as the Word of God, will not let material considerations of food, clothing and shelter so fill them with anxious thoughts that they neglect their Christian ministry.—Matt. 6:31-33; John 2:17; 1 Tim. 6:6-8.
Another respect in which the Word of God was an exemplary witness was in his being sympathetic and kind, patient, mild and understanding toward people. “He felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” And what tenderness and affection were in his words! “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and become my disciples, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for your souls. For my yoke is kindly and my load is light.”—Matt. 9:36; 11:28-30.
Once, apparently after a long and strenuous preaching campaign, Jesus, the Word of God, said to his disciples: “Come, you yourselves, privately into a lonely place and rest up a bit.” But when the Jews learned about it they got to that lonely place ahead of Jesus and his disciples. Finding the crowd there, did Jesus rebuke them, telling them he needed rest? No, tired though he and his disciples were, “he started to teach them many things.” Are you likewise willing to put the spiritual interests ahead of physical comfort?—Mark 6:31-34.
No question about it, much is required of all who would be true witnesses like the “Word of God.” Will you endeavor to be like him during the month of June?
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, October 1, 1962.

