





THE BIBLE’S VIEWPOINT
Premarital Sex



Is premarital sex wrong?

“For this is what God wills, . . . that you abstain from fornication.”—1 Thessalonians 4:3.

WHAT PEOPLE SAY
 Some cultures tolerate sexual activity between consenting unmarried adult individuals. In some areas it is viewed as acceptable for unmarried adolescents to engage in some forms of sexual intimacy.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
 The Bible uses the word “fornication” for some forms of sexual activity outside marriage. God expects his worshippers to “abstain from fornication.” (1 Thessalonians 4:3) Fornication is listed as a serious sin, as are adultery, spiritism, drunkenness, idolatry, murder, and thievery.—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; Revelation 21:8.
WHY IT MATTERS
 For one thing, the Bible warns that “God will judge fornicators.” (Hebrews 13:4) More important, by obeying God’s laws about sexual morality, we prove our love for Jehovah God. (1 John 5:3) He in turn blesses those who observe his commandments.—Isaiah 48:18.



Is it immoral for unmarried people to engage in any form of sexual intimacy?

“Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among you.”—Ephesians 5:3.

WHAT PEOPLE SAY
 Many people believe that apart from sexual intercourse, there is nothing wrong with sexual intimacies between unmarried partners.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
 When discussing immoral sexual practices, the Bible mentions not only fornication but also sexual “uncleanness” and “loose conduct.” (2 Corinthians 12:21) Clearly, there are various forms of sexual intimacy that are offensive to God when performed outside marriage, even when there is no intercourse.
The overall message of the Bible regarding sex is that sexual intimacies are restricted to a man and a woman who are married to each other. The Bible also disapproves of “covetous sexual appetite.” (1 Thessalonians 4:5) What does that mean? Consider an example that could apply equally to a man or a woman: A woman might be determined not to have intercourse with her boyfriend. Still, she engages in other forms of sexual intimacy with him. By doing so, they are coveting or lusting after something that does not belong to them. Hence, they are guilty of “covetous sexual appetite.” Such sexual greed is condemned in the Bible.—Ephesians 5:3-5.



How can you avoid sexual immorality?

“Flee from fornication.”—1 Corinthians 6:18.

WHY IT MATTERS
 According to the Bible, those who engage in premarital sex are in danger of losing their friendship with God.—Colossians 3:5, 6.
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
 The Bible advises people to “flee from fornication.” (1 Corinthians 6:18) This means that a person needs to stay as far away as possible from anything that could lure him or her into sexual immorality. (Proverbs 22:3) For instance, in order to remain morally clean, it is vital for one to avoid close association with people who ignore God’s principles related to sex. The Bible warns: “He that is walking with wise persons will become wise, but he that is having dealings with the stupid ones will fare badly.”—Proverbs 13:20.
Feeding the mind with immoral thoughts can also lead to sexual misconduct. (Romans 8:5, 6) Thus, it is wise to avoid music, videos, printed material, and anything else that improperly portrays sexual activity or that in any way promotes sexual conduct that offends God.—Psalm 101:3.



