From Our Readers
Care of Teeth
As a dental surgeon and specialist in periodontics I was especially interested in your article “The Latest on the Plague of Plaque.” (November 8, 1981) I found it very up-to-date and of great value to people in general as well as to students of dentistry and to fellow dentists.
O. C., Brazil
Incest
Today we received your issue on “The New Morality” (June 22, 1982) and I read the article on incest immediately. You see, my sister and I were victims of incest. I couldn’t tell my mother because I didn’t think she would believe me. And when I finally did tell her several weeks later, I don’t think she did believe me. I can’t begin to tell you of the emotional scars I still have because of it. Thank you for writing the article. More should be written on the subject, and perhaps this might encourage other victims of the crime to come forward.
Name withheld, Pennsylvania
I feel you were unfair in accusing Time magazine of publishing pro-incest propaganda (June 22, 1982, pages 9, 10). The opinions of so-called sexologists and also those of child psychiatrists were presented. You failed to note that the Time reporter found these pro-incest views ‘disturbing, irresponsible and falling just short of the child molester’s lib.’
L. C., Pennsylvania
Awake! should have stated that Time reported on pro-incest propaganda, not that it published such. We did include statements in Time’s article showing the dangers of such propaganda.​—ED.
Awake! Appreciated
We request, in urgency, having heard all the members and dispensing with other formalities, that there be registered in the annals of this Council a vote of congratulations and of public gratitude for the publication of Awake! and for the constant balance shown in the standard of information that it carries, giving guidance to the Brazilian family.
Municipal Council of Taubaté, Brazil
The Catholic Church
I am a Catholic and a subscriber to your magazine. Tell me, do you compile only unworthy information about our Church, or don’t you hear of anything good about us? Of all of Christendom, is it the Catholic Church you think poses the greatest threat to your sect?
C. U., Nigeria
We are not just looking for unworthy information about the Catholic Church. We know that about 580 million people around the world look to this Church for spiritual guidance and their hopes for salvation are tied to it. Yet both the Catholic Church and the Protestant churches maintain a position in the world and hold to doctrines and customs that are contrary to the teachings of Jesus Christ. By our publishing objective examinations of the teachings and activities of these churches, we hope to encourage all sincere persons to look into the Bible to learn what God requires in the way of true worship. Jesus said at John 8:32: “The truth will set you free.”​—ED.

