Young People Ask . . .
How Can I Get Rid of the Blues?
HE WAS very depressed. But he found that if he got into an exciting situation he felt better​—for a while. Then he found a surefire key to excitement: picking a fight with a policeman​—literally kicking him! That really got his adrenaline surging! His depression cleared up for the moment. But now he had some other problems!
If you have ever been plagued by depression you may sympathize with that man. Since his “solution” was not too practical, you may wonder what you can do to get rid of the blues.
“Some people get depressed because they’re hungry,” observed Dr. Nathan S. Kline, a New York specialist on depression. “A person may not eat breakfast and for some reason miss lunch. Then by three o’clock he begins wondering why he doesn’t feel right.”
What you eat can also make a difference. Debbie, a young woman plagued with feelings of despair, admitted: “I didn’t realize that junk food was so detrimental to my mood. I ate a lot of it. Now I notice that when I eat fewer sweets, I feel better.” Other helpful steps? Some form of exercise may lift your spirits. Or you may need a medical checkup, since depression can be a symptom of physical illness.a
However, in many cases depression is brought on by the way you think.
The Battle of the Mind
“When you’ve been through a lot of people cutting at you,” lamented eighteen-year-old Evelyn, “it makes you think you’re not worth anything.” You, too, may be a victim of such negative thinking​—and be disheartened as a result.
But consider: Is it really up to your peers to measure your worth as a person? Similar ridicule was heaped upon the Christian apostle Paul. Some said that he was a weakling and a poor speaker. Did this make Paul feel worthless? Not at all! They were setting up their own standards. But Paul knew that meeting God’s standard was the important thing. He could boast over what he had accomplished with God’s help​—regardless of what others were saying. So, too, if your thoughts dwell on your strengths and you have a standing with God to reflect on, the blues will often leave.​—2 Corinthians 10:7, 10, 17, 18.
Maybe you feel guilty because of some weakness. Are you striving hard to overcome it? Or is your life-style making matters worse? “Though the sins of you people should prove to be as scarlet, they will be made white just like snow,” promises Jehovah God, “if you people show willingness and do listen.” (Isaiah 1:18, 19) So do your part. Never overlook the compassion and patience of our heavenly Father.​—Psalm 103:8-14.
Also, set realistic standards for yourself. You don’t have to be top in your school class to be successful. (Ecclesiastes 7:16-18) Realize that you are going to have your share of disappointments in life. You may, for example, experience the breakup of a close relationship. That often triggers depression. Rather than feel, ‘No one cares what happens to me and no one ever will,’ think, ‘I’m going to miss her, but I’ll get over it.’ And there’s nothing wrong with having a good cry.
The Value of Accomplishment
“Despair doesn’t go away on its own,” advises twenty-five-year-old Daphne who successfully lived through bouts of discouragement. “You have to think on a different line or physically get involved. You have to start doing something.” But what?
“I’m on a sewing spree,” said twenty-four-year-old Linda who was working hard to fight a sullen mood. “I can work on my wardrobe and, in time, I forget about what’s troubling me. It really helps.” Doing things that you are good at can build your self-esteem​—which is usually at rock bottom during depression.
Also beneficial is engaging in activities that bring you pleasure. Try shopping for some personal treat, playing games, cooking your favorite recipe, browsing through a bookstore, dining out, reading, even putting together a jigsaw puzzle. Perhaps for these “down” days you may even save something that you especially like to do as ready “medication.” If you are a young woman you may find that such “down” times may coincide with your menstrual cycle.
“When I have something to look forward to I’m not as depressed,” reported Debbie. She found that by planning short trips or setting little goals for herself to do something different in her daily routine, she could cope with her depressed mood. However, doing something to aid another person was one of her biggest helps. “I met this young woman who was very depressed, and I began to help her to study the Bible,” revealed Debbie. “These weekly discussions gave me opportunity to tell her how she could overcome her depression. The Bible gave her real hope. This helped me at the same time.” Just as Jesus said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.
Confide in a Real Friend
“A friend is loving at all times, and becomes a brother in times of trouble,” according to Proverbs 17:17. (The Bible in Basic English) Yes, talking to a friend really helps. “When you keep it to yourself it is like carrying a heavy load all alone,” said twenty-two-year-old Evan. “But when you share it with someone who is qualified to help, it becomes much lighter.”
Though there is some relief by just getting your feelings “off your chest,” often more is needed. Your thinking may need some correction. So seek out a friend who will be not only an understanding listener but also an objective counselor. (Proverbs 27:5, 6) But where can you find friends like that?
Twenty-five-year-old Rosemarie kept her melancholy to herself. Her mother died when she was a child and, never having had a warm family life, she often felt dejected. “I always kept things to myself, not having anyone I could share my feelings with. This only made me feel worse.” What snapped her out of her constant dreary mood? She continues: “Then I began to study the Bible with one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. They showed real interest in me. In time, as I attended their meetings, I became close to other Witnesses and could open up about my depressed moods to some of the older, mature women. They helped me to look at matters correctly. I found within the congregation persons that were like the father and mother I never had.”
Do you need friends like that? Jesus Christ said that you can find them among his genuine followers. (Mark 10:29, 30; John 13:34, 35) They will show sincere concern about your welfare.
Rosemarie, in addition to finding close friends, developed something that is the finest aid in dispelling gloom​—an intimate relationship with God.
Power Beyond What Is Normal
The apostle Paul spoke of having a “power beyond what is normal” from God. (2 Corinthians 4:7) So, too, if you learn about God through a personal study of his Word, the Bible, and apply such knowledge, you will feel close to God. He will not let you be crushed by depression if you lean on him. (Psalm 55:22) With his holy spirit he gives power beyond your normal resources.
This friendship with God is truly reassuring. “When I have sad times,” said Georgia, “I pray a lot. I know that Jehovah is going to provide a way out no matter how deep a problem I have.” Daphne agrees, adding: “You can tell Jehovah everything. You just pour out your heart and you know, even if no human can, he really understands you and cares about you.”
Yes, God “really understands,” and invites you to throw your anxieties upon him “because he cares for you.” Having such reassurance is truly the finest way to combat the blues.​—1 Peter 5:6, 7.
[Footnotes]
See the article “Why Do I Get So Depressed?” in the August 22, 1982, issue of Awake!

