The Design in Nature​—What Does It Prove?
ALL of us marvel at things that are designed well. It may be a nicely decorated room, a flower, or a computer. Good design appeals to people.
In connection with design, a line of reasoning often used to prove the existence of God is that design means the existence of a Designer. And many people feel that today’s scientific discoveries have strengthened this argument. Why? Because these help us to appreciate how complex and ingenious the natural world is.
Consider what has been discovered in the world of a single living cell. A century ago the cell was looked upon as a blob of protoplasm surrounded by a simple membrane covering. Today we know that even this outer membrane is a marvel, as it regulates what materials will be brought into the cell or cast out. And inside the cell is an amazing array of interactive material. There are proteins, enzymes, the DNA master blueprint and much, much more that is extremely complex.
The Pattern
Whether we peer into the very small world of atoms and cells, or into the awesome universe with its billions of stars and galaxies, there is a definite pattern. We observe order, intelligence​—yes, design!
Whenever we see design in daily life, we do not hesitate to attribute it to intelligent humans. When we see a house, we acknowledge that it had an intelligent builder. The wristwatch that you may be wearing we acknowledge as the work of a watchmaker. When we see blueprints lying on a table, we know that they were drawn by a draftsman. When we view paintings in an art gallery, we know that they had to be painted by someone. Why, even a table, a chair, a toothbrush or a pencil all had human designers and makers. Now what would you think if you asked, ‘Who made all those things?’ and received the answer, ‘Nobody, for they just happened to come into existence by themselves’?
Yet all such things are relatively simple in design and function compared to atoms, living cells, plants, animals, humans, the universe. If the relatively simple had to have a designer and maker, is it reasonable to conclude that the far more complex did not?
At each level of observation of these things many are moved to agree with the apostle Paul when he said of God: “His invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.”​—Romans 1:20.
However, some ask: If this line of reasoning is so logical, why are not more persons convinced of the existence of a Designer, God?
[Pictures on page 3]
From the small world of atoms to the awesome universe we see similar design

