How to Prepare a Magazine Presentation
 1. Why is it better to prepare a personal magazine presentation rather than simply to memorize a sample given in Our Kingdom Ministry?
1 ‘Why should we prepare magazine presentations,’ you may wonder, ‘since presentations appear in each issue of Our Kingdom Ministry?’ While many have found these sample presentations to be helpful, personal preparation is still needed. A presentation that is effective in one territory may not be practical in another. Therefore, we should not feel obligated to present the magazines exactly as worded in the sample presentations. Even if we choose to use a sample presentation, it is best to put the thoughts in our own words.
 2. What is involved in determining which article you will feature?
2 Choose an Article: Having first read the magazine, choose an article that is appropriate for your territory and that you especially enjoyed. Your conviction and enthusiasm when presenting the article may move the householder to want to read it too. Though you will likely feature an article that has wide appeal in the local territory, be well acquainted with the other articles in the magazine as well. This will allow you to adjust your presentation if you encounter someone who may be more interested in another subject.
 3. What type of introduction do you use for the best results?
3 Ask a Question: Next, carefully prepare your opening words. Your introduction is important. It may be helpful to ask the householder a thought-provoking question to stimulate his interest in the article that you have chosen to feature. Viewpoint questions usually work best. Avoid asking something that could make the householder uncomfortable or defensive.
 4. What are the benefits of reading a scripture to the householder when the circumstances allow?
4 Read a Scripture: Finally, choose a scripture to read if the householder’s circumstances allow, perhaps one found in the article you will feature. Reading a scripture will help the householder to see that our message is from God’s Word. (1 Thess. 2:13) The scripture will also give him a witness even if he refuses the magazines. Some have awakened the householder’s interest by reading a scripture before asking a specific question. You might introduce the scripture by saying, “I would like to get your opinion on what is stated in this Bible verse.” Then call the person’s attention to a related point in the magazine, and make a brief comment to stimulate his interest further before offering it.
 5. What basic guidelines should you keep in mind when preparing a magazine presentation?
5 There are no rigid rules about what to say when offering the magazines. Generally, it is best to keep your presentation simple and brief. Use an approach that is comfortable for you and that gets good results. Focus on the excelling value of the magazines, and be enthusiastic. If you are well prepared, you will be more effective in placing The Watchtower and Awake! with those who are “rightly disposed for everlasting life.”​—Acts 13:48.

