Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!
1 “Happy is he who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy, and who observe the things written in it; for the appointed time is near.” (Rev. 1:3) Those words highlight the value of the book of Revelation, especially since we are living during the appointed time for many of its prophecies to be fulfilled. Fittingly, we will begin a study of the book Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand! at the Congregation Book Study starting the week of January 8, 2007.
2 Since the last time that we studied the Revelation Climax book at the Congregation Book Study, the world scene has changed in many ways. (1 Cor. 7:31) Furthermore, many who have joined the ranks of those preaching the good news of the Kingdom have never benefited from a verse-by-verse consideration of the book of Revelation. The study of the Revelation Climax book should help all of us remain awake to what lies ahead.​—Rev. 16:15.
3 Make it your aim to be present each week. Not only will the material help us to keep on the watch but also the messages from Jesus to the seven congregations will help us to avoid situations and circumstances that could adversely affect our spirituality and participation in the ministry.​—Rev. 1:11, 19.
4 Prepare Well: Before each book study, read the verses in the book of Revelation that will be analyzed. Note the Scriptural reasoning that provides explanation. Strive for understanding that reaches the heart. (Neh. 8:8, 12) Take time to meditate and to ask yourself: ‘What is this telling me about Jehovah and the outworking of his purpose? How can I act in harmony with his purpose and help others?’
5 Ninety-two years have passed since the start of “the Lord’s day” in 1914. (Rev. 1:10) Earth-shattering events foretold in the book of Revelation lie just ahead. The study of the Revelation Climax book will refresh our heart and mind and strengthen our faith that “the war of the great day of God the Almighty” and the new world are near.​—Rev. 16:14; 21:4, 5.

