Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 13
Song 152
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the November 15 Watchtower and the November Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I am already well acquainted with your work.”​—See Reasoning book, p. 20.
20 min: Ministers of the Good News. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, page 77 to the subheading on page 83.
15 min: “Bold yet Peaceable.”a Include comments on the Ministry School book, pages 252-3, under the italicized subheading “When to Yield.”
Song 39 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 20
Song 132
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Offering the Greatest Man book in December. Audience discussion. Entertain comments from the audience on what they appreciate about the Greatest Man book and outstanding experiences they have had from offering it in the past. Review the sample presentations from the insert to the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry. Demonstrate how to offer the book, using one of the sample presentations or another presentation that would be effective in the local territory.
Song 203 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 27
Song 111
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the December 1 Watchtower and the December Awake! In one of the presentations, demonstrate how to offer the magazines to a non-Witness relative. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for November.
10 min: Unitedly Building to Praise God. Talk by an elder based on the November 1, 2006, Watchtower, pages 17-21.
25 min: “How Do I View Blood Fractions and Medical Procedures Involving My Own Blood?”b Question-and-answer discussion and demonstration. The elder handling this part should follow closely the outline provided by the branch office.
Song 120 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 4
Song 155
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Revelation​—Its Grand Climax At Hand!”c Encourage the congregation to make good use of the special features of the book, such as the boxes and illustrations. At the end of each study, the lesson should be reviewed from the Bible.
20 min: “How to Prepare a Magazine Presentation.”d Include a three-minute demonstration of two publishers, perhaps a husband and wife, selecting a suggested presentation appearing on page 8 for the December magazines and deciding how they will use it, putting it in their own words. Then, using the suggestions in the article just considered, they prepare and demonstrate how they would present another article that they have found to be timely in their territory.
Song 168 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

