





LANDS AND PEOPLES
A Visit to El Salvador









NEARLY 500 years ago, when the Spanish arrived in what is now El Salvador, the predominant tribe in the area called their territory Cuscatlán—a name that means “Land of the Jewel.” Today, most people in El Salvador are descendants of indigenous tribes and European settlers.
Salvadorans are known for being industrious and friendly. They are also courteous and respectful. People greet others politely before starting a conversation or when entering a business by saying, “Buenos días” (good morning) or “Buenas tardes” (good afternoon). In fact, Salvadorans in rural areas and small towns consider it rude to ignore a passerby and not say a greeting.





Coffee growing has greatly influenced the history of El Salvador





One of the foods Salvadorans enjoy most is the pupusa—a cornmeal (or rice) tortilla stuffed with cheese and beans, as well as pork or other fillings. Pupusas are often served with tomato sauce and curtido—a mixture of cabbage, carrots, onions, and spicy vinegar. Although some people use a knife and fork, the traditional way to eat pupusas is with the fingers.





Pupusas are one of El Salvador’s most popular foods










Los Tercios Waterfall, Suchitoto




DID YOU KNOW? El Salvador has been called the land of volcanoes. There are more than 20 volcanoes, some of which are still active. Los Tercios Waterfall cascades over tall hexagonal columns of rock formed by volcanic activity.
There are more than 38,000 of Jehovah’s Witnesses in El Salvador, and they are organized into about 700 congregations. They teach the Bible to some 43,000 people in Spanish, English, and Salvadoran Sign Language.



FAST FACTS
Population: 6,267,000

Capital: San Salvador

Official language: Spanish

Climate: Very warm along the coastal and interior lowlands; milder at higher altitudes

Land: Mostly mountainous with a central plateau




TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
Answer true or false.
               El Salvador is the smallest country in Central America.

                 El Salvador is the most densely populated nation in Central America.

               Most Salvadoran foods are very spicy.

               Coffee growing greatly influenced the history of El Salvador.


Answers: A, B, and D are true; C is false. Most visitors find the spices in Salvadoran foods to be mild.



