A Letter from People Who Care
September 1, 1974
Dear Friend:
This summer, at the “Divine Purpose” District Assemblies, it was announced that in September two special meetings would be held by Jehovah’s witnesses world wide. This gathering today is the first of these meetings. It has been arranged especially for those of you who have begun to associate with Jehovah’s witnesses recently. We are pleased to have you with us, joining the millions of others coming together for this meeting in more than 32,000 congregations throughout the earth.
Why has this special meeting been arranged? Because the time in which we are living makes it urgent that you give careful and prayerful consideration to your standing before Jehovah God. As you perhaps have learned already, since 1914 C.E. this world has been in what the Bible calls its “last days.” These “last days” will soon come to their end, with the destruction of the present ungodly world. The fast-approaching execution of God’s judgment is referred to in the Bible as a “great tribulation,” a time of trouble unequaled in human history. (Matt. 24:21; Rev. 7:14) All who refuse to come to know God as his devoted servants and who persist in disobeying the “good news about our Lord Jesus” will then perish everlastingly. (We encourage you to open your Bible and read what it says about this at 2 Thessalonians 1:6-9; also take the time to read from the Bible the other scriptures cited in this letter.)
We do not know the precise time​—the “day and hour”—​for the “great tribulation” to strike. The Bible shows that it will strike like a thief in the night, suddenly, at an unexpected hour. (Matt. 24:36, 42-44) While not knowing the exact time, we do know that God’s judgment is to be executed within the lifetime of the generation that saw the beginning of the “last days.” Jesus Christ said: “This generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.” (Matt. 24:34) Accordingly, the generation of people that witnessed the events of 1914 C.E. is the one that will also see the “great tribulation.” Already nearly sixty years have passed. Those persons who were at an age of understanding in 1914 are diminishing in numbers. Clearly, then, the time for Jehovah God to act is near at hand.
Looking at the present world situation, some persons may conclude that any intervention by God is yet a long way off. They may feel that circumstances will soon force the nations into accepting the fact that they are going to have to live in peace if anyone is going to survive. But do not allow yourself to be deceived into thinking that the efforts of men to bring about a measure of peace and security are an indication that they will really succeed in bringing stability to human affairs. The Bible tells us: “You yourselves know quite well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night. Whenever it is that they are saying: ‘Peace and security!’ then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them.”​—1 Thess. 5:2, 3.
In view of the evident nearness of the “great tribulation,” we want to appeal to you not to delay in choosing life as an approved servant of God. It is important to realize, however, that fear of destruction in the “great tribulation” is not the basis on which a person can gain God’s favor. Rather, the basis for a right relationship with the Creator is deep love for him and appreciation for what he has done in behalf of humankind.​—Deut. 30:11-16; 1 John 4:8-10; 5:2.
Consider what he has done for you. Were it not for the natural cycles that he put into operation ages ago, you would not now be alive. The apostle Paul pointed this out to the men of Athens, Greece, saying: “[God] himself gives to all persons life and breath and all things.” (Acts 17:25) Furthermore, without your asking for it, he purchased you with the precious blood of his own Son, Jesus Christ. This laid the basis for you to choose to serve Him, with the prospect of gaining life free from pain, sickness, old age and death. (Rom. 5:8; Titus 3:4, 5; 1 Pet. 1:18, 19; Rev. 21:3, 4) Is it not only right, then, to want to do His will with a complete heart, keeping His commands? What makes this especially appropriate is that service to God is not a burden but even now brings true contentment, satisfaction and refreshment.​—1 John 5:3.
If all humans would appreciate what God has done for them and would loyally stick to his Word, he would not have to destroy any of them. (Jer. 18:7-10; Lam. 3:33; Ezek. 33:11; 2 Pet. 3:9) But, sadly, this is not the case. Therefore, out of deep love for his devoted servants, Jehovah God will, in all justice, act against the wicked, bringing an end to the ruiners of the earth. (Rev. 11:18; compare Genesis 6:5-12.) In this way he will preserve the life of his servants at the cost of the life of the wicked​—Prov. 21:18.
A Time for Action
How do you personally feel about this? Are you grateful that Jehovah God has been patient with sinful mankind, including you, and given you the opportunity to gain his approval and life? Are you demonstrating your appreciation in deeds and not putting off steps to come into a proper relationship with him?​—Isa. 55:6, 7.
Perhaps you are already studying the Bible with Jehovah’s witnesses in your home. We encourage you to continue, for it is God’s will for you to “come to an accurate knowledge of truth,” with a view to gaining life eternal. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) But if you are as yet not regularly discussing the Bible in your home, we will gladly arrange to assist you, free of charge. Please ask any one of Jehovah’s witnesses about this or talk to the elders of this congregation.
With increased knowledge of the Scriptures, you will doubtless come to see the need to make changes in your life to bring it into harmony with God’s truth. At times you may feel that you simply cannot make these changes, that they are just too big for you. But do not give up. Jehovah is a loving, patient and merciful God. He wants you to get the very best from life both now and in the future. He knows that the only way that you can do this is by conforming to his will. Therefore, if you sincerely seek to obey his Word, he will listen to your prayers for help. By means of his spirit, he will aid you to conform to his will. Though some weaknesses may be deeply ingrained, you will in time be able to keep them in check. Actions that are out of harmony with God’s commands and that at one time seemed pleasurable to you will eventually lose their appeal.​—Col. 3:9, 10; Eph. 4:22-24; compare Psalm 55:22; Philippians 4:13.
You will also find that your regular attendance at the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses will help you greatly. What is said at these meetings serves to incite one to manifest love in all aspects of life and to abound in fine works. This is surely no time to neglect meetings having such a beneficial purpose.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
As you experience the blessings that come from conforming to God’s Word, your heart will move you to want others​—relatives, friends and acquaintances—​to share in your joy. It may be that you have already advanced to the point where others recognize that you are living according to Christian principles. (Isa. 2:4; 1 Cor. 6:9, 10; 1 Pet. 4:3, 4; 2 Cor. 6:16, 17; Jas. 1:27) You may also appreciate the need to speak, not only to those whom you know, but also to strangers, helping them to come into a fine relationship with God as disciples of Jesus Christ.
But you may be fearful about sharing with Jehovah’s witnesses in their door-to-door preaching. Do not worry about this. No one in the congregation is going to insist that you do anything that you personally do not want to do. But when your own heart moves you to want to share the good news with others, you will be welcome to go along with an experienced Witness as an observer of that one. While you may not feel like speaking at first, you will find that, in time, you just cannot keep quiet. The truth of God’s Word, coupled with the urgency of the time and concern for fellowmen, will prompt you to express yourself.​—Luke 6:45.
If you continue to study God’s Word, attend meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses and share with others what you are learning, you will soon feel moved to make the most important decision in your life, the decision to serve God unreservedly as a baptized disciple of Jesus Christ.​—Matt. 28:19, 20; Mark 8:34; Acts 2:37-39; 8:26-38.
Have you progressed to the point where you could dedicate yourself to Jehovah God? Then, do not allow selfish considerations to cause you to delay. Make public expression of that dedication, symbolizing it by water baptism. (Rom. 10:9, 10) Yes, show yourself to be a genuine disciple of Jesus Christ, a person who has turned around from his former ways and is now using his life to do the will of Jehovah God.​—1 Pet. 3:21.
Regardless of your state in spiritual growth, we urge you to continue working toward coming into an approved relationship with Jehovah God before it is too late. Pray that he might help you to continue making progress in proving yourself to be the kind of person whom he can use at this critical time in human history to help your fellowmen, and whom he will consider worthy of preservation when the “great tribulation” strikes.​—Luke 21:34-36.
Your concerned friends,
Jehovah’s Witnesses

