Announcements
◆ Literature offer for August: The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life, or other pocket-size book for 25c. For September: Evolution book, for 25c or other small or large book. For October: Awake! subscription, with three booklets.
◆ The October 8 issue of Awake! and the October 15 issue of The Watchtower will be special issues. Be sure to order early the extra copies you will need.
◆ Each congregation will receive two Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature at the end of August. Please do not include cash items such as the Aid book, the large-print Bible (bi8) and the Concordance in value of campaign literature in stock. We would appreciate your filling out the forms and returning the original to us no later than September 6. Keep the duplicate copy.
◆ The elders in each congregation should arrange to meet together early in September. Any recommendations for new appointments should then be sent to the Society using the S-2 form. Presiding overseers should send in their report for the service year on the S-10 form at the same time, also the new S-9 form regarding elders to attend the Kingdom Ministry School. All these forms are being sent to congregations with the July literature statement. (See Organization book, page 67, and August 1973 Kingdom Ministry.)
◆ It is requested that, on the next literature order for the congregation, presiding overseers order twelve monthly Congregation Report cards and other forms needed for the 1975 service year.
◆ New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures​—French
Bible​—Vietnamese
◆ Out of Stock in U.S.A.:
From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained​—Thai
◆ The permanent addresses for receiving literature, magazines and Society mail should not be changed to correspond with the rotation of the elders and ministerial servants.
◆ If you still have at home copies of Kingdom News that were not distributed during the campaign we encourage you to make good use of them. When householders do not accept other literature, hand them one of these tracts.

