Presenting the Good News​—Through Christian Conduct and Dress
1 As representatives of Jehovah, his Christian witnesses are often in the public view. We are a people very closely observed by the world in general, and most persons in the world readily recognize that Jehovah’s witnesses are different. But what makes us different?
2 We are different because we have separated ourselves from the world. We no longer indulge in its “works of the flesh.” (Gal. 5:19-21) We do not share the materialistic ambitions and unchristian jesting so popular with this old system. Rather, our outlook is spiritual​—at least it should be. And as spiritual men and women we should seek never to be identified with the old world in any way​—whether by appearance, dress, speech or conduct.
3 In all these things we should always reflect Christian modesty and separateness from the old system. Most brothers and sisters therefore consider very carefully what clothing they will wear when going into the field service, making sure that it is well arranged, modest according to Bible standards, and not ignoring what is viewed as appropriate according to local custom. (1 Tim. 2:9, 10; 1 Cor. 2:12) Also they are careful to see that what they wear is clean and neat and that their book bags are in good condition. In this way their appearance will not detract from the message they bear.
4 Our conduct is very important, too. Of course, there is a time and place for recreation and other things besides field service, but when engaging in the field service our conduct should be exemplary. The preaching of the good news is serious work. We reflect joy in our work, but if we were joking and making a lot of unnecessary noise when going from house to house, people might not take seriously what we say; at least they would feel we certainly were not serious about our work as Christians.
5 Oftentimes, we have opportunities to do informal witnessing. But have you ever found that you held back from giving a helpful witness to someone, perhaps because you felt that your conduct and appearance at the time did not recommend you as one of Jehovah’s witnesses? This is something to consider, isn’t it? We are servants of Jehovah all the time, not just a few hours each month. And people observe what we do all the time, not just when we are in the field service. Whether shopping, going to and from work, attending a wedding or a reception, going to school or in other daily activities, we are observed. Yes, people have their eyes on Jehovah’s servants. If our dress at times when we are not in the field service were immodest or in imitation of some worldly fad, do you think that people who observe us would be inclined to accept us as genuine Christians when we called on them to discuss the Bible?
6 Therefore it is good to remember at all times who we are​—Jehovah’s Christian witnesses. Let us help people to realize that we are real Christians, separated from this old system, not only by what we preach but also by good appearance and fine conduct at all times.​—1 Pet. 2:12.
[Blurb on page 8]
In All Things Recommend Yourself as a Witness for Jehovah.

