Pursuing Peace in Jehovah’s Way
539,262 Share in Field Activity
1 “Seek peace and pursue it.” (1 Pet. 3:11) The need to act on this inspired admonition takes on ever-increasing urgency in this concluding period of the “last days.” Only those who are at peace with Jehovah, conducting themselves in harmony with his commands, can hope to survive the fast approaching “great tribulation.”​—2 Thess. 1:6-9; 2 Pet. 3:10-14.
2 Appreciating this, we rejoice in seeing thousands upon thousands responding to the “good news of peace” and taking steps to gain an approved standing before Jehovah God. (Acts 10:36) Many of these have progressed to the point of themselves sharing the “good news of peace” with others. Here, in the United States, during the month of May, 92,532 more persons participated in this vital work than did last May. That is marvelous indeed when we consider the changes many of them had to make in their way of life in order to represent Jehovah, the God of peace. A tremendous witness was given, over 40 million copies of Kingdom News No. 18 being distributed.
3 The thrilling increases in the ranks of Kingdom proclaimers are an indication that many more sincere people are yet to be found. And it is heartwarming to observe that Jehovah’s people as a body are responding wholeheartedly to the need of such persons to become reconciled to God. Just think of it, of the 539,262 proclaimers of the “good news of peace,” 20,745 were regular pioneers,. This was the largest number of regular pioneers to date. Might you be able to arrange your circumstances to join these pioneers?
4 During the month of August we will again have fine opportunities to aid others to seek peace. We can do so by distributing the Truth book, a publication that has certainly aided thousands to seek peace with Jehovah and, in fact, to continue pursuing it as his dedicated servants. Over 74 million copies of this publication have now been printed in 91 languages.
5 Even if you just recently started to proclaim the “good news of peace,” perhaps sharing in distributing the tracts, you will find it a pleasure to use the Truth book to aid others. This is a publication that you have studied. You know what it contains and what things particularly impressed you. Your sincere, enthusiastic expression about what you learned may be just what is needed to reach the hearts of truth seekers.
6 Of course, if people are really going to be helped to become pursuers of peace, they need to be instructed in God’s ways. It is encouraging, therefore, that now 37,000 more studies are being conducted on the average than last year. We surely want to be alert to every opportunity to start additional Bible studies. Some on whom you will be calling during the month of August may already have the Truth book. Why not help them to appreciate how beneficial it would be for them to have a Bible study in their home? Perhaps you could invite them to get their copy of the Truth book and then demonstrate the study method, using one or two paragraphs, if time permits. Others may have discontinued their studies due to vacation periods. Might special efforts to call on them result in renewing such studies?
7 May the month of August find us putting forth zealous efforts in aiding others to seek peace with Jehovah. At the same time may we continue to pursue peace ourselves, demonstrating in our attitude, words and actions that we are fully devoted to Jehovah and his righteous ways.
[Blurb on page 1]
Dutifully Pursuing Peace in Jehovah’s Way.

