Question Box
● What factors determine when congregation meetings will be held?
While there is no set pattern of meeting times to be adhered to, why we have our meetings at a certain time is in some respects more important than when they are held. Some questions for the congregation to consider in regard to meeting times are: How many other congregations must use the same Kingdom Hall, so, what choice of times is available? At what times will new ones most likely attend? What are the work and school schedules locally? What is our motive in wanting meetings at a certain time? Are we willing to put some personal preference aside so as to benefit the congregation as a whole?
Consider what the apostle Paul said: “All things are lawful; but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful; but not all things build up. Let each one keep seeking, not his own advantage, but that of the other person.” (1 Cor. 10:23, 24) In harmony with this principle, the elders, when considering possible meeting times to recommend to the congregation, might ask to themselves: Will such an arrangement prove advantageous spiritually the congregation and to new ones, aiding them to be present for the meetings? Will such a schedule really aid us to put Kingdom interests first, or, rather, will Kingdom interests be neglected?
After considering the factors involved and the recommendations of the elders, it is up to each congregation to decide their meeting times locally. As outlined in the “Organization” book, page 103, par. 3, the congregation would “choose times that are convenient for the majority of the members of the congregation.” Those whose schedules conflict with meeting times are pleased to make adjustments as not to neglect their spiritual interests. If several congregations meet in the same Kingdom Hall, then meeting times will have to be worked out between them in a loving, Christian Way.
The time for Congregation book studies within a congregation may vary according to the circumstances of those who make up a book study group.

