From Our Readers
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)  When I received the August 22, 2001, issue of Awake!, entitled “Coping With Post-traumatic Stress,” I was so surprised that I couldn’t stop crying. I have continually prayed that Jehovah teach me to cope with my PTSD. I thought that I was worthless, and I started to lose my self-respect. Today I received the answer to my prayers. I can’t express how much these articles have meant to me, both spiritually and emotionally.
C. K., Japan
I’m a 40-year-old adult who suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder because of my childhood. Your articles answered my prayers. They were encouraging and positive. Thank you for such insightful articles. Keep them coming!
R.D.M., United States
The pain of living and suffering with this disorder is very hard to express. My father was an alcoholic, and from childhood I was subjected to his anger and violence. I was also sexually abused. I was happy that this article pointed out that those with PTSD tend to reproach themselves and are in need of great encouragement. I give my heartfelt thanks to Jehovah and to all of you for these wonderful articles.
Y. S., Japan
Articles like these help us to cope emotionally and also strengthen us mentally, so that we can do better. Please continue to write such needed articles that help us to understand ourselves!
C. L., United States
I was diagnosed with PTSD, but the only thing I knew about the disorder was that you have flashbacks. Your articles explained details about symptoms. I used to blame myself, thinking that my spirituality had fallen sharply. But the point that we should think, not of how we view ourselves, but of how Jehovah views us was a real help.
J. S., Japan
Reading this material was hard, as I was trying to see through my tears. For the past two years, I have had flashbacks and nightmares of the night my grandfather died in my arms of a heart attack. I spent much of my time at Christian meetings crying. This information has helped me to understand why I am still hurting so badly. Now I know where to turn for help—to my most loving and caring heavenly Father and his organization.
P. T., Australia
Five years ago I lost my husband in an automobile accident, and a year later I began to experience unusual physical symptoms. When I received this article, I keenly felt that the ones who understand the matter best are Jehovah and his organization. Just having this feeling gave me the renewed strength I needed to go on. My heartfelt thanks for all the work you do!
A. K., Japan
Bible Reading  Thank you from the bottom of my heart for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Bible Reading More Enjoyable?” (August 22, 2001) I am 17 years old. I have always quit reading the Bible halfway through. Sometimes I did it just because I felt that I was too busy, and other times I thought that what I was reading wouldn’t really be of use to me. But the young people in the article are really enjoying their Bible reading and benefiting from it. I couldn’t help wanting to read it too. Now I want to keep trying and not give up.
Y. T., Japan

