Announcements
“SEPARATING TO THE RIGHT” TESTIMONY PERIOD
This is the twelfth annual campaign for taking subscription for The Watchtower. February, the second month of the campaign, has been set aside as a special Testimony Period entitled “Separating to the Right”. Thoughtful readers of this magazine know there is no better Bible publication than The Watchtower for helping people to be separated to the right of the King Jesus Christ in this judgment day of the nations. As an added inducement to the public to subscribe, a premium of 8 assorted booklets will be offered with every year’s subscription for The Watchtower at the regular rate of $1, American money. To persons already subscribing for The Watchtower a year’s subscription for the companion magazine Awake! may be offered, however without the premium added. We especially invite our Watchtower readers one and all to join in this campaign during February. A postcard to us will bring instructions and references to local fellow campaigners. Yes, by all means, report on our form the success with which Jehovah God blesses your activities during February.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of February 26: “A God of Warning,” ¶1-18 inclusive, also “Who Will Share in the Final Witness?” ¶1-7 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1950.
Week of March 5: “Who Will Share in the Final Witness?” ¶8-29 inclusive, The Watchtower January 15, 1950.
1950 YEARBOOK OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
1949, the most remarkable service year yet! So the 1950 Yearbook of Jehovah’s witnesses shows. You will want to read about it and rejoice at the noteworthy expansion of the worship of the true God in the 104 regions reported on. In addition to the annual world report of the president of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, the Yearbook also sets out his comment upon the 1950 yeartext and a daily text and comment for throughout the year. The printing of the 1950 Yearbook is in limited edition, and hence a contribution of 50c per copy is asked. Where you are in association with others, send in a group order, as by the servant of a company of Jehovah’s witnesses, with remittance to cover. This will save us on time of handling as well as expense of shipping.
1950 CALENDAR
By having the 1950 Calendar published by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society you will have prominent before your gaze the yeartext, “Preach the word” (2 Timothy 4:2), and also a view of the Society’s headquarters home, including the new Bethel structure, from which the service work throughout the earth is directed. Alongside this artistic picture you will find a calendar. Besides giving five interior views of the new Bethel home, this sets out the titles of the bimonthly special testimony periods for 1950 and the specific themes for the intervening months. This service calendar we send to any address at 25c a copy or $1.00 for 5 copies sent to one address, postpaid. So let companies or groups order the Calendar in quantity, through their designated servant, sending remittance to cover the cost at the above rate.

