Do the Answers Matter?
“You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”—JOHN 8:32.
THE Bible contains the truth that can set us free from confusing or even misleading beliefs about Jesus. Does it really matter, though, what we believe about him? Yes, it does. It matters to Jehovah. It matters to Jesus. And it should matter to us.
● Why does it matter to Jehovah? Simply put, because “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) Jehovah wants us to live happily forever. Jesus said: “God loved the world [of humankind] so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might . . . have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) God sent his Son to be our Redeemer and to open the way for us to live forever in Paradise on earth, in harmony with His original purpose. (Genesis 1:28) God is eager to give the gift of everlasting life to those who learn the truth about his Son and act in harmony with it.—Romans 6:23.
● Why does it matter to Jesus? Jesus too loves humankind. He showed self-sacrificing love by willingly laying down his life for us. (John 15:13) He understood that he was thereby providing the only way to salvation. (John 14:6) Should it surprise us that Jesus wants to see as many as possible benefit from his ransom sacrifice? That is why he commissioned his genuine followers to teach people worldwide about God’s will and purpose.—Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20.
● Why should it matter to us? Think for a moment about things that no doubt mean a lot to you—your health and your family. Do you yearn for good health and a better life for yourself and your loved ones? Jehovah through Jesus offers you and your loved ones the prospect of perfect health and unending life in a new world, free from pain and suffering. (Psalm 37:11, 29; Revelation 21:3, 4) Does that prospect appeal to you? If so, there is something you need to do.
Look again at the scripture text quoted along with the title: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” The truth about Jesus and his role in the fulfillment of God’s purpose can free us from the worst type of slavery of all—bondage to sin and death. But to experience that liberation, you need to “know the truth.” Why not learn more about this truth and how you and your loved ones can benefit from it? Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to help you.

