Ministerial Perseverance Rewarded
CHRISTIAN ministers are counseled to persevere: “Let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.” (Gal. 6:9) Proving God to be true in this matter are the following experiences taken from the 1962 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
● A Witness in Argentina reported: ‘In going from house to house I called at one door where no one was at home. I made note of this and returned time after time without finding anyone. One day I tried again and arrived just as its occupants were ready to leave. I gave a brief sermon and noticed that interest was shown; they asked me to return the next day. This I did, placing with them the Bible-study aid From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained and starting a Bible study with them at the same time. This was in September, 1960. They progressed rapidly, began telling others about the things they had learned, and seven months later began accompanying me in the Christian field ministry.’
● In the very religious town of A——, France, a full-time minister of Jehovah called back five times on different days at a certain door before he found the householder at home. The person he then met was so interested in the truth about Jehovah and his kingdom that in only two months she began telling others about it herself.
● In Luxembourg a married couple rented their hall to Jehovah’s witnesses for an assembly. They were so much impressed by the Witnesses that they not only told others about the Witnesses but the wife began distributing copies of the Bible among those to whom she spoke. However, for several years after that, whenever the Witnesses endeavored to arrange for a regular Bible study the excuse always was that they were too busy. Then one day the Witnesses heard that the couple had sold their business, a restaurant, and so tried again. This time a Bible study was begun and progress was rapid. The husband, wife and oldest daughter have taken up the preaching activity.
● Two Bible magazines had been placed by a Witness in Kenya, Africa, and arrangements were made to call back. Upon the first return visit a Bible study was begun, but then twelve calls had to be made before finding the interested party at home again so that the Bible study could be resumed. Soon this young couple were attending congregational meetings and sharing in the Christian ministry. Twelve months after their first Bible study they were baptized. They have continued zealous ever since, even though a change in the husband’s employment required him to move to where there is no congregation of Jehovah’s witnesses.
● A Philippine Witness traveled a long distance to the city of Bohol, where there was a great need for preaching the good news of God’s kingdom. However, before long she became homesick. Hearing of this, her parents urged her to return—a mistaken kindness. But instead of yielding to their importunities she determined to stick to her ministerial assignment, with the result that in six months her labors resulted in seventeen new Christian witnesses, including the local chief of police together with his wife and daughter.
● In Venezuela a Witness conducted Bible studies with a young mother of three children for almost four years and then due to circumstances dropped it, especially as no progress was evident. Almost a year went by, then the Witness called because the mother’s subscription for The Watchtower had expired. She not only resubscribed but wanted more literature, and asked that her Bible study be resumed, confessing that she had let her unbelieving husband unduly influence her. Now she is making good progress, attending the congregational meetings and sharing in the Christian ministry.

