Questions From Readers
● When did Saul of Tarsus receive the name Paul, and why?—D. B., U.S.A.
We cannot be dogmatic about the matter, but it seems logical that both names, Saul and Paul, were given in childhood to the person who later became the apostle Paul.
Saul was born of the Jewish tribe of Benjamin; as he put it, “a Hebrew born from Hebrews.” (Phil. 3:5) A number of possibilities have been offered as to why his parents gave him the name Saul. It could have been because that was his father’s name. (Luke 1:59) Then again, Saul was a traditional name of importance among Benjamites because the first king over all Israel, a Benjamite, was named Saul. Some have even suggested that his parents gave him the name because of its meaning, “asked for” or “desired.” Whatever the reason why this Jewish name was chosen, when among fellow Jews, and especially when studying to be a Pharisee and living as one, he would have used his Hebrew name Saul.—Acts 22:3.
Since his Jewish parents lived in the Roman free city of Tarsus, it is understandable that they also may have given their son a Roman name, Paulus or Paul, meaning “little.” Some of Paul’s relatives likewise had Roman and Greek names. (Rom. 16:7, 21) Additionally, it was not unusual for Jews of that time, particularly among those living outside of Israel, to have two names. We read in the Bible of the disciple Symeon, who was also called Niger, and of John, who was surnamed Mark. (Acts 13:1; 12:12) In Saul’s case a Roman name would have been especially fitting since he was born a Roman citizen.—Acts 22:28.
At Acts 13:9, in the account about the initial leg of the apostle’s first missionary trip, Saul is for the first time in the Biblical record called Paul. We read: “Saul, who is also Paul, . . . ” Some have suggested that he first took this name then in honor of proconsul Sergius Paulus to whom he had just preached, but this does not appear to be the most reasonable explanation. (Acts 13:7) Rather, if he had a Roman or Gentile name, now that he would be traveling among Gentiles, the apostle reasonably would use it. Recognizing that he had been entrusted with the good news for the Gentiles or people of the nations, Paul never used his Jewish name in any of his letters. (Gal. 2:7; 1:1) Accordingly, even Peter referred to his beloved fellow apostle as Paul.—2 Pet. 3:15.

