From Our Readers
Freedom of Thought  Often I had just let my mind drift, dwelling on undesirable thoughts. That is why I was astounded to read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Does the Bible Discourage Freedom of Thought?” (June 8, 1994) I never realized that Jehovah God would view it as a sin if one willfully contemplated a wrong course. Thanks to Jehovah for giving me such straightforward counsel that will help me to adjust my crooked thinking!
J. P., Philippines
Romance Problems  Thank you so much for the articles “Young People Ask . . . What If I Fall For an Unbeliever?” (May 22, 1994) and “How Can I Stop Liking Someone?” (June 8, 1994) A workmate of mine developed strong feelings for me, and I found myself becoming attracted to her. I knew this was wrong and prayed to Jehovah for help. When I saw these articles, I read them over and over again. Now I realize that the short-​term heartache that would result from breaking things off is far better than the lifelong problems that would result from a harmful relationship.
P. J., United States
It seems like the articles were written just for me! I wonder what would have happened to me if these articles had not been published. Thanks for knowing the problems youths face.
S. J., Nigeria
I have a crush on a boy in my class. He is very attractive and very gentle. Since reading the article, though, I keep asking myself, ‘Does he share my goals and way of life?’ After considering this, I realize just how much of a fool I’ve been till now. I want to get over this infatuation soon!
S. T., Japan
I fell for an unbeliever and married him. He went to Christian meetings just to please me. Once we got married, he changed. He even tried to stop me from serving Jehovah. Then he beat me and was unfaithful. Now I find myself divorced. If only all the young ones could see how serious it is to date an unbeliever! I don’t want anyone to go through what I went through.
T. F., Puerto Rico
Stress  Thank you so much for the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: What Can Help You Cope With Stress?” (September 8, 1994) I was raised a Christian but left the truth in my teenage years. I’ve been back three years now, but I’m married to an unbeliever. I constantly dwell on the mistakes that I made, not realizing that this is the reason I’ve been stressed out so much. Thank you for helping me see that it does no good to dwell on the past. Rather, I should work on my future.
R. L., United States
You said that ‘people of all ages are experiencing stress.’ I’m 21 and suffer from acute stress. I’ve been in the hospital twice within eight months for muscle spasms and stress-​related migraines. Each time the doctors have told me I’m too young to be stressed out. Your article thus gave me a small sigh of relief.
V. P., United States
Geography Lesson  I’m an 11-​year-​old girl, and I appreciated the article “Floating Islands of Lake Titicaca” very much. (June 22, 1994) In geography class the teacher asked us if people lived on Lake Titicaca. All my classmates said no. Having read Awake!, I answered yes. The teacher asked me how I knew, providing me the opportunity to give her a good witness.
S. B., Italy

