A Letter From the Governing Body
AS RECORDED at 1 Thessalonians 5:18, the apostle Paul exhorted: “In connection with everything give thanks.” During this past service year, there were bountiful provisions from Jehovah’s generous hand for which all of us have reason to give thanks. True to his promise, Jehovah opened up ‘the floodgates of the heavens and emptied out upon us abundant blessings’ that repeatedly made tears of joy and gratitude well up in us.—Mal. 3:10; Ps. 33:1.
As reflected in the 1998 Service Year Report of Jehovah’s Witnesses Worldwide, on pages 32 to 39, what a thunderous shout of triumph was heard throughout the earth! A new peak of 5,888,650 publishers joined their voices in praising Jehovah. (Ps. 66:1, 8) This included the 316,092 new ones who were baptized. The prospect that millions more may yet call upon Jehovah’s name is indicated by the 13,896,312 who attended the Memorial. We give thanks to Jehovah for this ingathering.—Ps. 30:4.
Early in the service year, publishers worldwide found delight in distributing Kingdom News No. 35. Faithfully and zealously supporting the campaign, they enjoyed fine experiences and many blessings. (Prov. 10:22; 28:20) Shortly thereafter, elders and ministerial servants benefited from the Kingdom Ministry School. They were thoroughly refreshed, and they highly valued the training. Shepherding, teaching, evangelizing, and working together in unity were emphasized. Letters reflecting gratitude to Jehovah recounted how much this training meant to them.
In May, district and international conventions began to be held. Delegates from 160 lands attended the nine international gatherings in North America. Graduates of Gilead and the Ministerial Training School, international servants, Bethelites in foreign service, as well as others with missionary status attended and were featured on the program. Many of them expressed their appreciation for the generous contributions that made it possible for them to attend a convention in their homeland.
Thousands of visiting delegates from around the globe were accommodated in the homes of their Christian brothers and shared in their family life. This served to deepen the intense love that unifies the worldwide brotherhood of Jehovah’s people. (1 Pet. 4:8; 5:9) Love and hospitality abounded to an extent never before experienced in connection with international conventions. Letters described moving scenes as hosts, with tears of joy and lumps in their throats, were introduced to their visiting guests, who responded with similar emotions. One host wrote: “Thank you for the most wonderful experience of our lives.” And a delegate from South Africa wrote: “The welcome that we received . . . was an experience that we shall never forget. . . . It will always enrich our appreciation for the worldwide brotherhood—a wonderful gift from our heavenly Father, Jehovah.”
Delegates to conventions in Britain, Germany, and Greece were imbued with the same spirit. These were enthused by the convention program, association with Witnesses from other lands, and a tour of the Society’s branch facilities. Many sent letters of appreciation and thanks for what they had experienced.
The conventions gave a tremendous witness. The public recognized that there was something significant behind the theme “God’s Way of Life,” as highlighted on the program cover and also as advertised on the lapel cards worn by our brothers.
The resolution presented at conventions this year expressed our determination to pursue this way of life henceforth and to give full expression to it in all we do—in our private lives, within the family circle, as part of the Christian congregation, and as a worldwide association of brothers.—Titus 2:11, 12; 1 Pet. 2:17.
Our having resolved to pursue this way places us in a very favorable situation. There is no question about the striking contrast between the spiritual condition of God’s people today and that of apostates and others who profess to know and worship God but who disown him by their works. (Titus 1:16) The inspired words found at Isaiah 65:13, 14, alert us to this difference: “Look! My own servants will eat, . . . drink, . . . rejoice, . . . cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart, but you [apostates] will make outcries because of the pain of heart and you will howl because of sheer breakdown of spirit.” What a heritage we have! May we be ever thankful for all that Jehovah is doing for his own people at this time.
Some of our fellow servants have undergone considerable suffering because of economic hardship, persecution, terrorism, and wars. Quite a number have been victims of disasters, such as floods, hurricanes, and volcanic eruptions. But their hope has not diminished. Jehovah has sustained them in all their tribulation, so that they exult in his ways and are able to remain in an approved condition before him.—Rom. 5:3-5.
Despite experiencing difficulties in these trying times, we are a blessed and happy people. (Ps. 3:8; 144:15b) As we look to the future, our desire is to help many more to benefit from Jehovah’s way of life even as we have. There is still time for them even in their busy lives to learn Jehovah’s way and benefit from his patience, as our 1999 yeartext, at 2 Corinthians 6:2, indicates: “Look! Now is the day of salvation.” Yes, now is the time to act! May we be thankful for the privilege of making this known to all who will hear.
Unitedly with you we joyfully pursue God’s way of life.
Your fellow servants,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

