Uruguay
WHEN the Spaniards first came to Uruguay in 1516, they found no gold or silver, nor did they find the passage to the Orient that they were seeking. But in time they recognized the rolling terrain and mild climate as ideal for livestock. Here was a money-making opportunity. Employing methods all too often characteristic of the colonial powers, Spain launched an aggressive military campaign to exterminate the native Charrua Indians and take the land. During the 17th and 18th centuries, they virtually replaced the local Indian population. Later, thousands of immigrants from Italy and other lands arrived also. Hence, most people in Uruguay today are descendants of European immigrants, and Spanish is the official language.
Notwithstanding the predominantly European influence of the more than three million inhabitants, about 10 percent have native Indian ancestry and less than 3 percent are descendants of slaves brought from Africa. Religion is not of major concern to the majority of Uruguayans. The Catholic Church does not have the strong grip on the populace that it has in other South American countries. In fact, from the beginning of the 20th century, there has been a marked separation of Church and State. However, while there are many freethinkers, agnostics, and atheists, a considerable number of people still believe in God. A commonly heard statement reveals their stand: “I believe in God. I just don’t believe in religion.”
How would such people react if, instead of being taught the creeds of Christendom, they learned about the true God, whose loving purpose and kindly dealings with humankind are set out in the Bible? Would they prove to be among “the desirable things” that God welcomes into his spiritual house of worship?—Hag. 2:7.
A Small Beginning
In 1924 a man named Juan Muñiz, from Spain, came to seek honesthearted ones who would become worshipers of Jehovah. He was asked by J. F. Rutherford, then president of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, to move to South America and oversee the preaching of the good news in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay. Soon after his arrival in Argentina, he sailed across the Río de la Plata to preach to the people of Uruguay.
During the next 43 years, until his death in 1967, Juan Muñiz was a fearless teacher of God’s Word and was instrumental in the spreading of the good news through several South American countries, including Uruguay. Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses from that period recall that he could captivate an audience for two to three hours without relying on any notes, just using his Bible.
Call for More Workers Answered
Shortly after arriving in South America, Juan Muñiz recognized a great potential for disciple making and realized that there was a great need for workers. He must have felt just as Jesus did: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) So in harmony with his prayers to Jehovah, “the Master of the harvest,” Brother Muñiz conveyed his concerns to Brother Rutherford.
In answer to his request, during a 1925 convention in Magdeburg, Germany, Brother Rutherford asked a German pioneer if he would be willing to help out in South America. His name was Karl Ott. Brother Ott accepted the assignment and came to be known as Carlos Ott among the Spanish-speaking brothers. After serving in Argentina for a while, he was assigned to Montevideo, the capital of Uruguay, in 1928. He served in Uruguay for the following ten years.
Carlos got down to work right away. He proved to be both diligent and ingenious. Quickly he found a place on Río Negro Street where he could live and hold regular Bible study meetings with a few interested people. He also arranged for Bible lectures to be broadcast by radio. One radio station even agreed to broadcast the lectures free of charge.
Sometimes, Carlos would enter a restaurant and approach people at their tables while they were eating. One day, while engaging in this table-to-table witnessing, he met José Gajek, a German storekeeper who embraced Bible truth quickly. Soon José joined Carlos as one of the first proclaimers of the good news in Uruguay.
Determined to share in spreading the good news of God’s Kingdom full-time, Brother Gajek sold his grocery store and took up pioneering. He and Brother Ott covered a large portion of the country, preaching from house to house and presenting Bible talks in many cities and towns. Brother Gajek sowed seed abundantly in the hearts of many Uruguayans until his death in 1953. Many of his students became members of the Christian congregation and remain faithful to this day.
Russians Accept the Truth
During World War I, several Russian families moved to Uruguay and settled in the north. There they established prosperous farming colonies. They also kept their traditional respect for the Bible, reading it regularly. Hardworking and reserved in character, they formed an austere community that had little contact with Uruguayan society. It is here that another early publisher of the good news in Uruguay entered the picture. His name was Nikifor Tkachenko.
In his native Bessarabia, Nikifor had been a staunch Communist. However, after immigrating to Brazil, he obtained the booklet entitled Where Are the Dead? published by the Watch Tower Society. He immediately recognized the ring of truth and became an avid student of the Bible. He soon started to preach among the Russian-speaking people in the São Paulo area of Brazil. Impelled by his desire to preach in his own language to his compatriots in Uruguay, he journeyed some 1,250 miles [2,000 km]. Thus, in 1938, Brother Tkachenko arrived at a Russian community called Colonia Palma in northern Uruguay and served with such zeal that he had soon exhausted his supply of Russian Bible literature.
The farmers responded enthusiastically. Entire families began to study and embraced the truth. They proved to be among “the desirable things” invited into Jehovah’s house. Tkachenko, Stanko, Cotlearenco, Gordenko, Seclenov, Sicalo are just a few of the families whose grandchildren and great-grandchildren have been the basis for such northern congregations as Bella Unión, Salto, and Paysandú. Some in these families have been special pioneers, elders, circuit overseers, and missionaries. As for Brother Tkachenko, he remained faithful until his death in 1974.
The Six Germans
Because of the violent persecution against Jehovah’s Witnesses in Nazi Germany, many German pioneers left their homeland to serve in South America. Early in 1939, six of these pioneers arrived in Montevideo, penniless and with few belongings. They were pleased to meet Carlos Ott, who was there to welcome them. The six were Gustavo and Betty Bender, Adolfo and Carlota Voss, Kurt Nickel, and Otto Helle. Just three days after their arrival, they were already preaching from house to house. Not knowing Spanish, they used a printed Spanish testimony card. All they could say in Spanish was “Por favor, lea esto” (“Please read this”). Despite their limitations with the language, the German group was left in Uruguay to care for the Kingdom work in the country when Brother Ott was reassigned to Argentina.
The first few months were not easy. Learning the language was a challenge. It was not unusual for them to invite people to the riñones (kidneys) instead of the reuniones (meetings); they spoke of abejas (bees) instead of ovejas (sheep); and they asked for arena (sand) instead of harina (flour). One of them recalls: “To preach from house to house and conduct Bible studies and meetings without knowing the language was a difficult task. Furthermore, we had no financial help. We were able to use contributions from our literature placements to cover our living and transport costs. Thankfully, by the end of 1939, we had placed 55 magazine subscriptions, more than 1,000 books, and 19,000 booklets.”
Bicycles and Tents
These six Germans were not easily discouraged. They soon began to cover the country with the good news in the most economical way possible—they bought six bicycles. Otto Helle and Kurt Nickel cycled for several days—384 miles [615 km]—to reach Colonia Palma in order to give support to Brother Tkachenko. Imagine their surprise when they discovered that he spoke neither Spanish nor German, and they did not understand a word of Russian! Feeling the effects of what had taken place at the Tower of Babel, they decided to preach with their limited Spanish in the nearby town of Salto while Brother Tkachenko continued to work with the Russians.—Gen. 11:1-9.
Meanwhile, in order to spread the Bible’s message to the cities and towns in the south, the Benders set out on a journey of hundreds of miles on roads covered with gravel and dust. On their bikes they carried a tent, a small cookstove, kitchen utensils, literature, a phonograph with Bible talks on records, as well as the clothing necessary for a period of several months. The equipment on each bike weighed as much as another person! With this limited amount of gear, they challenged the cold, the heat, and the rain. On some occasions when they waded through floodwaters, they had to carry everything on their shoulders in order to keep the books and the phonograph dry.
One essential piece of equipment was their tent. The Benders had waterproofed the tent cloth themselves, treating it with oil and garlic to keep the moths away. One morning they could hardly believe their eyes when they woke up to see the sky through dozens of holes in the roof of the tent. During the night the ants had had an irresistible meal of canvas coated with oil and garlic! The German couple had underestimated the voracious appetite of the ants.
“Nazi Spies”?
Being German nationals became one of the biggest problems for Gustavo and Betty Bender while preaching in the interior of the country. Why? World War II was in full swing, and the Uruguayan radio and newspapers gave sensational reports about the German advances in Europe. On one occasion while the Benders camped on the outskirts of a town, the radio announced that the Germans had dropped armed parachutists with bikes behind enemy lines. Immediately, panic-stricken townspeople concluded that the German couple camping outside the town were Nazi spies! The local police promptly headed for the Benders’ camp to investigate the situation, with the backup of a large group of armed men.
Gustavo and Betty were interrogated. The police noticed that certain items were covered by a canvas sheet. So they asked nervously: “What are you covering with that sheet?” Gustavo responded: “Our two bikes and Bible literature.” With a look of disbelief, a police officer ordered him to remove the sheet. No machine guns—but two bicycles and several books appeared, to the officers’ great relief. The officers extended a friendly invitation to the Benders to stay in a more hospitable place—the police station—while they were preaching in the town!
The six Germans preached faithfully for decades in Uruguay. After Gustavo Bender died in 1961, his wife returned to Germany, where she continued her pioneer activity. She died in 1995. Adolfo and Carlota Voss served as missionaries in Uruguay until their deaths in 1993 and 1960 respectively. And Kurt Nickel also remained in Uruguay until his death in 1984. At the time of this writing, Otto Helle, in his 92nd year, is still serving in Uruguay.
The Seeds Bear Fruit
These early proclaimers of the good news in Uruguay searched zealously for prospective subjects of God’s Kingdom. By 1944 there were 20 publishers and 8 pioneers reporting activity in Uruguay. It was a small beginning. Other “desirable things” were yet to be found.
María de Berrueta and her four children—Lira, Selva, Germinal, and Líber—started to attend Christian meetings in 1944. Shortly after, Lira and Selva began preaching and, in a few months, entered the pioneer service. They accompanied Aida Larriera, one of the first and very zealous publishers in the country. However, the Berrueta family had not yet symbolized their dedication by water baptism. During one of his visits from Argentina, Juan Muñiz noticed this anomaly. Thus, six months into their full-time ministry, Lira and Selva were baptized along with their brother Líber and their mother, María.
“Sustained by Jehovah’s undeserved kindness, we have never betrayed that dedication,” says Lira. In 1950 she was invited to Gilead School. As a missionary she was assigned to Argentina, where she served for 26 years. In 1976 she returned to Uruguay. Selva also attended Gilead School, in 1953, with her husband. They were assigned to Uruguay, where he served as a circuit overseer. Selva continued faithful until her death in 1973. Líber married and raised a family. He also enjoyed many privileges of service. Until his death in 1975, he was the president of the legal corporation used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in Uruguay, Sociedad La Torre del Vigía. What happened to Germinal? He stopped associating with Jehovah’s people. Yet, after some 25 years, the seed of truth sprang up again in his heart. Today, he is an elder in one of the Montevideo congregations.
Gilead Missionaries Arrive
In March 1945, Nathan H. Knorr and Frederick W. Franz from the Society’s world headquarters made their first visit to Uruguay. They were a source of encouragement to all. There was also another brother, Russell Cornelius, who arrived in Uruguay at about the same time. Brother Cornelius was not just visiting. To the delight of the brothers, he was the first Gilead graduate to be assigned to Uruguay. At that time he spoke only a few words of Spanish, but he was determined to learn. In six weeks he was able to give his first public talk in Spanish! He proved to be an invaluable help to the Kingdom work in Uruguay.
That same year, the Society sent 16 more missionaries. They were all young sisters. Their presence in Montevideo was soon evident, and one newspaper said that “blond angels with makeup” had come down from heaven to Montevideo! The sisters immediately set about preaching with zeal and enthusiasm. The effects of their ministry became manifest. Attendance at the Memorial jumped from 31 in 1945 to 204 the following year. Later, several of these missionaries were sent to cities in the interior of the country. Jehovah blessed their efforts as they preached in territories that had never before been reached with the good news.
Over the years more than 80 missionaries have served in Uruguay. Those who are still in their assignments are Ethel Voss, Birdene Hofstetter, Tove Haagensen, Günter Schönhardt, Lira Berrueta, and Florence Latimer. All of them have spent more than 20 years in their assignment. Sister Latimer’s husband, William, died in his assignment after 32 years of missionary service, many of which were spent in the traveling work.
A Well-Protected Meeting
Jack Powers, a graduate of the first class of Gilead, began to serve in Uruguay on May 1, 1945. He and his wife, Jane, worked tirelessly, advancing Kingdom interests here until 1978, when they had to leave the country to take care of their infirm parents in the United States. Jack remembers an unforgettable incident that took place while he was in Uruguay. In 1947, Jack arrived in Rivera, a city located in the north of the country near the Brazilian border. Although there were no local publishers, with the help of a brother from Brazil, he spent a month preaching throughout the city, placing more than 1,000 copies of the booklet One World, One Government, in Spanish.
As a grand finale to this month of activity, he decided to hold a public meeting in the Plaza Internacional. As the name indicates, the Plaza was centrally located right on the international border of Brazil and Uruguay. After several days of advertising the meeting, the two brothers took their places in the Plaza in expectation of multitudes who they hoped would swarm to hear the talk. Soon 50 armed policemen arrived to keep order during the meeting. What was the attendance? A total of 53—the two brothers, one person who came because of interest in the subject of the talk, and the 50 policemen. The meeting was orderly and very well protected indeed!
The following year, the Society assigned five missionaries to Rivera. Soon after the missionaries’ arrival, Nathan H. Knorr and Milton G. Henschel, from the Society’s headquarters, held a meeting in Rivera with 380 in the audience. Over the years, many people receptive to the Kingdom message were found in Rivera. Now, there are two congregations active in that territory.
Two Curious Neighbors
One of the largest cities in the interior of Uruguay is Salto, located on the east bank of the Uruguay River. This is a fruitful agricultural area famous for its oranges and other citrus fruits. Salto has also been productive in a spiritual sense, with five congregations in the area. However, in 1947 the missionaries in Salto had just begun their search for Jehovah’s “desirable things.”
That year, Mabel Jones, one of the 16 missionary sisters who had arrived in 1945, went up to Salto along with other missionaries for several weeks to build up interest in the assembly that was to be held there. Two neighbors, Carola Beltramelli and her friend Catalina Pomponi, watched Mabel curiously. On a Saturday afternoon as Mabel was returning home after sharing in the field ministry, the two curious neighbors approached her and asked Bible questions. Catalina Pomponi recalls: “I always had many religious anxieties. That is why I started reading the Bible on my own. I learned many things. For instance, I learned that prayers to God should be made in private, not to be seen by others. After that I often kneeled and prayed to God for understanding. When Mabel Jones spoke to us for the first time, we felt as if a veil was removed from our eyes. I came home, and I got on my knees to thank God. The following day both Carola and I attended the public meeting at the assembly.”
Despite the opposition they received from their husbands, Mabel’s two neighbors progressed rapidly and got baptized. In time Catalina Pomponi was appointed a special pioneer. Throughout her fruitful career of over 40 years in the full-time service, she has helped 110 persons to become baptized Witnesses of Jehovah. Carola Beltramelli also proved to be a zealous Kingdom proclaimer, helping more than 30 persons to baptism. Carola’s two sons became pioneers. The older one, Delfos, had the privilege of attending Gilead School, and he has helped to provide oversight in the branch since 1970.
In the Land of Maté
As the missionaries covered the rurals, they visited several estancias, large settlements for cattle and sheep raising. The people who live in the estancias are simple and hospitable. It is quite common for them to welcome the Witnesses by offering them the traditional drink, maté. Maté is a hot tea sipped from a gourd cup through a bombilla, a metal tube with a strainer at one end. For the Uruguayans, the preparation and serving of maté is almost a ceremony. After the tea is ready, the cup is passed around from person to person, everyone sharing the same bombilla.
Imagine the missionaries’ reaction when they were first invited to join in the collective drinking of maté. To their hosts’ amusement, as the missionaries drank the green and bitter brew, their faces contorted in a variety of ways. After the first try, some decided that it would also be their last. Future invitations to sip maté were politely declined.
‘If You Have Images, I Will Not Return’
A group of missionaries was assigned to the city of Tacuarembó, in northern Uruguay. This city is surrounded by large estancias and other agricultural establishments. In 1949, Gerardo Escribano, a young farmer with many questions about life, received an invitation to attend a public talk at the Kingdom Hall. He accepted the invitation on one condition: “If you have images or if I am required to repeat prayers, I will not return.”
Gerardo was pleased to find no images and no rites in the Kingdom Hall. Rather, he enjoyed a Scriptural talk that revived his interest in the Bible. He continued to attend meetings and in time became a dedicated and baptized servant of Jehovah. Over the years, he has enjoyed many privileges of service, such as special pioneering, circuit work, and district work. Brother Escribano and his wife, Ramona, have been in the full-time service for a combined total of more than 83 years. Since 1976, Brother Escribano has been a member of the Branch Committee together with Delfos Beltramelli and Günter Schönhardt, a missionary from Germany who for many years has contributed much to the spiritual upbuilding of congregations in the vicinity of the branch.
The Harvest Increases
“The harvest is great, but the workers are few,” said Jesus. (Matt. 9:37, 38) These words took on special meaning in the lives of the missionaries in Uruguay, who had such a vast territory to cover. As the years went by, it became evident that Jehovah was supporting and blessing the efforts of his workers.
In 1949, when Brothers Knorr and Henschel visited for the second time, 592 persons met in Montevideo to listen to Brother Knorr’s talk “It Is Later Than You Think!” On that occasion 73 were baptized. In those days there were 11 congregations in the country. Ten years later, during his fourth visit, Brother Knorr spoke to an audience of more than 2,000 in Montevideo. By then, there were 1,415 publishers and 41 congregations in Uruguay.
The decade of the 1950’s was characterized by growth in the number of congregations throughout the country. Still, many had to meet in private homes. In one case, the householder cleverly installed casters (wheels) on all his living-room furniture. Hence, when the time came to make room for the congregation meeting, all he had to do was wheel the furniture out of the way. In another case, the congregation met in a small room toward the front of a private home. As the congregation grew, the partitions were removed in order to accommodate the larger group. Eventually, most of the walls were removed, and the family agreed to live in a reduced space toward the rear of the house.
One outstanding tool that proved to be useful in acquainting the people of Uruguay with the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses was the motion picture The New World Society in Action. This film arrived in Uruguay in 1955. That year Líber Berrueta traveled into the interior of the country and showed the film to more than 4,500 persons. It moved many who had previously manifested limited interest in our work to study the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
A New Branch Office
As the number of publishers continued to grow rapidly, the need for suitable facilities to accommodate the branch office and the missionary home became evident. Over the years, various buildings had been rented to satisfy this need. But the time had arrived to purchase land to construct the Society’s own facilities. However, land in the center of the capital city, Montevideo, was too expensive. It seemed that there was no choice but to purchase land farther away, toward the outskirts of the city. Accordingly, a sizable lot was acquired in 1955. The construction drawings were approved, and the crews were ready to begin working on the site. Then, the brothers were shocked to learn that the local government had decided to build an extension of one of the main avenues right through the recently acquired property!
What were they to do? Negotiations with the authorities followed. As a solution, the officials offered to purchase the Society’s lot. However, the amount they were willing to pay was less than what the brothers had originally paid. The money would not be enough to acquire a similar lot.
“At one point, we concluded that perhaps it was not Jehovah’s time for the construction,” recalls Jack Powers. “But soon we came to a better understanding of Paul’s words at Romans 11:34: ‘Who has come to know Jehovah’s mind, or who has become his counselor?’ One of the officials suggested that perhaps we could trade our piece of property for one of the government lots that were not in use. He offered us a lot similar in size and ideally located right in the center of Montevideo, on Francisco Bauzá Street. Without hesitation, we accepted the offer. After all, the property was many times higher in value than the one we had purchased previously—and we did not have to pay one more cent! Indeed, the hand of Jehovah maneuvered matters in favor of his people!”
An Architect Makes a Decision
The building of the branch office progressed under the direction of Justino Apolo, a well-known architect. Justino had just begun to study the Bible with one of the missionaries. “I had always wanted to find the truth about God,” recalls Justino. “I was raised a Catholic, but over the years, I became more and more disappointed. I still remember very well the day I visited the church to make arrangements for my wedding. The priest asked me: ‘How many lights do you want on in the church during your wedding ceremony? The more lights that are on, the more it will cost you, but you would be certain to impress your friends.’ Of course, I wanted a nice wedding. So I asked for many lights. The priest then asked: ‘Do you want a red carpet or a white one?’ The difference? ‘Of course, the red carpet makes the bride’s dress stand out more,’ he explained, ‘but it does cost twice as much.’ Then came the subject of the ‘Ave Maria’ hymn. ‘Do you want one person to sing it, or do you want a chorus?’ The priest went on to sell me one ceremonial feature after another.
“I did get married in the church. But I was very irritated by all the commercialism in religion. When I started studying with Jehovah’s Witnesses, the difference was obvious. I quickly realized that I had found the truth.”
After many months of studying the Bible while working on Bethel construction and associating with the Witnesses, Justino realized that he had to make a decision. After the building was completed, toward the end of 1961, the architect made the right decision and got baptized. Now Justino serves as an elder and has helped to build more than 60 Kingdom Halls in Uruguay.
Branch Expansion Continues
On October 28, 1961, the joyful dedication of the beautiful new building took place. The first floor provided spacious facilities for the offices, a literature depot, and a comfortable Kingdom Hall. There were nine bedrooms on the upper floor accommodating the missionaries and the office personnel.
For the 1,570 publishers active in the country at the time, the new Bethel seemed capable of caring for any expected growth for years to come. However, growth was more rapid than expected. In 1985 a two-story addition doubled the size of the branch.
More recently the Society has obtained another fine piece of property on the outskirts of Montevideo. Construction of new branch facilities together with an Assembly Hall is well under way. With the help of an international team of workers, the project is expected to be completed in 1999.
Training for Overseers
To care for the increase of “desirable things” in Uruguay, not only branch facilities but also caring shepherds were needed. Between the years 1956 and 1961, the number of publishers doubled and 13 new congregations were formed. What a loving and timely provision the Kingdom Ministry School proved to be! When the Kingdom Ministry School started in 1961, many brothers in responsible positions in congregations made arrangements to attend these month-long courses. A number of them had to travel long distances, and some risked their jobs to attend the full course of the school.
For example, Horacio Leguizamón lived in Dolores, 190 miles [300 km] from Montevideo, where the Kingdom Ministry School was being held. When he asked his employer for a one-month leave, he was told that it was impossible. Brother Leguizamón explained how important this training was to him and that he wanted to attend even if it meant the loss of his job. A few days later, he was surprised to hear that his employer had decided to make an exception, enabling him to attend the school without losing his job.
Was the course worth going through all the trouble? “We have never experienced anything like it,” recalls one of the first students. “Being in the company of mature brothers from all over the country made us feel as if for one month we were living in the new world. At the school we became adequately equipped to face the challenge of shepherding the flock efficiently, with the loving support of Jehovah’s visible organization.”
The Kingdom Ministry School helped hundreds of mature Christians to become better equipped, and this resulted in the strengthening of the congregations, especially at a time when the problems of the old system of things were intensifying.
Poor—Yet Rich Spiritually
According to Uruguayan historians, the decade of the ’60’s marked the beginning of the country’s economic deterioration. The traditional export products, such as beef, leather, and wool, gradually decreased in value in the international market. A number of banks and major manufacturing companies failed, leaving thousands unemployed. People were worried about the uncontrollable inflation, the abrupt devaluation of the currency, the increase in taxes, and the difficulties in obtaining food and other basic necessities of life.
The economic crisis had severe social consequences. The impoverishment of the large middle class resulted in a considerable rise in crime. Discontent led to frequent, and sometimes violent, demonstrations against the authorities. Thousands of Uruguayans, particularly young ones, left for other countries in an effort to escape a crisis that was rapidly worsening.
On the other hand, within Jehovah’s organization the decade of the ’60’s yielded a spiritual growth that calls to mind the words of Isaiah 35:1, 2: “The wilderness and the waterless region will exult, and the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron. Without fail it will blossom, and it will really be joyful with joyousness and with glad crying out.” Fifteen new congregations were formed between 1961 and 1969, and the total number of publishers in the country peaked at 2,940.
On December 9, 1965, the government approved the bylaws of our legal corporation known as Sociedad La Torre del Vigía. This instrument has made it possible to obtain special permits and tax exemptions for the printing, importing, and distribution of Bibles and Bible-related literature. Also, the legal status made it possible to acquire properties and construct Kingdom Halls.
The “Great Assembly”
The year 1967 will always be remembered as the year of the “great assembly.” A delegation of some 400 Witnesses from the United States and Europe, including F. W. Franz and M. G. Henschel, arrived to attend the assembly. An audience of 3,958 enjoyed for the first time the presentation of a Bible drama with costumes. Also for the first time, the brothers were able to use Palacio Peñarol, a spacious enclosed stadium where Montevideo’s important social, artistic, and sporting events took place.
Many of the local brothers made extraordinary efforts to finance the trip and their accommodations. For six months one sister took a job hand-washing people’s clothing in order to save enough money for her trip. Another sister, whose husband was opposed to her being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, accumulated the necessary funds by making frozen refreshments and selling them to the neighbors.
What kind of impression did the convention leave with the stadium’s administrators? One of them stated that “the Palacio Peñarol has never before been so clean and free of bad odors!” The administrators were so impressed by the order and good organization of the Witnesses that they made their private offices available to the brothers in the convention administration. After that, the stadium was used for many district conventions until 1977. In that year, however, the government changed its attitude toward Jehovah’s Witnesses, and for several years thereafter, the Witnesses were restricted from holding conventions.
“Cautious as Serpents”
During the early 1970’s, the economy in Uruguay worsened. Acts of civil disobedience became more common. Labor and student demonstrations turned into violent and destructive rampages. Armed bands of urban guerrillas began to spring up in large cities. Terror spread as these bands engaged in robberies, bombings, assaults, and kidnappings. In the midst of the turmoil, the armed forces grew in power and took over the government in 1973.
The military ruled with an iron hand. All political and trade union activities were prohibited. Strict censorship of the press was instituted. Public meetings could not be held without previous permission from the authorities. Individual freedoms were severely limited. How were the brothers able to “preach the word,” even in this troublesome season?—Compare 2 Timothy 4:2.
Brother Escribano recalls: “In those days, as never before, we had to apply Jesus’ words at Matthew 10:16: ‘Look! I am sending you forth as sheep amidst wolves; therefore prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.’ Accordingly, the Society quickly gave direction to all the elders so that the publishers would receive the necessary training to continue zealously in the preaching work—but now with caution and good judgment.”
Some members of the clergy and religious groups had been giving support to the rebels. Hence, the new military government grew very suspicious of all religious movements, including Jehovah’s Witnesses. As a result, many were arrested throughout the country while engaging in the house-to-house ministry. However, in most cases they were released immediately after showing their Bible literature and explaining the nature of their work. After this initial spate of arrests, the brothers deemed it wise to make their presence less conspicuous by going out in smaller groups.
In some cases the military tacitly consented to the Witnesses’ house-to-house work. Once, they even tried to help—in their own way. A group of soldiers was patrolling an area where a sister was preaching. At one house, after the sister rang the bell, the householder reached out through a second floor window and in a very impolite manner asked the sister to leave. One of the soldiers who saw what had happened reacted immediately by pointing his machine gun at the householder and ordering her to come down and properly welcome the sister. The householder complied.
A Place for Assemblies
In June 1974 the branch office received a notice from the government requiring responsible brothers to appear before the secretary of the Supreme Court of Justice. Brother Beltramelli was one of them. He remembers: “We were nervous. We knew that the military government had the power to ban our work immediately, if they so desired. But what a relief when the official explained to us that the government was interested in purchasing a building that was being used as a Kingdom Hall! They even offered to assist us in obtaining another suitable place for a Kingdom Hall. As a result, we were able to purchase the Lutecia movie theater in Montevideo. It was located ideally on one of the principal avenues. And the money we received from the government was more than enough to convert the theater into a new Kingdom Hall.”
“We were convinced that Jehovah had something to do with it,” Brother Beltramelli reminisces. “The large auditorium in this theater could seat almost 1,000 persons. It would serve not only as a Kingdom Hall for the area but also as an Assembly Hall, which was desperately needed in view of the new restrictions on assemblies and conventions.”
Thus, for several years the former theater, although officially a Kingdom Hall for the local congregation, was actually used for circuit assemblies on a weekly basis. For these large gatherings, the brothers learned to be cautious. They entered and left the building as inconspicuously as possible and parked their cars in scattered locations throughout the neighborhood.
A Time to Build
Even during this turbulent period, the constant growth in the number of Kingdom publishers, along with the addition of new congregations, was a source of much joy. By 1976 the number of publishers had increased by more than 100 percent in less than ten years. But this also presented a great challenge: How could we accommodate so many new ones in the old Kingdom Halls, which for the most part were rented? “For everything there is an appointed time,” said King Solomon under inspiration. With 85 congregations and only 42 Kingdom Halls, it seemed clear that the “time to build” Kingdom Halls had arrived.—Eccl. 3:1-3.
Yet, the entire country was in the middle of a financial crisis, and the congregations did not have enough funds to build. Where would the money come from? Delfos Beltramelli, the branch coordinator, recalls: “During that period we felt the hand of Jehovah and the love of his people in action. The generous contributions from the brothers throughout the world allowed the branch to lend the congregations in Uruguay the money they needed.”
There was also a need for qualified workers, and the Witnesses in Uruguay responded to that need. Many have continued to make themselves available to help build Kingdom Halls in one place after the other. Avelino Filipponi was one of the tireless volunteers. After sharing in the construction of the branch in 1961, Brother Filipponi and his wife, Elda, served as special pioneers, and since 1968 he has served as a circuit overseer. For a number of years, he was also assigned to assist with the construction of Kingdom Halls by providing professional services and direction for the building projects.
“El Plomito”
Brother Filipponi remembers some experiences regarding the construction of Kingdom Halls: “In every location where we built a Kingdom Hall, the neighbors and passersby were always very much impressed with the enthusiasm and zeal displayed by the Witness workers. At one construction site, a six-year-old non-Witness boy from the neighborhood visited every day, begging to be allowed to work on the project. He was so insistent that he came to be known as el plomito, a local expression that means ‘the little pest.’ Well, the years went by, and we did not hear from the boy again. But at one assembly a brother approached me and asked: ‘Brother Filipponi! Do you remember “el plomito”? It’s me! I got baptized two years ago.’” Evidently, the seed of truth had been planted in this young boy during the construction of the Kingdom Hall.
Now there is one Kingdom Hall for every 129 publishers—a total of 81 Kingdom Halls. Undoubtedly, Jehovah has blessed the construction of suitable places of worship for his people in Uruguay.
Assemblies to Help Our Neighbors
A military regime had also been established in Argentina, the neighboring country to the west. There, the government closed down the Society’s branch office and the Kingdom Halls. Thus, the brothers in Argentina began to hold their meetings in small groups. However, during that time they were able to hold assemblies in public without government interference. How was that possible? By crossing the border and holding their assemblies in Uruguay! These large gatherings were organized by the Uruguayan brothers, but many parts of the program were handled by brothers from Argentina. It was a special privilege to provide accommodations for the thousands of brothers coming from Argentina. This resulted in a faith-strengthening “interchange of encouragement.”—Rom. 1:12.
One unforgettable convention took place in the Palacio Peñarol from January 13 to 16, 1977. There was a mixed audience of almost 7,000 Uruguayan and Argentinean brothers and sisters. At the conclusion of the convention, all in attendance joined in singing praises to Jehovah. Those in the audience took turns singing—the Argentineans sang one verse while the Uruguayans remained silent, then vice versa. Finally, everyone joined in the singing of the last verse. The mixed emotions of joy for having been together at the convention and sadness for having to say good-bye to their dear brothers brought tears to the eyes of many.
However, on January 13, 1977, while that large convention was being held at the Palacio Peñarol, a famous newspaper with a tendency to favor the Catholic Church published a front-page article under the headline: “Jehovah’s Witnesses: Their Authorization Under Scrutiny.” The article denounced the position of the Witnesses regarding the national symbols. It stressed that in Argentina the government had banned our work and that the same could happen in Uruguay. Shortly after the publication of the article, the government ceased issuing permits for our conventions and assemblies.
Restrictions Intensify
In 1975 the military government had launched a campaign designed to enhance patriotism and nationalism. This nationalistic euphoria brought difficulties to many brothers as they strove to maintain their Christian neutrality. They endeavored to “pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Mark 12:17) Several young Witnesses were expelled from school because they conscientiously refrained from venerating the national symbols. Many brothers endured much ridicule and abuse at their places of work. Some Witnesses even lost their jobs because of their neutral stand.
In small cities and towns in the interior, local authorities were watching the Witnesses very closely. In some cases government spies visited Kingdom Halls, pretending to be interested people. For this reason the brothers saw the need to be increasingly cautious. At the meetings, they avoided discussing the subject of neutrality, thus averting any confrontation with the authorities.
On one occasion one such spy visited a Kingdom Hall just before the meeting started. He asked one of the brothers: “At what time will the congregation sing the hymn today?” The Spanish word himno can refer either to a national anthem or to a religious song. Knowing the man to be a spy, the brother answered: “Three times—at the beginning of the meeting, in the middle, and at the end.” Of course, the brother was referring to our Kingdom songs. The spy left immediately, completely satisfied with his own assumption that the brothers were going to sing the national anthem three times during the meeting.
Arrested—But Happy
Sometimes the police would raid the Kingdom Halls right in the middle of a meeting and arrest all in attendance. Then every brother and sister would be subjected to an interrogation. This proved to be an excellent opportunity for the brothers to give a witness to a good number of police officers. After everyone was interrogated—usually a process that would last several hours—all would be released.—Compare Acts 5:41.
In the Florida Congregation, located to the north of Montevideo, Sister Sely Assandri de Núñez was scheduled to give a student talk in the Theocratic Ministry School. She invited her neighbor Mabel to come and listen to her talk. Mabel had never visited a Kingdom Hall before. That night the police raided the meeting and arrested everyone, including Mabel. After Mabel had been detained for several hours, her husband was able to arrange for her release. This startling experience awoke in her a genuine interest in the teachings of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Soon after, she began studying the Bible and attending meetings. Now Mabel is a dedicated and baptized Witness of Jehovah.
Despite the almost 12 years of restrictions by the military regime, a steady stream of honesthearted people continued to flock into Jehovah’s organization. In 1973 there were 3,791 publishers in the country. By 1985, when this difficult period ended, that figure had gone up to 5,329, an increase of more than 40 percent! Undoubtedly, Jehovah had been blessing his people during that time of distress.
Assemblies Without Restrictions
In March 1985 a democratic government was established, and all restrictions were lifted. From then on, Jehovah’s people could engage freely in Kingdom preaching and teaching. The brothers were now free to hold their circuit assemblies and district conventions. Brothers and sisters were filled with joy over the opportunity to meet their fellow worshipers from distant parts of the country again. How encouraging to see that their brothers too had remained steadfast and were still serving Jehovah faithfully!
But where could we find convention sites that would accommodate an expected attendance of more than 10,000 people? None of the sites previously used would be adequate now. Again, Jehovah answered our prayers. During the years of military government, a new soccer stadium, Estadio Charrúa, had been built in the Parque Rivera, one of the largest parks in Montevideo. Although the stadium had been used exclusively for sporting events, we were able to lease it for a national convention in December 1985. Since then, the local authorities have been very cooperative in letting us use the stadium every year for our conventions, often with more than 13,000 people in attendance.
A significant witness was given at a circuit assembly held in the stadium of the city of Treinta y Tres in December 1990. From inside a Catholic church, the stadium, filled to capacity with Jehovah’s Witnesses, was in full view. One morning the priest pointed out through the window and said to his parishioners: “Do you see how many people are being gathered by Jehovah’s Witnesses? How do they get so many people? They have something that you Catholics do not have—the spirit of evangelizing! We are dwindling in numbers every day because we do not go out to preach as they do. Either we start evangelizing as the Witnesses do or our Church will die.”
Working Isolated Territories
In the 1980’s a special effort was put forth to reach the most remote areas of the country with the good news. During an annual visit to a place in the northeastern part of the country, a group of brothers placed several books in a village called Cuchilla de Caraguatá. The following year, the Witnesses visited a man there who would not listen to their message, claiming that he had the truth. “I am one of Jehovah’s Witnesses!” he declared. He had been out of the village when the Witnesses were there the preceding year. But after coming home he read the literature that had been left and decided that it was the truth. He went around the village telling everyone that he was now one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Today in that village, there is a small congregation.
Even though Berta de Herbig lived in the remote town of Dolores, she appreciated the importance of attending meetings regularly. She walked seven miles [11 km] with her six children to the Kingdom Hall. Most of the time, she arrived about an hour before the meeting started. Her good example of endurance and determination as a mother has had a powerful effect on her children. Now after years of her faithful service, four of her children are active in the truth. One of them, Miguel Ángel, who later became a pioneer, would ride a bicycle for 36 miles [58 km] in order to reach an isolated group in La Charqueada-Cebollatí. Another son, Daniel, is presently serving as a special pioneer in the town of Treinta y Tres.
A Better Relationship
For years many health professionals in Uruguay looked down on Jehovah’s Witnesses because of not understanding their attitude regarding abstaining from the use of blood. (Acts 15:28, 29) A large number of hospitals in the country refused to admit Jehovah’s Witnesses. Others would admit Witnesses for surgery and then because they would not accept blood, would dismiss them just before the operation. However, during the past few years, the relationship between the medical profession and the Witnesses has improved considerably.
In 1986 the Hospital Central de las Fuerzas Armadas organized a convention to discuss alternative treatments for Jehovah’s Witnesses and brought together a number of prominent personalities in the fields of medicine and surgery, as well as lawyers specializing in the medical field. Jehovah’s Witnesses provided information and suggestions to the hospital authorities. As a result of this special gathering, many doctors in Uruguay changed their attitude toward the Witnesses and are now willing to treat the Witnesses and respect their Bible-based viewpoint on blood.
Subsequently, a number of widely publicized meetings were held, first in Montevideo and then in other cities. Prominent specialists have acknowledged that with the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses, they have learned new techniques for nonblood medical treatment. A professor of hemotherapy stated: “We have learned much and have adjusted our thinking, thanks to Jehovah’s Witnesses. In the past we had numerous confrontations with them simply because we did not understand them. Now we see that in many areas they have always been in the right. Evidently, they have spared themselves many headaches by refusing to take blood.”
Their Work Is Not in Vain
Truly it can be said that the hard work performed by zealous Kingdom proclaimers in Uruguay during the 1920’s and through the 1940’s was not in vain. A handful of zealous Kingdom proclaimers from abroad gathered and instructed thousands of “desirable things” in this beautiful country of rolling hills. (Hag. 2:7) In Uruguay there are now more than 10,000 publishers of God’s Kingdom. The more than 135 congregations have an average of almost five elders per congregation. At the latest Kingdom Ministry School, held during March 1998, 656 elders and 945 ministerial servants attended. Nearly all the congregations own their Kingdom Halls, many of which were built by brothers, with the financial support of the Society.
During the past 20 years, the number of publishers has more than doubled, and there are good prospects for future growth. As long as Jehovah holds back the winds of the approaching great tribulation, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Uruguay will continue to invite others: “Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways, and we will walk in his paths.”—Isa. 2:3; Rev. 7:1.
[Full-page picture on page 224]
[Picture on page 227]
Juan Muñiz
[Picture on page 229]
They lived in homemade tents and traveled throughout Uruguay on bicycles to witness (left to right): Kurt Nickel, Gustavo and Betty Bender, Otto Helle
[Pictures on page 235]
Early Uruguayan publishers (from left to right): María de Berrueta, Carola Beltramelli, Catalina Pomponi
[Pictures on page 237]
Missionaries still serving in Uruguay: (1) Florence Latimer, (2) Ethel Voss, (3) Birdene Hofstetter, (4) Lira Berrueta, (5) Tove Haagensen, (6) Günter Schönhardt
[Picture on page 243]
New branch facilities under construction in 1998
[Picture on page 245]
Branch Committee (from left to right): Günter Schönhardt, Delfos Beltramelli, Gerardo Escribano

