Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
Spiritually fortified as a result of Bible study, Jehovah’s witnesses will be active during January in helping others to acquire spiritual strength. This they will do by discussing with them Bible truths and by offering them a year’s subscription for this magazine, The Watchtower, along with three Scriptural booklets, on a contribution of $1.
1965 ASSEMBLIES
You will be glad to know that arrangements are being made by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society to hold assemblies this year on the dates shown below and at the locations listed. The programs will vary from four to six days in length. Be sure to include at least one of these assemblies in your vacation plans.
Canada
July 1-4: Victoria, B.C. July 8-11: Vernon, B.C. July 15-18: Regina, Sask.; Sudbury, Ont. July 22-25: Peterborough, Ont. July 29-August 1: Brandon, Man. August 5-8: Kitchener, Ont. August 12-15: Quebec, Que. (French). August 19-22: Calgary, Alta.; Saint John, N.B. August 26-29: London, Ont.; Sydney, N.S.
Europe
June 9-13: Dublin, Eire; Edinburgh, Scotland. June 17-20: Oslo, Norway. June 23-27: Helsinki, Finland. June 30-July 4: Rotterdam, Netherlands. July 7-11: Charleroi, Belgium; Luxembourg, Luxembourg. July 14-18: Basel, Switzerland; Vienna, Austria. July 21-25: Berlin, Germany.
United States
July 15-18: Albuquerque, N. M. (tentative). July 29-August 1: Memphis, Tenn. August 12-15: Buffalo, N.Y.; Minneapolis, Minn. (tentative); Nashville, Tenn.; St. Petersburg, Fla. (tentative). August 24-29: New York, N.Y. In addition to these listed for the United States, efforts are being made to arrange for other assemblies on the West Coast, in the Southwest and in the Southeast. Further information will be published as soon as available.
WILL YOU MAKE THIS VITAL DECISION?
Every day we make decisions. Some may mean little in their final outcome, but occasionally we are called upon to decide something that may change the course of our entire lives. A decision you can make now that may bring you eternal benefits is to read every issue of this magazine you now hold. The Watchtower is printed to aid you and all other honest-hearted persons to find and to keep God’s goodwill and the everlasting peace that goes with it. Send today; enjoy its rich benefits for life. One year, $1. Send now and receive free the booklets When God Speaks Peace to All Nations, Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near and When All Nations Unite Under God’s Kingdom.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
February 21: Death and Hades to Give Up the Dead. Page 37.
February 28: Part Two. Page 44.

