Help Children Serve Jehovah From the Heart
1 Solomon declared that “sons are an inheritance from Jehovah.” (Ps. 127:3-5) They are, indeed, an inheritance of inestimable value. Parents have a God-given responsibility to teach, train, and discipline their children. This includes training in the ministry, encouraging the children to speak from the heart about Jehovah and the Kingdom.​—Eph. 6:4.
2 At what age should parents begin this training? The Bible’s answer is clear: It should be from infancy. (2 Tim. 3:14, 15) The earlier the training starts, the greater the likelihood the children will develop a solid foundation in the truth and make the ministry their vocation. This early training will also serve to protect them from worldly thinking and attitudes.
3 Many preschoolers have shown considerable aptitude for mastering complicated skills. This potential for learning at an early age should be directed toward training them in skills that bring Jehovah’s approval. (w88 8/1 p. 15; w89 12/1 p. 31) Many of tender years have progressed to the point of becoming unbaptized publishers. Some children make a dedication and are baptized prior to entering their teens. This has opened the way for them to serve as auxiliary pioneers and even regular pioneers before finishing their schooling. To achieve these goals, they need to be taught to converse with people on a variety of Bible subjects.
4 Some adults who are inclined to view today’s youth in general as brash and disrespectful may have little interest in conversing with a young person who calls at the door. What might a young publisher say at the door to overcome such a barrier and hold the attention of the adult householder? One young publisher used something like this: “Good morning, my name is ․․․․․․․․. I am calling on my neighbors today because many are concerned about the future. As an adult, you are surely much more experienced in matters of life than I am. However, here is a scripture that is comforting to all of us.” After reading Revelation 21:3, 4, the conversation could focus on the tract Life in a Peaceful New World.
5 Another suggestion is: “Hello, my name is ․․․․․․․․. I am making brief visits in the neighborhood because I know many adults are concerned about the direction young people seem to be taking today. Sometimes young people display a disrespectful, even rebellious attitude. But I am sharing a scripture that shows how someday everyone will learn to live together in peace.” Then read Psalm 37:11 and comment appropriately. When adult householders hear such sincere expressions by our young publishers, surely many of them will be favorably impressed.
6 Thousands of young publishers continue to make a fine contribution to the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-​making work. They are to be warmly commended. Youths trained from infancy by godly parents readily respond to sincere encouragement to work toward having a fuller share in all features of the ministry. Those in school have the unique opportunity of witnessing to fellow students and teachers alike. Many have enjoyed gratifying experiences witnessing in this special territory.
7 So help the young publishers in your congregation take advantage of the opportunity to serve Jehovah with youthful vigor, praising him from the heart.​—Eccl. 12:1.

