Service Meetings for October
Week Starting October 5
Song 92
10 min: Local announcements, selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry, and highlights from Theocratic News. Review outstanding articles from current magazines; have one or two brief demonstrations to show how they can be offered after first using a Scriptural discussion. Encourage all to take advantage of mild weather during October to enlarge their share in field service.
15 min: “Make Good Use of Magazines.” Questions and answers. Stress need to make sure there is genuine interest before offering a subscription. When discussing paragraph 6, give suggestions on how to start a magazine route: Use simple, direct approach; keep a good house-​to-​house record; stimulate interest in future issues by mentioning upcoming articles; raise questions that are answered by articles; be sure to return every two weeks.​—7/84 km p. 4.
20 min: Conducting the Congregation Book Study in the Greatest Man book. Congregation Book Study conductor uses a group of four or five publishers to demonstrate to congregation how the study is to be conducted. This demonstration should be well rehearsed and conducted according to the instructions outlined in Our Kingdom Ministry for September. Use chapter 11 of the Greatest Man book. Demonstrate how longer scripture citations may be divided so as to allow for more than one reader or to highlight key portions when time does not allow for reading the entire passage. Conductor may intersperse brief comments to audience to point out method being used. Each one in audience should be following along with own copy of book.
Song 63 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 12
Song 77
10 min: Local announcements. Read monthly accounts report; give commendation based on 2 Corinthians 9:6, 7. Invite prepared publishers to relate outstanding experiences in offering magazines and subscriptions during October.
15 min: “Develop a Motivating Introduction.” Give a talk discussing how to prepare presentations using the featured articles in the October magazines. Arrange for two or three capable publishers to demonstrate the suggested presentations; include one presentation by a younger publisher.
20 min: “Show Concern for Interested Ones.” Discuss with audience. When considering paragraph 2, relate selected points from the July 1, 1981, Watchtower, pages 4-6, expressing how we can imitate Jesus in showing concern for others. Include comments on how to fill out the house-​to-​house record and how it should be used to follow up interest. Briefly demonstrate one of the suggestions. After having a capable publisher demonstrate suggested method, invite audience to comment on reasons why it may be an effective way of starting studies in local territory.
Song 88 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 19
Song 164
 5 min: Local announcements. Briefly explain how to fill out the subscription blanks, and identify the brother(s) assigned to accept subscriptions.
20 min: “Help Children Serve Jehovah From the Heart.” Discussion with audience. Emphasize need for parents to fulfill their responsibility to set the example and train their children personally in the ministry. Invite one or two parents to relate what they have done that has gotten good results. Have a parent demonstrate how he or she helped a child prepare a Bible discussion for use in house-​to-​house ministry. Conclude by having a young person demonstrate one of the suggested discussions.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss with audience. Stress why it is important for children to have a reputation for good conduct and a sincere desire to share in the field ministry in order to qualify as unbaptized publishers.
10 min: Expressions From Younger Publishers. Invite some prepared youngsters to explain how they qualified to be unbaptized publishers and why they enjoy field service and want to have a greater share. Those interviewed should give their own positive expressions and not be repeating words they have been asked to recite.
Song 221 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 26
Song 46
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to think about the possibility of auxiliary pioneering during November or December when holiday periods usually make extra time available.
15 min: Talk on “Bible,” based on Reasoning book, pages 58-64. Highlight the benefit that we derive personally by applying Bible principles in our lives.
15 min: Featuring the New World Translation and The Bible​—God’s Word or Man’s? during November. Talk and demonstration. Review highlights of material on “New World Translation” in the Reasoning book, pages 276-9. Then demonstrate how the second suggestion on page 10 of the Reasoning book could be used in talking with a householder.
10 min: “Light Bearers in the Neighborhood.” Highlight ways new releases may be used in local territory.
Song 111 and concluding prayer.

