A Visit That Can Be a Blessing
1 It was with rejoicing that Zacchaeus received Jesus as a guest in his home. And what a blessing that visit turned out to be!​—Luke 19:2-9.
2 Today, as Head of the congregation, Jesus Christ directs the elders to “shepherd the flock of God.” (1 Pet. 5:2, 3; John 21:15-17) In addition to teaching at meetings and taking the lead in field service, the overseers of the congregation provide loving, personal assistance to individual members of the congregation. From time to time, therefore, you may look forward to receiving personal attention from the elders, either at your home, at the Kingdom Hall, while together in field service, or on other occasions. Should you feel apprehensive about the elders’ visits? Not at all. Their calling on you does not mean that you are falling short in some way. What, then, is the purpose of a shepherding call?
3 Paul said he wanted to visit the brothers ‘to see how they were.’ (Acts 15:36) Yes, as loving shepherds, the elders are very much interested in how you are. They want to offer spiritual assistance that may be helpful and upbuilding to you. Such personal care is what our loving Shepherd Jehovah desires each of us to have.​—Ezek. 34:11.
4 Welcome the Elders’ Visits: Paul’s goal in visiting his brothers was to ‘impart some spiritual gift to them in order for them to be made firm, and that there might be an interchange of encouragement.’ (Rom. 1:11, 12) All of us are in need of spiritual encouragement in these difficult last days, and we need help to continue firm in the faith. Your positive response to a shepherding visit will undoubtedly result in a fine interchange of encouragement.
5 Appreciate the many benefits to be derived from the elders’ shepherding work. If there is some matter or a question about which you are concerned, remember that the elders are there in the congregation to help. Do not hesitate to discuss with them any matters that might be affecting your spiritual well-being. Appreciate this loving arrangement by Jehovah, and rejoice in the blessings that such a visit can bring.

