How Fine It Is to Be Always in Attendance!
1 For decades in Eastern Europe, many of our dear brothers were banned from meeting publicly. Imagine their joy when the bans were lifted and they could meet together in freedom!
2 Concerning his visit to one such congregation, a circuit overseer wrote: “On Tuesday evening, right at the beginning of my visit, the heating system broke down. Outside, the temperature hovered around freezing, and inside, it was only about 40 degrees Fahrenheit [5° C.]. The brothers sat wearing their coats, scarves, gloves, caps, and boots. No one could follow along in the Bible, since it was impossible to turn the pages. Standing on the platform in my suit, I was frozen solid, and every time I spoke, I could see my breath. But what impressed me was that I heard not a single word of complaint. All the brothers said how pleasant and fine it had been to be in attendance!” Those brothers did not even think of missing that meeting!
3 Is That How We Feel? Do we cherish the opportunity to gather freely at our weekly meetings? Or do we take the meetings for granted when circumstances are favorable? Regularly attending meetings may not be easy, and there may be times when we have a legitimate reason for not attending. Never forget, though, that there are those among us who despite advancing age, severe health problems, physical handicaps, strenuous work schedules, and other serious responsibilities see the importance of meetings and are almost always in attendance. What fine examples for us to imitate!​—Compare Luke 2:37.
4 Let us make it our custom to support true worship by attending all our Christian meetings, from a small book study group to a large convention. Why should we take attending these gatherings so seriously? Because it is a divine injunction that we gather together. But there are other important reasons. All of us need the benefits of divine instruction and the help of holy spirit, which are received at meetings. (Matt. 18:20) We are built up by an interchange of encouragement when fellowshipping with our brothers.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
5 At the transfiguration, Peter said, “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here.” (Luke 9:33) We should feel the same about all our Christian meetings. Indeed, how fine it is to be always in attendance!

