Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 6
Song 110
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Comment on April field service report for the country and the local congregation. Theocratic News.
15 min: “How Fine It Is to Be Always in Attendance!” Questions and answers. Include comments on June 8, 1988, Awake!, pages 19-21, to encourage young people to attend meetings regularly.
20 min: “Our Neighbors Need to Hear the Good News.” Arrange for two or three capable publishers to review the suggestions for presenting a few of the brochures that the congregation has in stock. Explain why they may be effective in local territory. Emphasize the goal of starting Bible studies in the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. Demonstrate an initial presentation followed by a return visit and the offer of a study. Remember to mention the donation arrangement.
Song 73 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 13
Song 116
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Encourage all to give serious consideration to enrolling as auxiliary pioneers during August, when there will be five full weekends.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: Is the Spirit of the World Poisoning You? Talk by an elder based on October 1, 1997, Watchtower, pages 25-9.
Song 182 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 20
Song 18
 8 min: Local announcements. Review the box entitled “One Million!”
12 min: “A Visit That Can Be a Blessing.” Discussion between two elders. Explain objectives of the shepherding work as reviewed in the September 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 20-3. Warmly encourage the congregation to look forward to the elders’ visits.
25 min: “Pioneer Service​—Is It for You?” (Paragraphs 1-14) Service overseer gives brief opening remarks, encouraging all to think seriously about regular pioneering. Then he discusses question 1, including comments on “Enthusiastic Pioneer Spirit” in the 1998 Yearbook, pages 104-5. Two or three members of the congregation who have pioneering experience join him on stage to discuss question 2. They share a practical, realistic view of how it is possible to get along materially as pioneers. Then two parents join the group to discuss question 3. They give positive reasons why youths should seriously consider a career in full-time service. Encourage all to attend next week’s Service Meeting, when the remaining questions will be considered.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 27
Song 155
15 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for July. Announce service arrangements for the first weekend in August, and encourage all to participate. Review “New Circuit Assembly Program.”
30 min: “Pioneer Service​—Is It for You?” (Paragraphs 15-25) Talk and discussion conducted by an elder. Arrange ahead of time for the pioneers and those who pioneered in the past to share heartfelt expressions in answer to questions 4-5. They stress the need for a good schedule and sticking to it, giving examples of practical weekly service schedules that really work. The elder concludes with a motivating talk that answers question 6. The start of the service year on September 1 is a fine time for new pioneers to begin their full-time service. Applications can be obtained from any member of the Congregation Service Committee.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.

