VOL. XXX NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A.D. 1909--A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS. 

"Them That Are Contentious" 323 

"Be Transformed" 324 

Moses a Mediator Before Aaron a Priest 325 

"To Make an End of Sins" 326 

The Antitype Begins Where the Type 

Ends 327 

A Tempest-Tossed Prisoner of Hope 328 

Calm in a Time of Storm 328 

"For God Was With Him" 328 

St. Paul Prisoner at Rome 329 

The Servant's Path (Poem) 330 

Some Interesting Letters 331 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 333 

Catalogue of Bibles, Testaments, Etc 334 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



CLOTH "HELPS" 



The Berean Bible Students' Manual is now in stock, uniform 
in size and binding with the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Price, 
50 cents, postpaid. 

HYMNS OF DAWN IN LEATHER BINDING 

These are now in stock in elegant leather binding, stamped 
in gold, at $1.00 per copy, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEER MATTER IN OTHER LANGUAGES 

In German— A large assortment of both tracts and old 
TOWERS. 

In Dutch— We have a large supply of the "Do-You-Know?" 
tract in the Hollandish language for use among your 
Dutch neighbors and friends. 

In Swedish and Dano-Norwegian— We have an ample 
supply in both languages for Volunteer purposes. 

In French and Italian— New supply just received. The 
quantity of the latter is limited for the immediate present, 
however. 

In Polish and Hungarian— Peoples Pulpit in quantities 
for distribution. 

In Greek— Several tracts. 

Order as many of the above as you can judiciously use— 
they are free to TOWER subscribers. 



R4501 : page 323 

"THEM THAT ARE CONTENTIOUS" 

"God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them 
who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory 
and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but 
unto them that are contentious and do not obey 
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, 
indignation, and wrath." 

THE Apostle's words foregoing are applicable in some 
degree to everybody, but they are especially addressed 
to and applicable to the Church. In a general sense, 
those who are seeking the higher and better things 
along the lines of loving obedience to whatever they may 
know of the Divine will, are receiving a blessing day by 
day, even though their pathway be a narrow and difficult 



one. On the contrary, those who are of a contentious 
disposition, fault-finding, irascible, the dissatisfied, are 
continually making trouble for themselves as well as for 
others, and are cultivating a disposition which neither 
God nor anybody in harmony with God, could approve— 
a disposition which will not be rewarded by eternal life, 
but bring its possessor into more or less trouble continually, 
and spell failure for him in the end. 

But our subject shines out most distinctly when we 
apply it as the Apostle here does, to God's consecrated 
people. Some, a decided minority, we fear, are patiently, 
perseveringly, seeking for God's best and grandest gift— 
joint-heirship with the Redeemer in his Kingdom of 
Glory, and participation in his glorious, divine nature. 
There is only one way to seek for this great prize successfully, 
and that is by patiently and perseveringly cultivating 
and developing in ourselves the character-likeness 
of our Redeemer. (Rom. 8:29.) Various opportunities 
for serving the Lord are set before us, and these are 
blessed privileges, but we may rely upon it that the Divine 
purpose and intention in permitting such services is 
for our own development in Christian character. The 
command to all men is, to honor God supremely, and to 
deal justly with our fellows, treating them as we would 
be treated by them, loving them as ourselves; but the 
special command to the New Creation is, to love one 
another as our Elder Brother loved us— self-sacrificingly. 
Whatever we are permitted to do one for the other is in 
the nature of a test of our loyalty to God, of our justice 
toward the world, or of our loving devotion to the 
brethren. 

Following the example of our Lord, we are to lay 
down our lives in the service of the brethren. This command 
is not so much for their need of our self-sacrifice as 
for our need of it, as a development of our love and as a 
test of our love. As the Apostle says, "We ought also 
to lay down our lives for the brethren." 

R4502 : page 323 

There are plenty of opportunities for sacrificing self 
in the interest of the Priesthood. Not only are some of 
the brethren in darkness, in ignorance and superstition, 
and need our assistance out into the glorious light of 
Present Truth, but, additionally, some of them have 
weaknesses and blemishes, and need our consoling sympathy 
and strengthening encouragements, or loving rebukes. 
To the extent of our faithfulness in these matters, 
we are self-sacrificers, pleasing and acceptable to our 
heavenly Father and our Redeemer. 

The Apostle explained to Timothy, an Elder, that he 
should in meekness reprove those who opposed themselves, 
and not render evil for evil, nor railing for railing, 
nor accusation for accusation, but contrariwise by 
meekness and gentleness, patience and love, should show 
the brethren the more excellent way, and should develop 



ourselves in Christlikeness of character. It is by such 

"patient continuance in well doing," by such patient development 

of Christlike character, that we may successfully 

seek the glory, honor and immortality which God 

has promised only to such. For, as the Apostle points 

out, God has predestinated that all who will be of the 

elect Church, of the Bride class, must be copies of his Son 

in character, in heart— Rom. 8:29. 

Alas! that there seem to be so few well developed 
along these lines of Christ's character-likeness. Alas! 
that so many seem to be cultivating the wrong spirit 
which they know God will not approve— the contentious 
spirit, the fault-finding disposition which, instead of 
building one another up in the most holy faith, is destructive 
of faith, destructive of peace, destructive of 
every good quality. 

Alas! that amongst those who are in the Truth these 
contentious persons are to be found in considerable numbers, 
doing a destructive work, an injurious work, instead 
of a helpful work. Surely they must know that 
they are injuring and blemishing their characters and 
making themselves less and less fit for the Kingdom, or 
for eternal life on any plane. Surely they must know 
that they are doing a destructive work in the Body of 
Christ, which is the Church. Surely they must know 
that they are sowing seeds of discord, and planting roots 
of bitterness, which are sure to bring forth an evil fruitage, 
hurtful to many. Surely they must know that God 
has expressed a special reprobation for those who thus 
do injury to the Church. -Matt. 18:6; Luke 17:2. 

What will be the reward to these? Not glory, honor 
and immortality, but indignation, wrath, tribulation, and 
anguish, says the Apostle. He does not say that this 
means an eternity of wrath, and anguish, nor do we. On 
the contrary, knowing that the extreme penalty of opposition 
to God is the "Second Death," we must suppose 
that the tribulation and anguish will be more or less connected 
with the present life— either by their participation 
in the "Great Company," and passing through the 
great time of trouble and there learning the lessons they 
neglected to learn previously, or, soured in disposition, 
robbed of the peace, and joy, and love, which they might 
have possessed as spirit-begotten ones, these will die the 

R4502 : page 324 

"Second Death" as incorrigible, as having received the 
grace of God and the instructions of his Word in vain. 
Instead of developing character symbolized by the fruitful 
vine, they are developing the characteristics of the 
briar and the thorn, whose end is destruction. 

BE TRANSFORMED 

It would be of no avail for us to call attention to these 
matters of Divine Writ, nor for the Apostle to have 



penned these words of condemnation, if there were not a 
possibility of change on the part of those who are well-doing 
and well-seeking, and also on the part of those 
who are evil-doing and contentious. Such condemnations, 
on the contrary, are intended to help us to establish 
our characters in the right direction. Whoever, 
therefore, realizes while reading this article that he is 
going in the wrong direction, cultivating a contentious 
and fault-finding spirit, and a disposition to pull down the 
faith and obedience, and spirit of love, in the Body of 
Christ, will do well to immediately resolve by the grace 
of God to take the opposite course. And whoever is 
seeking the glory, honor and immortality of the heavenly 
calling along the right lines of patient perseverance in 
well doing, should be encouraged, and made watchful, 
that he might persevere in the right way, and become 
more and more blessed, and more and more secure, and 
entrenched, and fixed, in the character which God will 
approve, and to which he will say, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant; enter into the joys of thy Lord." 

To those who find themselves possessed of a cantankerous 
disposition, fault-finding, and nagging, destructive instead 
of constructive, quarrelsome instead of peaceable, 
we urge reform in great haste. We remind them that we 
are nearing the end of the Church's condition of trial; that 
we are already in the testing time, and that many are falling 
because of not having developed proper characters. 
We urge them to take the matter at once to the Lord in 
prayer, and by his assisting grace to immediately begin 
to reverse all these wrong currents of their lives. They 
should hearken diligently to the Apostle's words, and 
"seek peace and ensue it," and so far as possible henceforth 
"live peaceably with all men," and "let the peace 
of God rule in their hearts," and be thankful for blessings 
already received. In such a condition of heart they will 
have little disposition to find fault with the Lord or his 
providences in connection with his people and his work. 
They will "learn of him" instead of finding fault with 
everybody and everything which the Lord does not order 
to their pleasement. 

We urge all such to take note of the fact that the murmurers 
and complainers in typical Israel were not permitted 
to enter into Canaan's blessings. (1 Cor. 10:10.) 
We remind them of the Apostle's words to the effect that 
murmurings against the Divine arrangements are really 
murmurings against the Lord himself. Let us do with 
our might what our hands find to do, without murmuring, 
without complaining, without fault-finding. (Phil. 2:14.) 
Let us leave to God the management of his work. 
Let us humbly realize that if he would commit it all to 
our care we would be unable to manage it and would be 
obliged to take it back to him and to solicit his supervision 
of his own work. 

If the thought comes to us that we could manage better 
than the Lord; that we could guide the harvest work 
better than he has arranged it, let us flee that thought 



as a snare of the Adversary by which he would entrap us. 
Instead of fault-finding and endeavoring to change the 
Divine arrangements let us do our own parts as faithfully 
as we know how, uncomplainingly, co-operating to 
the extent that our conscience and talents will permit in 
the work which the Lord is carrying on and directing. 
Surely we do not know that if the Lord should give the 
entire management of his harvest work into our hands 
that we could do it better than he; surely, therefore, we 
should humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, 
that he may exalt us in due time. 

Let us be assured that only those who do thus humble 
themselves, and realize the wisdom and grace of God, and 
fall in line therewith, will have any part in the Kingdom 
work. The heady, the high-minded, the self-conscious, 
the contentious, the dissatisfied, shall have neither the 
good of the present nor the honors of the future. 

YE SHALL RECEIVE THE SEVERER TRIAL 

The Apostle James admonishes the brethren respecting 
the peculiar dangers which beset those ambitious to be 
teachers, saying, "My brethren, be not many masters 
(teachers), knowing that we (teachers) shall receive the 
greater condemnation (judgment, or trial). For in many 
things we offend all"— we are all imperfect.— James 3:1. 

While all recognize the truth of the Apostle's words, 
few seem to be in any great degree deterred by them. 
As a consequence, we find many seeking the office of 
teacher in the Church, and perceive also the truth of the 
Apostle's words that as teachers they are subject to 
severer trials, and that the majority of those who appear 
to stumble and fall from the truth are of this class. 
We write thus not to suggest that teachers are unnecessary 
or contrary to the Divine arrangement, but to 
suggest that whoever enters upon the work of teaching 
should do so with a realization of the grave responsibility 
which he assumes, and the temptations or trials which 
beset his pathway toward the heavenly city. 

St. Paul wrote, "He that seeketh the office of a bishop 
(of a shepherd, of an overseer) seeketh a good service," 
and so we should recognize that whoever out of a pure 
heart seeks to serve the Lord's cause as an under- shepherd 
of the sheep, and as a co-laborer with the Redeemer, 
is engaging in a most noble service. If he approach this 
service from this standpoint of earnest desire to serve 
the flock, an earnest desire to be in full accord with the 
Great Shepherd, he should not be ashamed to rejoice that 
he has to this extent the Spirit of the Lord. But if he 
find in himself, in either great or small measure, a spirit 
of ambition, a spirit of pride, a spirit of boastfulness, the 
desire to lord it over the brethren of the household of 
faith, then let him fear. With trembling heart either 
let him resign the service, or at the throne of grace rid 
himself, purge himself, of the evil ambitions of his heart, 
and be filled with the Spirit of the Master. That holy 



Spirit is the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, 
longsuffering, brotherly kindness, love; to desire simply 
and only the glory of God and the blessing of his people— 
the spirit that is ready to sacrifice self at any moment for 
the peace of the Body of Christ, or the assistance of the 
flock. 

Some wonder why the Apostle should thus write of 
special dangers to those brethren who would attempt to 
teach in the Church. We answer that we accept his 
words as those of inspiration, and that, additionally, observation 

R4503 : page 324 

shows us the truthfulness of them. Moreover, 

unconsciously the Lord's dear people who make no pretensions 

themselves in the direction of teaching are often 

responsible to a considerable degree for the deflection of 

those whom they recognize as teachers, and whom unconsciously 

they lead into temptation. The besetments of 

teachers are, (1) pride, and (2) arrogance. 

(1) Encouraged by the laudatory words of the brethren, 
the tendency is for them to feel that they are somebodies, 
and to attribute the success of their efforts to 

natural ability, talent, etc., rather than to the wonderful 
power and beauty of the Truth. Ministers in general 
seem to be liable to besetment along this line, because it 
is indeed a very honorable position to stand before our 
fellows as ambassadors for the King of Glory. The general 
tendency is to boast of denominational strength and 
wisdom. But amongst those who are in the light of 
"Present Truth" the temptation to personal pride is perhaps 
even greater. 

The antidote for this is a distinct remembrance of the 
fact that the plan is not our own, but all of its lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths are of God and for 
all his people, and that we are highly honored in the delivering 
of it in the most humble manner conceivable. 

R4503 : page 325 

A proper allegiance to the Lord should lead us to hide 
ourselves, that all the glory and honor might go to the 
great Author of the Plan of Salvation, and to the great 
Redeemer, whose sacrifice is its very center, and whose 
love is the very circumference of our message. With these 
thoughts impressed upon our minds, the greater the service 
permitted us, the greater should be our humility 
and our realization of unworthiness to be the mouthpieces 
of the great Lord of Glory. 

(2) Arrogance we mentioned as one of the besetments. 
Alas! how inappropriate it is that any, because 

of being honored of the Lord as his mouthpiece for his 
message, should attempt to take the place of his Lord, 
and to act arrogantly toward his brethren, or, as the 
Apostle expresses it, to "Lord it over God's heritage." 
(1 Pet. 5:3.) The Scriptures set before us the very reverse 



standard, namely, that those brethren permitted 
to serve as teachers, so far from being lords of the 
Church, are merely its servants. While they are servants 
of God, the Divine direction in the matter is to be 
sought through the Church. In a word, the Church's 
election of elders, pastors, or teachers is the election 
of those whom it esteems to be the Lord's choice for its 
service— to serve it in holy things, to minister to it the 
grace of God, to dispense for it the spiritual food of the 
Divine Word. 

The Church has been responsible in a considerable 
measure for the stumbling of those whom it has recognized 
as Elder-brothers and teachers. While they should 
not think evil, surmise evil, surmise pride, or surmise 
arrogance, they should be so wakeful to their own duties 
and responsibilities toward these brethren that they 
would not unduly flatter them, nor unduly encourage 
them, nor stimulate them to manufacture new light. 

On the contrary, all who are spiritual should be helpful 
to those elder-brothers; should compliment them on 
their loyalty to the Lord, and to the old, old story, rather 
than commend them for fanciful fictions, or encourage 
them further along such lines. The Gospel of Grace 
has not changed; it is still the old, old story of Jesus 
and his love, and of the Father's love; it still includes the 
thought of our calling and election by faithfulness to the 
terms laid down in the Scriptures. The brethren should 
be encouraged along these lines rather than along the 
lines of manufacturing types by guess-work without any 
authority of the Word of God. 

As for arrogance on the part of leaders, and a supercilious 
lording it over the Church, we believe that the 
Church itself has a great responsibility. Beginners should 
not be hastily pushed forward, as St. Paul points out, 
and when any Elder-brother advanced in the Truth begins 
to show signs of headiness, and of disregard for the 
voice of the Church, and a disinclination to submit to it 
all the questions pertaining to its affairs, the Church 
should curb such arrogance promptly and thoroughly by 
declining the further election of such brother, and by 
insisting upon the rights of the Church. The insistence 
should not, however, be in the nature of wrangling or 
contention, but in a kindly, brotherly, noble manner 
the rights of the Church should be set forth, and the 
vote of the Church on the subject should be asked. If 
the vote be contrary to the brother who sought to protect 
the Church's rights, he should submit gracefully, 
because by him also the voice of the Church is to be accepted 
as decisive. 

We have great sympathy for the dear brethren who, 
in the providence of God, occupy the positions of Elders 
and teachers in the congregations of the Lord's people. 
And hence, while calling attention to the severe temptations 
to which they are exposed, and while urging the 
Church to do its duty and to assist them to keep humble 
and faithful, we also urge, in the language of the Apostle, 



that those who are noble, humble, self-sacrificing, 

cannot be too highly esteemed nor too loyally supported. 

The Apostle's words are, "Remember them which have 

the rule (supervision) over you; who have spoken unto 

you the Word of God; whose faith follow, considering 

them that have the rule (supervision) over you, and 

the end of their conversation: Jesus Christ the same yesterday, 

and today, and forever." And again, "Obey 

submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls as they 

that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and 

not with grief." (Heb. 13:7,17.) And again, "Esteem 

them very highly in love for their work's sake."— 

1 Thess. 5:13. 

If the position of an Elder and teacher in the Church 
of Christ is a very hazardous one, a very difficult one to 
fill with acceptableness to God and to the brethren, and 
a position very full of temptation, the Church should 
sympathetically be very watchful not to increase the 
temptation, not to foster it and a wrong fruitage. On 
the contrary, however, where a faithful servant is found, 
all the loyal brethren should seek in every way to be 
helpful and to co-operate with such. Instead of being 
fault-finding and inclined to criticize this, and that, and 
the other word, and manner, and tone, and look, they 
should be so full of love and sympathy, and so appreciative 
of his loving zeal, devotion and humility, as to let 
trivial and unimportant matters pass unmentioned, and 
indeed unnoticed. Realizing the responsibility of his 
office they have some reason to doubt if they would be 
able to fill his place with as good or as great ability and 
humility. 

In the selection of Elders the consecrated should remember 
that the responsibility rests upon them; and no 
vote should be cast without studious consideration of the 
Divine will, and prayer for Divine guidance. In seeking 
to determine the Lord's will in such a matter, we 
should remember the characteristics of the teacher as 
set forth in the Scriptures: (1) Of course, a teacher 
should be apt to teach; he should have the natural faculty 
or ability to make plain matters which he understands. 

(2) Still more important is it that if he have 

the ability to teach, he shall be clear in the Truth, 

so the Truth and not error may be set forth with clearness. 

(3) Humility and piety should be considered paramount 
and primary qualifications for eldership. However 
able a teacher, however doctrinally clear, no one is 
properly fitted for this position except he have humility 
and piety, and unless his words and deeds have manifested 
his love for the brethren. For, as the Scriptures set 

forth, these are qualities of great value in God's sight. 
Now as ever it is true that great opportunities for doing 
good means even greater opportunities for doing harm. 
This is because, under present conditions, spiritual sickness 
and contagions like earthly ailments spread and 
"catch" much more readily than spiritual health. 



R4503 : page 325 

MOSES A MEDIATOR BEFORE AARON A PRIEST 

THE record of the institution of the priesthood, the establishment 

of the tabernacle service, etc., comes after 

the account of Israel reaching Mt. Sinai— after the 

account of the mountain quaking and smoking 

and the terrible sights and sounds referred to by 

St. Paul (in Hebrews 12:26-28), which, we understand, 

prefigured the great time of trouble we are 

expecting, in which society will be shaken and mankind be 

prepared for the establishment of the Mediatorial Kingdom 

of Christ under the New Covenant. How shall we understand 

this fact? How can we harmonize it with the Scriptural 

thought that our Lord became High Priest more than eighteen 

centuries ago, when he offered up himself and later 

as Priest presented his blood on our behalf at the heavenly 

Mercy Seat; and that since then he has been gathering and 

sacrificing the body of under-priests, and that he, as the 

Head and they as the Body, will shortly be revealed as the 

antitypical Moses, the Mediator of the New Covenant? 

R4503 : page 326 

We must remind our readers afresh that the various 
types of the Scriptures do not follow one another in sequential 
order. Moses assuredly was a type of Christ— Head and 
Body. (Acts 3:22.) Just as surely Aaron was a type of 
Christ Jesus, and his sons types of the Church, the Body of 
Christ, the Royal Priesthood. King Solomon in some respects 
was a type of Christ. As the rich, the wise, the famous king, 
his fame was world-wide. Similarly Melchizedek was a type 
of Christ, in him being blended the kingly and the priestly 
offices. These types could not all be worked out in one person 
and at one time; hence we do not so find them. When 
thinking of Moses as a type of the Mediator between God and 
men, we should consider him as St. Peter explains, as composed 
of Head and members, and that God has been raising 

R4504 : page 326 

him up during this Gospel Age. Our Lord, the Head, first 
was raised to the plane of glory, honor and immortality. Later 
all of his faithful ones, sharers in his sacrifice, will be sharers 
in his Divine nature and glory, and will be raised up with 
him by a share in his resurrection (Phil. 3:10), "the first 
resurrection," which includes only the blessed and holy. These, 
his members, shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years 
and be unto him and unto the Father kings and priests for 
the blessing of mankind.— Rev. 20:6. 

In considering Moses, the mediator of the Law Covenant, 
as typical of The Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
we should view him from this standpoint— as one Head and 



many members, just as we would Melchizedek, who represents 
our Lord, the Head, and the Church, his Body, the Royal 
Priest of the future. On the contrary, Aaron represents the 
same great Priest from a different standpoint, because his 
typical work related to Christ and the Church in the present 
life only— as a sacrificing priesthood— up to the end of the 
sacrificial work, the sprinkling of the blood of atonement in 
the most holy on the Mercy Seat and the inauguration of 
the new dispensation of glory and blessing. His service, also, 
in some degree, shows the Millennial work of cleansing humanity 
from sin and that both the High Priest and the under-priests, 
his members, will be associated in that work. 

Since the two types could not be expressed simultaneously 
it was every way better that the mediator type and the institution 
of the Law Covenant, typical of the New Covenant, 
should precede all sacrificing; yea, precede the appointing and 
setting apart of the priesthood, even though the active work 
of the Mediator of the New Covenant cannot begin until the 
close of this age, when the sacrificing of the "better sacrifices" 
shall have been completed. Coming first in the record 
no one who rightly understands the types could misunderstand 
this to teach that the antitypical Mediator must first come 
forth and institute the New Covenant, before the antitypical 
priesthood would come forward and make the sacrifices, the 
sin-offerings which would make possible the institution of 
that New Covenant. We have been surprised that anyone 
could be so blind as not to see that the sacrifice of Christ 
is the very basis of his work as the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. Hence he could not be in any sense either a part 
or all of the antitypical Moses, until after serving as the antitypical 
Aaron. The correctness of this thought is also borne 
out by the fact that Aaron was older than Moses. 

It follows, then, that those who raised the objection that 
the Church could not be members of the Body of the Mediator, 
because the priesthood was not inaugurated until after Moses 
had mediated and sealed the Law Covenant, put themselves 
in a very foolish light and show the shallowness of their argument. 
For if this be an argument against the Church being 
members of the Mediator's Body, it would be an equally 
strong argument against our Lord Jesus, the antitypical High 
Priest, being the Head of that Mediator. 

The harmony between the two types is shown in the fact 
that in the end of the Atonement Day, after Aaron had offered 
the sacrifice of "the bullock for (instead of) himself" as the 
sin-offering for his body and his house, the household of 
faith, and after he had subsequently offered "the Lord's goat" 
and applied its blood on behalf of all the people, then, as the 
antitypical Priest, Head and Body, completely clothed in the 
garments illustrative of his authority and power, he was accompanied 
by Moses, the mediator, to the altar. 

Thus we read: 

"Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, 
and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory 
of Jehovah appeared unto all the people."— Lev. 9:23. 



R4504 : page 326 

"TO MAKE AN END OF SINS" 

A BROTHER inquires how he shall answer those who 
claim that Daniel 9:24 teaches that our Lord Jesus 
made an end of sin at his First Advent and that 
therefore the Church could not share with him 
in his antitypical or "better sacrifices" for sins. 

The passage refers to the 70 weeks of Israel's favor, the 
69th of which reached to our Lord's baptism at Jordan, and 
the 70th, beginning there, reached to 3-1/2 years beyond the 
cross— our Lord's death marking the middle of that 70th 
week (v. 27), and the acceptance of Cornelius by the holy 
Spirit marking its end. A number of things were to be 
accomplished before the termination of those 70 symbolical 
weeks— 490 years. We therefore should inquire: In what 
sense were all of these fulfilled? In what sense were transgressions 
finished at that time? Were there no more after 
the close of the 70th week? Are there none now? "Everlasting 
righteousness" was to be brought in. Does "everlasting 
righteousness" prevail throughout the whole earth, or 
has it at any time prevailed either during or since the 70 
weeks of Israel's favor? The same query would be applicable 
to the making "an end of sins." Have sins come to an 
end? Are there no more sins? And in what sense did sins 
come to an end at any time during the 70 weeks? "Reconciliation 
for iniquity" was to be made. Are we sure that all 
iniquities were reconciled for at that time? What proof have 
we to that effect, since the Scriptures do not so say? 
These questions suggest their own answers. 

We still hold that the sense of this prophecy is that before 
those 70 symbolical weeks— 490 years— would end, long-looked 
for important events would begin to have their fulfilment 
—not to the world, nor yet to nominal Israel, but to 
"thy people." For "Israelites indeed" these blessings were 
provided and foretold— others to be blessed in due time. 
Those loyal to the Lord like Daniel were specially "thy people" 
—the most holy of verse 24. "Israelites indeed" who accepted 
God's mercy were the "most holy," who were anointed 
by the holy Spirit at Pentecost. To them and all of their 
class since, the incidents of that time sealed or made positive 
the prophetic utterances of the past, and confirmed the 
visions of coming glory declared by the prophets. In Christ 
and his redemptive work believers realized the beginning of 
God's blessing for humanity. 

To this class applied the "reconciliation for iniquity" 
which our Lord Jesus made at the heavenly Mercy Seat, when 
"he ascended up on high, there to appear in the presence of 
God for us." The iniquities of the Church were thus cancelled. 
The reconciliation of believers was thus effected. But 
the reconciliation went no further than believers; unbelievers 
are still unreconciled. The great Redeemer did not appear 
as their Advocate or make reconciliation for their iniquities. 
We are glad, however, that he will begin a reconciling work 



for them at a later time, as shown by other Scriptures. To 

those whose iniquities were thus reconciled for by our Redeemer's 

sacrifice there was an end of their sins— they were 

no longer under condemnation. The offense was by one 

man unto condemnation, but a free gift of God through Jesus 

effects for "Israelites indeed" the forgiveness of many transgressions. 

(Rom. 5:12-19.) Moreover, transgression was finished 

so far as these were concerned; because since then it 

is possible for these to abide in Divine favor to keep the 

Law blamelessly— as the Apostle declares, "The righteousness 

of the Law is fulfilled in us, who are walking not after 

the flesh, but after the spirit." (Rom. 8:4; Gal. 5:14.) The 

work of redemption and reconciliation effected opened to 

every Jew an opportunity for release from bondage to the 

Law by becoming dead with Christ; and likewise the close 

R4504 : page 327 

of that 70th week opened the secondary door of Divine favor 
to the Gentiles. 

We see nothing whatever in this Scripture to contradict 
the plain statement of other Scriptures, to the effect that our 
Lord's great work of reconciliation is divided into two parts 
—the first for the Church and the second for the world. As 
we read, "He is a propitiation (satisfaction) for our sins 
[the Church's sins] and not for ours only, but also [additionally 
and subsequently] for the sins of the whole world." 
Full satisfaction was in our Lord's sacrifice. It merely waits 
to be offered. It is nearly nineteen centuries since the first 
application for the Church. This use of the Lord's merit will 
soon be accomplished— and that merit (passed through the 
Church) will again be in the hands of the great High Priest 
to be used on behalf of the sins of the whole world. 



R4504 : page 327 

THE ANTITYPE BEGINS WHERE THE TYPE ENDS 

DID not the Law Covenant end at the time of our 

Lord's death? And if it was a type or a foreshadowing 

of the New Covenant, would not that 

be the time for the New Covenant to begin? If 

the New Covenant will not be ratified until the last member 

of the Church of Christ has suffered with the Head, 

would not that imply a considerable interim between the 

fulfilment of the type and the coming of the antitype? And 

has it not been THE WATCH TOWER'S teaching that where the 

type ceases the antitype surely begins? 

As we have already pointed out on previous occasions 
many make the mistake of supposing that the Law Covenant 
ended at the cross. On the contrary, the terms of that Covenant 

R4505 : page 327 



are binding upon every Jew from the day in which the 
Covenant was made to the present time— as St. Paul says, 
"The Law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth." 
(Rom. 7:1.) Every Jew to-day is under a death condemnation, 
by virtue of that Law which he is under, yet cannot 
keep. There are only two possible ways of his getting free 
from that bondage: 

(1) With the end of this age the great High Priest will 
antitypically offer the blood of "the Lord's goat" "for the 
sins of all the people"; and this will include the sins of Israel. 
And then the blessed opportunities of the New Covenant will 

be opened to them, as God promised. (Jer. 31:31; Rom. 11:27-31.) 

Then their eyes will be opened and they will 

see out of their obscurity and gladly accept the Mediator of 

the New Covenant and begin at once to share that Covenant's 

blessings. 

(2) For any Jew to get free from the Law Covenant 
before the inauguration of the New Covenant in the times of 
restitution, he must die to the Law. As St. Paul declares, 
"The Law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth." 
"Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the 
Law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to 
another, even to him who is raised from the dead." (Rom. 7:1,4.) 
This is in full accord with the Apostle's statement, 

"Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one 
that believeth"— to the extent of becoming a follower of 
Christ and consecrating his restitution rights in death, a living 
sacrifice, following the example of his Redeemer. (Rom. 10:4.) 
The present being the time appointed of the Father 
as the "acceptable year of the Lord" (Isa. 61:2), the "acceptable 
time" when God is willing to receive sacrifices (first 
the sacrifice of Jesus, and, subsequently, the sacrificing of 
those justified by his blood, his followers, who present their 
bodies (Rom. 12:1), the Jews have as good an opportunity 
of thus entering into joint-heirship with Christ, the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, as have the Gentiles. And they have no 
better opportunity, because there is no other name and no 
other manner now open to any to obtain a share in the 
"high calling" to the divine nature, glory and honor. 

St. Paul, in writing to the Galatians, warning them against 
coming under the domination of the Law, does not at all 
intimate that the Law Covenant had passed away or become 
dead. On the contrary, he testified that if any would be 
circumcised they would become "a debtor to do the whole 
law." (Gal. 5:3.) In the Epistle of Hebrews St. Paul mentions 
the fact that the New Covenant was promised and that 
the very intimation of the word new signified that the Law 
Covenant had become old, and hence was "ready to vanish 
away" and lose its force entirely. But he did not say that 
it had passed away. His plain teaching was that those who 
by faith accepted the Lord Jesus and became dead with him 
by baptism into his death were thus made "free from the 
Law" and were thereafter "not under the Law [Covenant] 
but under the Grace [Covenant— the Abrahamic Covenant.]"— 
Gal. 5:18. 

One Scripture more requires to be mentioned on this 



line: "Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was 
contrary to us (Hebrews), and took it out of the way, nailing 
it to his cross." (Col. 2:14.) This signifies, not that 
the Law Covenant was abrogated or done away, but that, so 
far as the Jews who had accepted Christ were concerned, the 
demands of all of the Law's ordinances were fully met for 
them by the Lord Jesus when he was nailed to the cross. 

Another evidence that the Law Covenant did not cease 
when Jesus died, and has not yet ceased, is furnished us in 
the type of Hagar and her son Ishmael. The Apostle tells 
us that Hagar allegorically represented the Law Covenant 
and that Ishmael symbolically represented fleshly Israel, the 
children of that Covenant. He cites the fact that when the 
heir, Isaac, was born, the son of the Sarah Covenant, God 
said to Abraham, "Cast out the bondwoman and her son, 
for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the 
son of the free woman." (Gal. 4:30.) This signifies that 
the Law Covenant and its Jewish children were to be outcast 
from Divine favor for a time. If Hagar had died at that 
time, the teaching of the type would have been that the Law 
Covenant ceased then to exist. But Hagar continued to live, 
and so the Law Covenant was continued, and still has power 
over every Jew as long as he liveth. If we trace the type further 
we find that subsequently Hagar returned and was subject 
to her mistress, and Ishmael, who represented the Israelites, 
received later a blessing from Abraham, who represented 
God. 

So then, the Law Covenant did not pass away when our 
Lord Jesus died, nor when he arose from the dead the antitype 
of Isaac. Consequently the antitypical New Covenant 
was not ushered in at that time. Nevertheless, as we have 
heretofore pointed out, when our Lord presented himself in 
baptism, saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O God" (Heb. 10:7), 
he set aside the first (the typical) sacrifice that he 
might establish the second (the antitypical) sacrifice. The 
three and a half years of his own sacrificial ministry were 
typified in the killing of the bullock of the day of atonement. 
Immediately on his ascension, applying his blood on 
our behalf for our reconciliation to the Father that we might 
become his joint-sacrificers, he at once began the secondary 
part of the Day of Atonement sacrifices— the killing of "the 
Lord's goat" taken "from the people" and whose blood would 
subsequently be applied "for all the people." 

This sacrificing of the Church, in one sense, was done 
by the great High Priest on the Day of Pentecost. But it 
has been a progressive work, and all of the sacrifice is not 
yet accomplished, and will not be until the last member of 
the Body shall have gone into sacrificial death, in the Redeemer's 
footsteps. Thus we see that the setting aside of 
the type and the establishing of the antitype required a long 
period. And this Atonement Day matter, while all-important, 
was by no means the only typical feature of the Law Covenant. 
Did it not foreshadow the coming out of the High 
Priest in garments of glory and beauty to bless the people? 
And is not this feature of the Law still unfulfilled? And can 
it pass away before this fulfilment? We hold that it cannot, 



and that the instant of its passing away will be the instant 
in which the New Covenant will come into force with the 
same people— Israel. 



R4505 : page 328 

A TEMPEST-TOSSED PRISONER OF HOPE 

-ACTS 27:l-26.-OCTOBER 31.- 

Golden Text:— "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust 
also in him, and he shall bring it to pass."— Psa. 37:5. 

FESTUS, governor of Judea, sent St. Paul and other 
prisoners to Rome, the former with no derogatory 
charges against him. There was no direct intercourse 
between Rome and the little port of Caesarea; hence 
for a distance of six hundred miles the journey was made by 
a small trading vessel. This journey lasted from about the 
middle of August to September 1st— good speed for a sailing 
vessel in those days, but the weather was fine. At Myra, St. 
Paul and two of the brethren who accompanied him (Luke 
and Aristarchus) and the guard and the other prisoners were 
transferred to an Egyptian vessel laden with a cargo of wheat, 
enroute for Rome and bearing a considerable number of 
passengers besides the crew— in all two hundred and seventy-six 
persons. The pleasant weather continued for several days 
and then it became stormy. The vessel abandoned her intended 
route to get into the lea of the Island of Crete and 
tarried at the port of Fair Havens for better weather. Thus 
they were delayed until about October 1st, the Jewish New 
Year's Day and a fast day and the time for equinoctial storms. 

St. Paul drew attention to the dangers of continuing the 
journey and advised that they winter there, but those in 
authority concluded that they would go to Phenice, a larger 
port. But before they had gone far a northeast wind (typhonic) 
struck the vessel suddenly and they were obliged to 
go with the wind to the southward and came under the shelter 
of the little Island Cauda. Here they undergirded the ship 
by placing chains and ropes under her keel, because the weight 
of the cargo of wheat and the severity of the storm had 
strained her. They lowered the gearing of the sails and 
continued to drive before the wind, guarding against sand 
banks. The ship labored heavily in the storm; part of her 
cargo was thrown overboard; later on she was further lightened 
by casting overboard her heavier furniture, tackle, etc. 
The storm continued for several days. Neither sun nor stars 
were visible, and the captain could not tell his whereabouts, 
for the compass had not yet been invented. Hence all aboard 
were gradually abandoning hope. They had ceased to eat 
and were almost in despair. 

Then came the opportunity for St. Paul's message of 
cheer. He reminded them that they should have followed 
his advice and stayed at Fair Havens and not have sustained 



the loss and injury. But he bade them be of good cheer, for 

their lives would all be preserved, though the ship be destroyed. 

In explanation of his confidence he related that the 

angel of God whom he served stood by him in the night saying, 

"Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar; 

and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee. 

Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer; for I believe God, that it 

R4506 : page 328 

shall be even as it was told me. Howbeit we must be cast 
upon a desert island." 

CALM IN A TIME OF STORM 

The true Christian in proper relationship with the Lord 
has at all times "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding,' 
ruling in his heart. It was St. Paul who sang 
praises to God in the prison at Philippi, who was composed 
and ready to speak to the people after being mobbed at Jerusalem, 
who was also the composed one in the tempest on the 
Mediterranean Sea. While St. Paul was indeed a stalwart 
follower of Jesus, with whom few, if any, could stand comparison, 
nevertheless the same principle holds with respect to 
every sincere child of God. If their triumphs of faith are 
less heroic than those of the Apostle, so also their trials are 
proportionately less severe. The Christian has much advantage 
every way. He has the promise of God, not only as 
respects the life that now is, but also re the life to come. 

"JESUS SAVIOR PILOT ME OVER LIFE'S TEMPESTUOUS 
SEA" 

"The voyage of life" frequently resembles the one of this 
study. It may start out with summer suns and every prospect 
favorable, but, ere long, the trials and difficulties of life sweep 
down as a storm— financial or social or moral tests come 
upon the individual to drive him from his intended course. 
His purposes thwarted, his heart overwhelmed with dismay 
and almost in despair he finds himself the more ready to hear 
the message from on high, speaking peace and telling him 
of a fair haven at last. Nevertheless it can be reached only 
through the wrecking of the earthen vessel, and Divine providence 
alone can effect the ultimate salvation. Happy are 
those who shall ultimately be saved even "through great tribulation, 
as the companions of God's "peculiar people," represented 
by St. Paul. (Rev. 7:14.) But still more happy, 
more blessed will be the 144,000 who now have in the stormy 
times the fellowship of God and through sore tribulation shall 
enter the Millennial Kingdom as Joint-Heirs of the Lord. 
It will be through their instrumentality under God that their 
companions in the storm of life may ultimately be saved.— 
Rom. 11:31. 

Ah, yes, we do well to heed the exhortation of our Golden 
Text, "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; 
and he shall bring it to pass." He shall bring to pass blessings 



and peace, even in the midst of the storms of life, and he 
shall bring to pass eventually for these glory, honor and immortality 
through Christ. 
May we not adapt Longfellow's majestic words: 

Thou, too, sail on, O Ship the Great! 
Sail on, O Church, be strong and wait! 
Humanity with all its fears, 
With all the hopes of future years, 
Is hanging breathless on thy fate! 
We know what Master laid thy keel, 
What Workman wrought thy ribs of steel, 
Who made each mast, and sail, and rope, 
What anvils rang, what hammers beat, 
In what a forge and what a heat, 
Were shaped the anchors of thy hope! 

Fear not each sudden sound and shock; 

Tis of the wave and not the rock; 

Tis but the flapping of the sail, 

And not a rent made by the gale. 

In spite of rock and tempest roar, 

In spite of false lights on the shore, 

Sail on, nor fear to breast the sea! 

Our hearts, our hopes, are all with thee, 

Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears, 

Our faith triumphant o'er our fears, 

Are all with thee— are all with thee! 



R4506 : page 328 

"FOR GOD WAS WITH HIM" 

-ACTS 27:27; 28:10.-NOVEMBER 1 .- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord redeemeth the soul of his 
servants; and none of them that trust in him shall 
be desolate. "-Psa. 34:22. 

OUR studies show us St. Paul from various standpoints 

—a bigoted persecutor; a humble penitent 

crying, "Lord, what wouldst thou have me to 

do?" a courageous witness to the Truth amongst 

his own people; a self-sacrificing missionary in foreign 

lands; we have noted his conduct in the presence of 

mobs and in the presence of kings and nobles; and his 

courage in the presence of danger while on his voyage 

as a prisoner to Rome. To-day we view him as a man 

amongst men in contact with the duties of life and in the 

midst of a great disaster— a shipwreck. His deportment 

from the time he became a follower of Jesus was noble, 

humble, reverential, faithful, devout, saintly: worthy of emulation 

by all the followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. The 

transformation wrought in St. Paul is possible in all who 



have the hearing ear and who receive the Gospel message 
into good and honest hearts. Such a transformation is of itself 
a witness to the power of God— to the reality of the religion 

R4506 : page 329 

of the Bible. What a changed world we should be in, 
if all mankind underwent such transformation! But all are 
not in condition of heart to be thus influenced, thus "drawn" 
by the Gospel. Some will need the strong arm of Messiah, 
will need the authority and force of the Millennial Kingdom 
to bring them to subjection and to show them the advantages 
of right over wrong. Thank God that we may pray with 
faith, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven." 

SHIPWRECKED ON MALTA 

Fourteen days and nights scudding before a terrific storm 
brought St. Paul and the ship's company of two hundred 
and seventy-six souls to where the trained ears of the seamen 
in the night caught the sounds of the surf, they knew 
not where. Four anchors were cast out of the stern of the 
vessel and they waited for morning. St. Paul, the Jew Prisoner, 
by this time had risen in the estimation of all on board 
the ship— "For God was with him." Throughout the storm 
all had lost courage and hope but him, and his was due to 
his submission to God's will and partly to the fact that in 
a vision the Lord showed him that he should yet preach the 
Gospel at Rome and that, for his sake, Divine Providence 
would care for every life on board the ship. A heart at peace 
with God and instructed through his Word is prepared for 
what may come, of joy or sorrow. The Apostle exhorted his 
dejected companions to be of good cheer. He reminded them 
of his vision and assured them of his absolute faith therein. 
He urged them to take food that they might be strengthened 
for the strenuous exertions of the coming day. His cheerfulness 
and example were contagious. As the light of the 
Lord was his peace and joy, so he in turn was the light of 
that ship and its comfort. He illustrated what he taught— that 
God's people should do good unto all men as they have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith. He exemplified 
his own words of II Corinthians 1:4— "God comforteth us in 
all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which 
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are 
comforted of God." 

With the morning light they discerned the shore and a 
little bay which now is known as St. Paul's Bay in the Island 
of Malta, then called Melita. The pilot cut loose from his 
anchors, hoisted sail and sought to beach the boat; but, before 
reaching shore, grounded on a mud bank; the forepart 
holding fast, the rear began to go to pieces with the force of 
the waves, as it was a meeting place for two sea currents. 
The life boat had been cut adrift in the night, because the 
seamen had attempted to desert the ship. St. Paul advised 
this course, realizing the need of the seamen to bring 



the boat to land. His confidence in God's promise did not 
lead him to be slack as respects the proper use of earthly 
means. There is a lesson here for God's people. While 
praying and trusting, let us not slack our hands. 

Seeing that only by swimming or floating on wreckage 
could the shore be reached, the soldiers proposed to kill the 
prisoners because under Roman law they were answerable 
for their security with their own lives. But the centurion 
had learned to esteem the Apostle, and for his sake spared 
all the prisoners, doubtless remembering the vision which 
had inspired them all with the hope and courage which 
brought them thus far towards safety. It turned out as St. 
Paul had foretold, that every human life was spared and 
the ship alone was lost with her cargo. 

On the shore we get a new picture of the Apostle. He 
stood not on any dignity or assumed superiority to be served, 
but promptly assisted in serving the interests of the entire 
company. We find him gathering sticks for a fire, at which 
the company might be warmed and dried. The barbarians 
of the Island (so called because they did not speak Greek 
but Phoenician) showed them various kindnesses. But when 
they saw a viper, warmed to life by the heat of the fire, 
fasten itself upon the Apostle's hand, they reasoned that this 
prisoner was doubtless a murderer who, having escaped the 

R4507 : page 329 

perils of shipwreck, Justice still pursued, and had caused him 
to be bitten that he might die. They supposed that the arm 
would swell with the poison from the viper and that soon 
St. Paul would be writhing in agony and die in torture. But 
when he shook off the serpent and suffered no injury, they 
esteemed that he must be a God. 

A fresh opportunity here offered for the honoring of the 
Gospel message, for St. Paul found that the father of the 
governor was sick and he miraculously healed him and other 
sick people of the island. Thus was the knowledge of Christ 
and his minister to a considerable extent shed abroad, although 
so far as we have any information the Apostle did not 
attempt to preach the Gospel message, either to his companions 
on shipboard, or to the people of the island. Evidently 
he did not consider them to be "good ground" in 
which to sow the seed of the Kingdom— evidently he did not 
consider them to be of those whom the Lord our God has 
called to be of the Bride class now being "called" and tested. 
Their experiences, doubtless, will prove profitable to them "in 
due time," when the glorified Christ shall draw all men unto 
himself— "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw 
all men unto me" (John 12:32), granting them blessed opportunities 
for knowledge and blessing and restitution.— 
Acts 3:19-21. 



R4507 : page 329 



ST. PAUL PRISONER AT ROME 

--ACTS 28:ll-31.-NOVEMBER 14.- 

Golden Text:— "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; 
for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that 
believeth."— Rom. 1:16. 

EARLY in the spring A.D. 60 Centurion Julius and his 

soldiers of the Augustan Band started from Malta 

with St. Paul and the other prisoners for 

Rome in another ship, Luke and Aristarchus 

accompanying. The sea journey was effected without special 

incident, the landing being made in the Bay of Naples at 

Puteoli, the seaport of Rome, which is one hundred and 

fifty miles inland. Here they tarried seven days, the Centurion 

awaiting orders from Rome respecting the disposal 

of his prisoners. The delay afforded St. Paul an opportunity 

to meet with a little band of Christians residing at Puteoli. 

Doubtless he took the opportunity also to send word to 

the Christians residing at Rome, whom he repeatedly declared 

that he longed to meet and whom the Lord promised 

that he should meet. The journey to Rome, one hundred 

and eighty miles, was made on foot. En route the Apostle 

was frequently cheered by evidences of the Christian love of 

the brethren. Some of these met him at Appii Forum, forty-three 

miles distant from Rome, and another delegation met 

him at Three Taverns, thirty miles from the great city. 

Many great generals had come this same way with their 
troops to the imperial city, to receive honors and applause, 
but few preachers ever had so great honors as were accorded 
to St. Paul. The journey to and from was for one delegation 
sixty miles and for the other eighty miles, and the 
record shows us that the Apostle was by these made 
acquainted with the true spirit of brotherhood amongst the 
Christians at Rome. The brethren doubtless came on the 
journey for their own refreshment and joy, not realizing, 
perhaps, that the Apostle needed this evidence of their love. 
Commenting along these lines a gifted writer says, "We often 
forget that great men are often very lonely and, while we 
hesitate to say kind words to them, yet words of recognition 
for what they have done are refreshing to those who 
receive more criticism than praise. A few days ago an editor 
showed me a letter he had just received from one who 
had held nearly the highest position in the gift of the American 
people, thanking him for his kindly words in a late editorial. 
My friend said that at first he was astonished that 
so great a man should care for anything he could say; but 
on further thought he understood the value of generous appreciation 
even to the greatest." 

R4507 : page 330 

"IN HIS OWN HIRED HOUSE" 

The fact that there were no charges of an evil character 



against St. Paul and the further fact that the Centurion who 
had him in charge during the voyage became his friend were 
quite sufficient reasons why he should not be treated as an 
ordinary prisoner, but allowed to live in his own hired house 
under the care of a soldier to whom he was lightly chained. 
However, although not permitted to go at liberty, he was 
permitted to receive his friends and others who called upon 
him. It is difficult to estimate how much Divine Providence 
had to do with all these arrangements. Moreover, the soldier 
on guard was changed every few hours, so that probably he 
came in close contact with at least six every day, and thus 
gradually he probably had contact with the entire imperial 
guard. Thus many were brought in contact with Christian 
teachings and example. It is claimed that it was through 
these soldiers that the Gospel message was carried to France, 
Germany and Great Britain. Truly, "God works in a mysterious 
way, his wonders to perform!" St. Paul must have 
had some financial means. It is assumed that ere this he 
had come into his patrimony. The Scriptures intimate that 
Felix held him captive at Caesarea in hope of receiving a 
bribe for his release, evidently having some intimation respecting 
St. Paul's finances. 

The Lord's servant was not slow in using his God-granted 
privileges. He knew not when they might be taken 
away. First of all, of course, he met the Christian brethren; 
but, as early as the third day after his arrival, he sent for 
the Jewish leaders and officers of the synagogues, for at this 
time there were seven synagogues at Rome. He desired to 
give them information at first-hand respecting why he was 
there and a prisoner. Secondly, he wished to preach to them 
the Gospel. He explained that although a prisoner at the 
instance of the Jews at Palestine, he was not disloyal to 
his nation or its customs. He had been pronounced innocent 
at the Roman Court, but had been compelled to appeal to 
Caesar for his safety; but that even then he was making no 
accusation against his countrymen. He proposed that gladly 
he would explain to them the good news, that the long-expected 
Messiah, in whom the Jewish expectations of his 
nation rested, had come. The response was that they had 
received no letters or other communication injurious to the 
Apostle, and expressed a desire to hear for themselves what 
St. Paul had to say, because they had heard of this sect and 
knew that it was spoken against as evil. If he could say 
anything favorable to it they would hear it. 

As our Lord foretold, the darkness which now predominates 
in the world hates the light and everywhere speaks 
against it. Vile slanders are still the weapons of the Adversary 
which the Christian must not handle, because to do so 
is contrary to the spirit by which he has been regenerated. 
Even where a truth discreditable to another must be told 
for any reason it must be spoken in love and, so far as 
possible, nothing derogatory or injurious must be said. "Speak 
evil of no man." It is, however, necessary at times to show 
up the error, the falsity of doctrines presented in the name 
of Truth; but in so doing, appeals should not be made to 
bigotry or superstition, but to reason and to the Word of God. 



TESTIMONY FN THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

On the appointed day the Jews came to hear the Apostle's 
message and, from morning until evening, he quoted, explained 
and expounded, showing from the Law and the prophecies 
that Jesus is the Messiah and that he is now gathering 
a Spiritual Seed to be his Kingdom, and that when this 
Kingdom is complete, it will be glorified in the First Resurrection, 
and will begin the work allotted to the Seed of 
Abraham, namely, that of blessing all the families of the 
earth. The blessing will consist of mental enlightenment 
and mental, moral and physical uplifting out of sin and death 
conditions to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed at 
Calvary. When some of them refused the message, St. Paul 
sought to further influence them, or at least to influence the 
believing ones, by quoting from the Prophet Isaiah, showing 
that God foreknew and foretold that the majority of 
Jews would reject the message when it should come to them. 
As our Lord said of them, "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall 
not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive." 
(Matt. 13: 14.) The Apostle does not mean that 
those who are deaf to the Gospel will be eternally tormented, 
but still they lose a great blessing, the wonderful privilege 
of becoming heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
the Redeemer in his Millennial Kingdom. They lose a share 
with the saints in the glorious work of uplift, which will 
then be in progress. They lose this privilege because not 
worthy of it. They were blind to the Truth for this cause. 
To have permitted the unworthy ones to see, hear and understand 
the message would have distressed them and added to 
their responsibilities and possibly hindered, to some extent, 
the outworking of the Divine purposes. 

Some believed St. Paul's message and some did not. It 
is always thus. The Truth is a searcher and discerner of 
hearts, and a separator. St. Paul remained for two years 
under these conditions, preaching the Kingdom of God and 
how it may be attained at the present time by becoming 
members of the elect "little flock," the Bride of Christ; how 
the Kingdom when established during the Millennium will 
bless the whole earth. He explained how all these things 
were dependent upon the Lord Jesus Christ and his sacrifice; 
that without the redemption which is in Christ Jesus there 
could be no remission of sins, no everlasting life, no Kingdom 
class on the spirit plane, but only everlasting destruction. 
-Acts 3:23. 



R4508 : page 330 

THE SERVANT'S PATH IN A DAY OF REJECTION 

Servant of Christ, stand fast amid the scorn 

Of men who little know or love thy Lord; 
Turn not aside from toil: cease not to warn, 



Comfort and teach, trust Him for thy reward; 
A few more moments' suffering, and then 

Cometh sweet rest from all thy heart's deep pain. 

For grace pray much, for much thou needest grace 
If men thy work deride— what can they more? 

Christ's weary foot thy path on earth doth trace; 
If thorns wound thee, they pierced Him before; 

Press on, look up, tho clouds may gather round, 
Thy place of service He makes hallowed ground. 

Have friends forsaken thee, and cast thy name 
Out as a worthless thing? Take courage then: 

Go tell thy Master; for they did the same 

To Him, who once in patience toiled for them; 

Yet He was perfect in all service here; 

Tho oft thou hast failed: this maketh Him more dear. 

Self-vindication shun; if in the right 

What gainest thou by taking from God's hand 

Thy cause? If wrong, what dost thou but invite 
Satan himself thy friend in need to stand? 

Leave all with God; if right, He'll prove thee so; 
If not, He'll pardon; therefore to him go. 

Be not men's servant: think what costly price 

Was paid that thou mayest His own bondsman be, 

Whose service perfect freedom is. Let this 

Hold fast thy heart. His claim is great to thee. 

None should thy soul enthrall to whom 'tis given 
To serve on earth, with liberty of heaven. 

All His are thine to serve: Christ's brethren here 
Are needing aid, in them thou servest Him. 

The least of all is still His member dear, 

The weakest cost His life-blood to redeem. 

Yield to no "party" what He rightly claims, 

Who on his heart bears all His people's names. 

R4508 : page 331 

Be wise, be watchful, wily men surround 

Thy path. Be careful, for they seek with care 

To trip thee up; see that no plea be found 
In thee thy Master to reproach. The snare 

They set for thee will then themselves enclose 
And God his righteous judgment thus disclose. 

Cleave to the poor, Christ's image in them is; 

Count it great honor if they love thee well; 
Nought can repay thee after losing this, 

Tho with the wise and wealthy thou shouldst dwell. 
Thy Master oftentimes would pass thy door 

To hold communion with his much-loved poor. 

The time is short, seek little here below: 



Earth's goods would cumber thee and drag thee down. 
Let daily food suffice; care not to know 

Thought for to-morrow: it may never come. 
Thou canst not perish, for thy Lord is nigh, 

And His own care will all thy need supply. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have had this poem for a long time and always intended 
to send it to you. I do not know the author and 
think he probably never knew you; but it seems to apply as 
if it had been written to you. 

Yours in the One Hope, S. L. G. C. 



R4508 : page 331 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 



MY DEAR PASTOR AND OTHER MEMBERS OF CHRIST'S BODY: 

God has certainly been good to me, and I cannot express 
the joy that has so recently come through the light 
of "Present Truth." And am so thankful, too, that it 
came at the time it did. For several years my life and 
my husband's life— and since our marriage our united 
lives— have been consecrated so far as we had light, and 
there was a great peace and comfort in our daily service 
for him. We were members of the M.E. Church 
from childhood, and, as "touching the righteousness which 
is in the law (Methodist law), blameless." 

For some years I served as class leader, Epworth 
League President, Junior League Superintendent, Superintendent 
Primary Department in Sunday School and 
afterward as a Nurse Deaconess and Evangelistic Deaconess 
under the Woman's Home Missionary Society. Six 
years ago I married Mr. Brown, General Secretary of the 
Young Men's Christian Association at Decatur, Ills. We 
were led, through the study of the Bible, to see that 
eternal torment, as taught by our church, was false, also 
to expect the establishment of Christ's Kingdom upon 
earth in the near future, though we knew nothing of the 
teaching of Millennial Dawn. 

About a year ago our first sorrow came, when a dear 
little babe died, and that was only the beginning of 
sorrows. A few weeks later my husband's health failed; 
he was forced to resign his position, our home was broken 
up, household goods stored, and, after vain attempts to 
restore health and for which all our money was spent, 
death again came and took the one upon whom it seemed 
my very life depended. A few weeks before his death 
some one mailed us a copy of "What Say the Scriptures 
about Hell?" I read it and said to my mother, who was 
present, "If these are the teachings of Millennial Dawn 
they are greatly misrepresented. I have always thought 
of them as I have of 'Dowieism,' but this gives me the 
proof that I have been seeking for three years— that the 



Bible does not teach eternal torment." Then I got the 
first three volumes of the "Dawn-Studies" and hurriedly 
read two of them. Under the circumstances I could not 
study; then came the death. The comfort that the knowledge 
of the high calling gave me and the peace which 
filled my soul sustained me through the sad hours and 
days, and continues even now. After reading the remaining 
four volumes, I subscribed for the "Tower," 
severed my relations with the Church and social organizations, 
and am rejoicing in the Blessed Hope. 

I have searched the Scriptures daily to see whether 
these things are so, and am proving beyond a doubt that 
they are the teaching of his Word. We (my two little 
children and I) are living in my old home town, where 
much of my church work has been done. My friends do 
not understand my action toward the church and are 
deeply grieved. So far as I can learn, I am the only 
woman in Casey who has accepted the Truth. Sometimes 
it seems hard to stand alone when I have had so many 
friends and such a strong Christian husband to help me, 
but the Father knows how much I am able to bear, and 
I rejoice that I am counted worthy to suffer for him and 
that I may "go to him without the gate bearing his 
reproach." 

Dear Brother Abraham is "strong in the Lord" and 
helps me very much. He and his wife come to my home 
(or I to theirs) one or two evenings each week for study 
of the Word. All the past earthly blessings "I count but 
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus 
my Lord." We are thankful indeed to our blessed Lord 
for the strengthening food received through our dear 
Pastor, Brother Russell, and also for making us acquainted 
with members of the Body, who have been very 
helpful. We are also grateful for the increase of knowledge 
which Brother Hall's visit gave us, and the opportunity 
of having the harmonious teaching of the Word 
publicly presented to our friends. 

After much thought and prayer, I have decided to 
take the "Vow" and, with his help, keep it. My sacrifice 
is on the altar. Pray that I may keep it there until it 
be consumed in his way. With much love to all in the 
Truth, and an intense desire to make my calling and 
election sure, I am, 

Your new Sister in Christ, MRS. GEO. B. BROWN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been thinking of telling you of 
my appreciation of "The Watch Tower" and the sermons, 
to say nothing of the books and all of the helps we have 
for the thorough study of our Father's Word. 

I feel very humble and thankful to our loving Heavenly 
Father and to our dear Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 
that I am permitted to see these grand truths while some 
others blessed with larger opportunities are now stumbling 



on account of not being able to see eye to eye with 
you on the Covenants and the Vow. 

When the Vow first came out in "The Watch Tower" 
one year ago, I did not understand it and objected to it, 
as I felt that my consecration vow covered the whole 
ground. But it was not long until I realized that my objections 
were from the great Adversary of our souls. I 
soon discovered that there was a wrong condition of heart 
back of the objection, so I asked the Lord to remove all 
feelings of resentment and to fill my heart and mind with 
his holy Spirit and with a desire to obey his will at whatever 
cost. I praise his name that my prayer was answered 
and that he led me to see my need of the Vow and I 
gladly and thankfully made it my own; and now, daily, I 
pay my vows to the Lord. When I see a weak point in my 

R4509 : page 331 

character I strengthen it by making a vow to the Lord 
that through his grace I shall overcome that weakness. 
One vow that I have taken is that I will not murmur 
nor complain; another, that I will not speak evil or even 
slightingly of any one; not that I was particularly given 
to murmuring or complaining, for I am naturally of a 
hopeful turn of mind; neither was I given to evil speaking; 
but I never realized how much I needed to be on my 
guard along those lines until I made them a subject of 
special prayer and vowed to the Lord that by his help I 
would overcome those faults. At first I failed a number 

R4509 : page 332 

of times; then I would go to the Lord and tell him how I 
regretted my weaknesses and how I desired to be pure in 
heart; then came "The Tower" with the article, "There is 
a sin unto death." I read it over and over many, many 
times and then I realized more and more the great necessity 
of paying our vows to the Lord and that only those 
who come off more than conquerors will be of the Little 
Flock. 

Dear brother, it is indeed a narrow way, and I praise 
the Lord that he is showing me with each succeeding step 
more and more the narrowness of it; and I rejoice that 
the "path of the just is as the shining light that shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day." 

It is to me a great blessing and strength to remember 
you, dear Brother, at the throne of heavenly grace many 
times daily, and to remember the Brooklyn Bethel family, 
some of whom I know personally, with all the interests of 
the harvest work and also all of the Lord's dear people. 

I hope, dear Brother Russell, that you had a pleasant 
and helpful visit with the dear ones on the other side of 
the great Atlantic. Will it not be glorious when we all 
meet in our Father's Kingdom, and the glory and knowledge 
of the Lord shall be filling the earth ocean wide and 
ocean deep? 



Praying the Lord's blessing on yourself and all others 
in "Bethel Home" and on the harvest work, I am, with an 
humble request for your prayers on my behalf, 

Your sister in the One Hope, 

J. M. GOODHART,-Ohio. 

P.S.--I have been in Present Truth four and one half 
years. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wonder if it is not a pleasure for you to hear from 
those who have been blessed through your ministries! 

Five years ago my husband and I received light which 
we gladly accepted, when Brother Marchant stopped at 
our door and presented Vol. 1. We bought, read, wondered 
and eagerly obtained the other volumes and began 
to attend the meetings held by the Bible students. 

During these five years we have enjoyed the Sunday 
addresses on the Truth by Brother Streeter and visiting 
Pilgrim brethren, and the testimony meetings and Friday 
evening studies. The interest has grown so that from 
the handful that met together five years ago, there are 
now about a hundred regular attendants on Sundays, and 
often there are fifty or seventy-five above that number. 
Our testimony meetings have outgrown the parlors of any 
of our members, and so they have been divided into two 
sections. It is delightful to enjoy the harmony here, and 
I attribute it to the fact that we "have not many teachers," 
but study the Scriptures with the "Key" under the 
wise and careful leadership of our dear Brother Streeter, 
who patiently studies and guides us to the solution of 
each point, referring us constantly to God's Word as unfolded 
in the light now due. 

Interest has been aroused and is being developed in 
Pawtucket, and in Pawtuxet also, where a number of 
people await anxiously the next chart talk. Truly the 
Lord has blessed us in Providence, and we bless and 
praise him and ever rejoice in the Truth. 

Your Sister in our dear Lord, 

F. A. R.,-R. I. 



DEAR SIR:- 

A little over a year ago I providentially became acquainted 
with "The Watch Tower" and "Dawn-Studies," 
which I have read with increasing interest and enjoyment 
and deepening conviction. A friend loans me "The 
Tower," and I have the full set of books and "The Tower 
Bible." "The Tower" and "Dawn-Studies" have given 
me such new and blessed views of the Scriptures that 
they have superseded my church papers and other denominational 
literature, which no longer satisfy me, 
and which I have discontinued. I find my greatest delight 
is studying and conversing upon these gracious 



truths. 

The teaching refuting eternal punishment, declaring 
the grand and glorious restitution blessings and proclaiming 
the Lord's presence, though so wholly at variance 
with the doctrines and teachings of my church (Methodist), 
which I had ever loyally and devotedly supported, 
especially appealed to me, affording unspeakable joy and 
thanksgiving. I can never be thankful enough to God 
for bringing me a knowledge of these glorious things 
through your writings. The thought that Christ is now 
present and is setting up his Kingdom gives me keenest 

joy. 

Yours in the Present Truth, M. G. ROBERTS,-Me. 



DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

As per your request, I send this postal to tell you I 
have made the Vow my own resolution before the Lord. 
I feel that I want to take my stand with those who are supporting 
the Truth and the Harvest Work and to withdraw 
myself from those who are opposing either. I feel it is 
incumbent on me to take advantage of every means of grace 
the Lord places at my disposal. I believe your visit removed 
the last barrier in my mind, and I think there may be others 
who have been helped to see the Vow in a different light 
as a result of your visit. May the Lord bless you and keep 
you. 

Your Brother only by his grace, 

FRANK P. SHERMAN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have wanted so much to write you, but understanding 
how very busy you are, I refrained until now. 

Six years ago I was a nominal church member and a 
great Spiritualist, trying to find peace and comfort from 
those sources, but, finding none, was about to say there 
is no other world than this. 

When I purchased the first volume of "Scripture Studies" 
of Sister Coppage I was rejoiced to read it and found 
such comfort that I left off attending church, and read 
my book and Bible, not knowing that there were others 
of like faith until Brother and Sister Schuler canvassed 
here a year ago, of whom I bought the remaining volumes, 
since which I have carefully read your book on 
Spiritualism. 

I cannot tell you what joy I found, for even my children 
were afraid when night came; we were almost possessed 
by those evil ones. Since I have read and told 
them all, they all know and say, "Mother, we do not fear 
any more; and home is at peace again." 

When first I read the Vow I was much impressed with 
its grandeur. I have made it my own. Would that I 
could tell you all that your writings have done for me. 



Your Sister by his grace, 

MRS. N. J. KENDRICK,-Ga. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

While in Carnegie Library at Conneaut, O., recently, 
I came across your series of "Millennial Dawn." Now I 
should like to have samples of your tracts. I might add 
that my interest in your message has already caused some 
stir among friends who, like the Pharisees of old, think 
good news bad doctrine. 

Until I read those Keys to the Bible in Conneaut, I had 
no good light on eternal torment, which from a boy I 
never could accept. I prayed for light and the Lord, I 
believe, sent me into the library and to the "light." They 
were the first books I touched on entering and were just 
what I wanted. 

Yours in Christ Jesus, 

CHAUNCEY G. McCOY,-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

If you think this might prove an incentive to some one 
to study more faithfully please use it, if you think best. 

For the third time in a little over four years, I have 
commenced the study of the full course of "Millennial 
Dawn" series. During this time every available moment 
has been given to this course of reading, which has 

R4509 : page 333 

also included every printed sermon and issue of "The 
Tower." This has necessitated the giving up of visiting, 
fancy work, music and all other reading; none but necessary 
work of any kind has occupied my attention. 

As I take up Vol. II. for the third reading, I am amazed 
to find the many points overlooked in, or forgotten since, 
the former readings. Each time I read I find each volume 
more intensely interesting because of prophecy fulfilled 
or in process of fulfillment before my eyes. 

I need not add that the benefit received is inestimable, 
incalculable; that I would not exchange the knowledge 
and satisfaction thus far gained for the wealth of all the 
world. 

Undoubtedly this continuous study of the unfolding of 
the Father's plan, as also the making of the special vow 
to the Lord my own, has enabled me thus far to "stand 
in this evil day;" and by his grace I shall pursue this 
study and adherence to the entire vow of consecration according 
to ability, until our "change" come, that so "having 
done all," I may "stand" perfected in his presence. 

My Bible is a thousand fold more precious, because 
with each perusal of any one of the volumes, the eyes of 
my understanding are still more widely opened to discern 



the will and purpose of its Great Author. My reverence 

R4510 : page 333 

for and gratitude to him for the precious "meat in due 
season" for all who "will receive it," knows no bounds. 

May he keep you moment by moment, ever closer and 
closer "under the shadow of the Almighty," sustaining 
and protecting you through every trial or persecution he 
may permit to come into your life and crown you "more 
than conqueror" at the full close of the earthly 
pilgrimage! 

Your least Colporteur and joyful fellow-servant, 

E.G. 



page 333 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT-BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V (E)* 

Questions on Scripture Study V.— 
Man for whom Atonement was made 

DECEMBER 5 

(1) Our Lord's words, "All live unto him" (Luke 20:38), 
are sometimes cited as proofs that the dead do not die, but 
only seemingly die and become more than ever alive. How 
should these words be understood? 

(2) Quote the passage and explain it in detail. 

(3) If death signifies destruction, why do the Scriptures 
speak of the dead as being asleep and not as being destroyed? 
P. 352. 

(4) In I Thess. 5:23 the Apostle speaks of the body and 
spirit and soul of the Church. Quote the passage and explain 
its meaning. P. 353. 

(5) Could it be that the Apostle here meant to refer to 
the Church as individuals? Could he have meant that the 
body, the soul and the spirit of the individual members of the 
Church would be preserved until the Second Coming of the 
Lord? P. 353. 

(6) It is held that since souls are said to go to sheol, 

to hades, therefore the human soul must be something tangible 
and conscious after dissolution. What is sheol? What is 
hades? P. 353, last par. 

(7) How many times does the word sheol occur in the 
Old Testament Scriptures? How is it translated— by what 
English words, and are these translations reliable— when 
judged by the present definition of the words used in translating 
it? State the various translations of sheol in English 

Bibles. P. 354, par. 1. 

(8) Is there anything of joy or pain implied in the word 



sheol? What class of people is said to go to sheol? P. 354, par. 2. 

(9) Why are all souls said to go to sheol? What do 
they do there? What is their state or condition and when 
will they be relieved? P. 354, par. 3. 

(10) What do we know about the English word hell 
and its origin and meaning in the unabridged dictionary? 
P. 354, last par. 

(11) Give illustrations of the use of the word sheol and 
show that they could not mean suffering, torment, etc. P. 355. 

(12) What is the difference between qeburah, a grave, 

the tomb, and the grave, sheol, the state of death? Give illustrations 
in proof of answer. P. 356, par. 1 . 

DECEMBER 12 

(13) Give illustrations of the use of sheol, translated pit, 
and show what it signifies thereby. P. 356, last par. 

(14) In Deuteronomy 32:22 we read of the fire of God's 
anger which shall burn to the lowest hell. Explain this 
passage. P. 357. 

(15) What is meant by the sorrows of hell— sheol? P. 
358, par. 1. 

(16) Explain the statement of Job 7:9, "He that goeth 
down to the grave (sheol) shall come up no more." P. 358, 
last par. 

(17) What is meant by "deeper than hell"? (Job 11:8.) 
P. 359, par. 1. 

(18) What is meant by the expression, "Oh, that thou 
wouldest hide me in sheol"? P. 359, par. 3. 

(19) What is meant by the expression, "If I wait, the 
grave (sheol, oblivion) is my house"? (Job 17:13,14.) 
P. 360, par. 1. 

(20) What is meant by Job 21:13, "They spend their 
days in wealth, and in a moment go down into sheol— hell"? 
P. 360, par. 5. 

(21) We read that "hell is naked before him." (Job 26:6.) 
What is here signified? 

DECEMBER 19 

(22) What is meant by the statement, "In death there is 

no remembrance of thee; in the grave (sheol, oblivion), who 
shall give thee thanks"?— Psa. 6:5. P. 361, par. 3. 

(23) We read that "the wicked shall be turned into hell 
and all the nations that forget God." Where is the Scripture 
and what does it signify? P. 361, par. 5. 

(24) When we read, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 

hell (sheol, oblivion); neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One 
to see corruption" (Psa. 16:10), what should we understand? 
P. 362, par. 1. 

(25) We read, "The bonds of hell (sheol, oblivion) encircle 
me; the snares of death seize me" (Psa. 18:5); how 

should this statement be understood? P. 362, par. 5. 

(26) We read, "O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul 
from sheol"— hell (Psa. 30:3); what is here signified? P. 362, 
last par. 



(27) We read, "Let the wicked be ashamed. Let them 
be silent in hell"; explain.— Psa. 31:17. P. 363, par. 2. 

(28) "Like sheep they are laid in hell. ...But God 

will redeem my soul from the power of shed" --hell. (Psa. 49:14,15.) 
What does this signify? P. 363, last par. 

(29) "Let them go down quickly into hell." (Psa. 55:15.) 
How shall we understand this inspired prayer? P. 364. 

(30) "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell."-Psa. 86:18. P. 365, par. 1. 

DECEMBER 26 

(31) Explain the Scripture, "My soul is full of troubles 
and my life draweth nigh unto sheol"— hell.— Psa. 88:3. P. 
365, par. 3. 

(32) "What man is he that liveth and shall not see 
death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand (power) of 
sheol"-hell? What is meant?-Psa. 89:48. P. 365, last par. 

(33) What is meant by the statement, "The pains of hell 
gat hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow"?— Psa. 1 16:3. 
P. 366, par. 1. 

(34) Explain the Scripture, "If I ascend up into heaven, 
thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art 
there. "-Psa. 139:7,8. P. 366, last par. 

(35) Explain the statement, "Her steps take hold on 
hell"— sheol.— Prov. 5:5. P. 367, par. 1. 

(36) "Her house is in the way of hell." "Her guests 

are in the depths of hell." (Prov. 7:27; 9:18.) Explain these 
Scriptures. P. 367, par. 3-5. 



page 334 
BIBLES, TESTAMENTS, STUDENTS' HELPS, ETC. 
SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES 



THIS LIST SUPERSEDES ALL PREVIOUS LISTS 

Bible publishers announce that, owing to increased cost of material 
and labor, they have found it necessary to advance the price of 
many of the cheaper grades. 

IN presenting our list of Bibles this year, we have dropped a number 
which we previously carried and have selected others which we 
think more desirable. We give below a list which, although not 
very large, we think will cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the 
wants of nearly all. However, should any of the friends desire a 
more complete list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 

First in importance among Bibles we rank the 



WATCH TOWER BIBLE 

described on next page. 



TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No (Add Postage on these, 20c. each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., round corners, Price Price 

red under gold, references, 7-1/4 x 5 $1.45 $ .94 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 
gold, illustrated, full teachers' helps, references, 
linen, 7-3/4x5-1/4 1.60 1.05 

4412 Black Face Brevier— easy to read. Egyptian 
Morocco, div. circuit, head bands and marker 

round corners, red under gold, 5-1/8 x 7-7/8 2.30 1.25 

(Add Postage on these, 26c. each.) 

8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 
under gold, helps, references, concordance, 
illustrated, linen, 8-1/2x6 2.10 1.38 

8702 Same as 8701, leather lined 2.50 1.63 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 
foot of each page. Otherwise they are ordinary "Teachers' Bibles" 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 
(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.35 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.63 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents 
only. Their special feature, differentiating from other Teachers' 
Bibles, is that they show the readings of the Common and Revised 
Versions side by side in the same line, self -pronouncing. 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4x6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, kid lined, otherwise 
same as 350 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 153 Ruby, French Morocco, round cor., red under 

gold, div. cir., text only, 5-1/2 x 3-7/8 x 1-1/8 95 .63 

01329 Same as 01327, leather lined to edge 1.60 1.05 

194 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text, 5-7/8 x4x 1-1/4 1.20 .78 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 



"Mite" Bible (the smallest Bible) 
093X Venetian Morocco, div. cir., gilt edges with 

magnifying glass, 1-3/4 x 1-1/4 x 5/8 1.00 .75 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103 Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, text only, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01112 Persian Morocco, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

as 01103 2.00 1.35 

01157X Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined, 

red under gold, text only, 5-5/8x3-7/8x9-16 2.00 1.35 

03029X Pearl, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, 5-1/8 x 3-7/8 x 5/8.. 3.25 2.15 
03114X Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined, 

silk sewed, red under gold, references, 5-5/8 x 4 x 3/4. 3.25 2.15 
(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 
0612 Diamond, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, text only, 3-3/4x2-1/2x7/8... 2.25 1.55 
02002X Brilliant, Persian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, maps (smallest reference 

Bible made), 3-5/8 x 2-1/2 x 5/8 2.50 1.70 

INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, references, maps, 7 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 1.75 1.13 

8636 French Seal, leather lined, otherwise as 8635 3.75 2.34 

9635 Brevier, large face, French Morocco, div. cir., 

red under gold, references, 7-1/8 x 5 x 1 2.75 1.90 

THUMB INDEX ON A BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 
INDIA PAPER BIBLES-(Continued) 

03265X Minion, Levant Morocco, div. cir., calf lined 
silk sewed, red under gold (thinnest minion 
reference Bible), 6-7/8 x 4-3/4 x 5/8 4.25 2.85 

03274X Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, red under gold, references, index, concordance 
and maps, 6-7/8 x 4-7/8 x 7/8 4.50 3.00 

03554X Brevier, black face, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather 
lined, red under gold, references, index, 
self-pronouncing, concordance and maps, 
8-1/8x5-1/2x7/8 5.50 3.60 

0358 IX Long Primer, black face, same as 03554x, 7-3/4 x 
5-1/4 x 15-16 6.00 4.00 

0865-1/2X Long Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined, silk 
sewed, red under gold, teachers' helps, arranged 
as cyclopedic concordance, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 x 
1-1/8 8.00 5.25 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, references 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, Egyptian Seal, references, red under 



gold, div. cir 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, references, 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, Egyptian Seal, references, red 

under gold, div. cir., 8-3/4 x 6-3/4 3.00 2.25 

(Add Postage, 15 cents each.) 
Minion, black faced, reference edition, self-pronouncing, a 
fine edition— 4-3/4 x 7. 

152 Egyptian Seal, div. cir., red under gold 1.75 1.38 

154 Persian Levant, leather lined to edge, otherwise 

same as 152 3.25 2.35 

(Add Postage, 12 cents each.) 

152X India paper edition of 152 2.75 1.97 

154X India paper edition of 154 4.00 2.81 

LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light 
Weight, Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.43 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

2032 Arabian Morocco, grained leather lining to 

edge, silk lined band and marker 6.00 2.80 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, lie each.) 
216 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold, 

5-3/4x3-5/8 1.25 .84 

215B Minion, French Morocco, references, div. cir., 

red under gold, 7-1/4x5-1/4x7/8 1.50 .85 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 3c each.) 
21 13 Nonpareil, French Morocco, limp, gold title, side 

and back, gold edges (vest-pocket edition), 

4-3/8x2-7/8x1/2 40 .22 

2113P Same as above, with Psalms 50 .27 

2115 Same as 2113, with div. cir., and red under gold 56 .30 

2115P Same as 2115, with Psalms 66 .35 

013RL Same as 2113, with words of our Lord in red 

letters 60 .33 

015RL Same as 013RL, with div. cir., red under gold 80 .42 

2142X Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, grained leather 

lining, red under gold, gold roll (thin), 4-3/8 x 

2-3/4x3/8 85 .43 

2142PX Same as 2142X, with Psalms 1.00 .55 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, gold edges, 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined, red under gold, India paper, 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4. .90 .65 
(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
371 Brevier, Roan leather, flexible, gold edges, with 

Psalms, 6-1/4x4-1/2 45 .45 



NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

270 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 45 .45 

361 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 50 .50 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including 
postage .23 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 
241 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 17 .17 

(Postage, 12c.) 
208 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4x7-1/4 25 .25 



PRICES ON BIBLES IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES FURNISHED ON REQUEST. 
page 335 
CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURE" SERIES 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this journal 
for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following publications 
by other presses, which we supply at specially low prices because of 
the assistance they will lend to the study of God's Word. We mention 
these somewhat in the order in which they seem to us to be desirable 
aids. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
STUDENTS' EDITION 

[There is a picture of this Bible on the left side of the column.] 

We specially recommend this Bible 
for its smallness of size, lightness of weight 
and good-sized print, and above all for the 
helps to Bible students and teachers 
bound with it. Printed on India paper; 
excellent press work. Its special feature 
distinguishing this Bible from all others is 

ITS BEREAN BIBLE 
TEACHERS MANUAL 

Parti. 



Brief Scripture Commentary based 
on expositions of Dawn-Studies, THE 
WATCH TOWER and Brother Russell's 
published sermons, tracts, etc., with 
references to these for fuller comments. 

Part II. 

INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS 

Texts topically arranged for use in 
teaching divine plan privately or publicly. 

Part III. 

BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX 

Part IV. 

DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED 

SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED 

WHOLESALE PRICES 
IN ANY QUANTITY 

POSTAGE, OR EXPRESSAGE INCLUDED 

MINION TYPE EDITION, 4-1/2 x 6-3/4 
inches. Sample of Type in our October 
1 issue. 

No. 1918-So-called French Seal, 

red under gold, round-cornered, 

divinity circuit, linen-lined $1.65 

No. 1928-Same as 1918, bound in 

Levant Morocco, fine-grained, 

very durable, leather lined 2.50 

BOLD-FACED TYPE EDITION. 

SAMPLE OF TYPE IN OCT. 1, '08, ISSUE, 

PAGE 302, SIZE 5-1/2 x 7-1/2 INCHES. 
No. 1938-The Helps in this Bible 

and the binding are exactly the 

same as in the above described 
No. 1928. (We have these only 

in the better binding "Levant 

Morocco.") Price $3.00 

No. 1948-This Bible is exactly 

the same as No. 1938, except 

that it contains additional matter 

desired by some, namely: 

the Bagster Concordance, etc., 

which adds to its bulk. Price 3.25 

Patent index 25 cents extra, but we do not advise this on so 
small a book. The above very special price was secured only by our 
placing a very large order— 10,000 copies. This is probably the 
largest-sized single order ever placed for India paper Bibles. 



DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This publication, we believe, will be in great demand as soon as 
known. It is a text-book for each day in the year— and good year 
by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate comment 
under each text selected from the columns of back issues of 
THE WATCH TOWER. 

Our new edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts 
and comments as the former one; but it has twice as many 
pages. Every alternate leaf is blank ruled, for use as an 
Autograph and Birthday record. It is printed on fine bond paper 
and bound in handsome dark blue cloth. It would be well worth 
$1.00 or more, in any book store. 

PRICES, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL. 

The new "Manna" will be sold by Manna Colporteurs and others 
at 50 cents each (60 cents when gotten by mail or prepaid express). 
The wholesale rates, open to any TOWER reader, are as follows, 
cash with order:— 

1 copy, postpaid $ .35 

10 or more copies, by express, prepaid, each 30 

10 or more copies, by freight or express, charges collect, each.. .20 

We, of course, prefer the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES to be colporteured; 
but a good follow-up work can be done with "Manna" 
by those who cannot do the regular work with the STUDIES. 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the 
natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the Giver of all Good and 
thus inducing the peace of God and favoring both spiritual and natural 
health and well-being. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This very valuable work, published under the author's copyright 
by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been sold by them at 
$4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For several years a friend, 
an earnest Bible student, desirous of assisting the readers of our 
Society's publications, has supplied them through us at a greatly 
reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright and plates from 
the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same to our Society as a 
gift, under our assurance that the gift will be used for the furthering 
of the Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of price 
as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this help in the 
study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with THE WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage and, 
as a Premium, one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red under 
gold edges, silk sewed, leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription to W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT 



This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. As 
footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek MSS., Sinaiticus, 
Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these differ from the Common 
Version. This is a very valuable little work, published in Europe, 
which we specially import for the benefit of our readers. Price, 50c, 
including postage. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD 
TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a 
valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our special 
price, in leather binding, including postage, is 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in cloth binding, $5, 
including postage. We are not permitted by the publishers to cut 
this price; but may and do give postage free and give besides a 
premium of any four volumes of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES series in cloth 
binding with each Concordance, or six volumes if purchaser pays 
the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It has some 
advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we prefer it. 
Special reduced prices,— in cloth binding, $3; half leather, $5. 
Carriage prepaid, 65c. extra. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who have either 
of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth binding, $1, 
delivered. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. 
It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, $1.30, including 
postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE" 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It presents 
the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, and seems 
remarkably free from the bad theology so common in this class of 
books. All Christian parents should have a Sunday Bible lesson 
with their children, and this book furnishes interesting topics, to 
which may be added as much concordant "Present Truth" as the age 



of the children will justify. Parents are responsible for their children's 
training in theology as well as morals. This will assist you in 
the discharge of this duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as 
to your children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special price, 
75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 

SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA PAPER 

Calls for SCRIPTURE STUDIES divided into small portions, light 
convenient for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., led 
us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume is on this 
very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch in thickness and 
about four ounces in weight. [The type is exactly the same size as in 
the regular editions.] It is a beauty. Leather covers, gold edges. 
Its cost, with postage, is now 75c each for the first three volumes 
and 85c each for the remainder per volume, at which price it is 
supplied to WATCH TOWER subscribers. 



page 336 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 

UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION OF BROOKLYN, N.Y. 



ONE-DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS ADDRESSED BY THE 
EDITOR OF THIS JOURNAL AS FOLLOWS: 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., NOV. 7 

Morning Rally and Testimony Meeting at 10:30 o'clock. 

Discourse by Brother Russell at 3:00 p.m. Evening Meeting 
for the interested at 7:30 o'clock; this will be a Question 
Meeting. Visiting friends cordially invited. 

All meetings will be held in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Nos. 
13-17 Hicks street. Convenient to all cars and ferries— close 
to the old bridge terminus. 

BROCKTON, MASS., NOV. 14 

ROCHESTER, N.Y., NOV. 21 

YORK, PA., NOV. 28 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., DEC. 5 

PITTSBURG N.S., PA., DEC. 12 



BROOKLYN TABERNACLE EVERY SUNDAY 

Preaching at 3:00 p.m. Praise service at 7:00 p.m.; 
Berean Bible Study at 7:30 p.m. Convenient to New York 
via Subway, and Jersey City via P.R.R. Annex Ferry. 



page 338 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE KEYS. 

PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION, 

WHEN DELIVERED BY COLPORTEURS THE COST AND PRICE ARE INCREASED. 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the divine plan 
revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
25c. (Is. l/2d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas offered 
are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these events the 
fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great prophecy of 
Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.). 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., The At-one-ment Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 30c. (Is. 3d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (Is.). 

Is also published in foreign languages as follows: German, five vols., 



in Swedish Vols. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6; in Dano-Norwegian, three vols.; 
in Greek, three vols.; in French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, 
and Italian, one vol. each; bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, 
prices the same; in Polish, condensed edition, one vol., 10 cents. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY 