Insight on the News
A Warning Sign
Last December an earthquake measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale struck Soviet Armenia a devastating blow. Described as “one of the worst in Soviet history,” the quake claimed some 25,000 lives and left 500,000 homeless. It destroyed two thirds of Armenia’s second-largest city, Leninakan, with a population of 290,000 and completely destroyed Spitak, a town of about 30,000 inhabitants. Numerous smaller communities were also leveled by the quake. At least 5,400 survivors were pulled from the mounds of rubble by multinational teams of rescue workers, and according to Soviet authorities, the number of injured reached 13,000.
Although scientists have some idea of the basic geological causes of most earthquakes, they cannot accurately predict when these will occur. Nevertheless, the devastating frequency of earthquakes in this century comes as no surprise to educated Bible students familiar with Jesus Christ’s foretold “sign” marking his invisible “presence” and “the conclusion of the system of things.” Why is that? Because even though Jesus did not explain the cause of these seismic events, he warned that as a part of that composite “sign,” there would be “earthquakes in one place after another.”​—Matthew 24:3, 7.
“A World Government”
The only way to combat the greenhouse effect and other emerging environmental disasters is a world government, says Dr. Kenneth Hare, renowned geographer and climate-change expert. Humanity is mounting a deadly assault on nature, Hare warned. The planet is threatened not just by a nuclear holocaust “but by ecological misuse,” reports the Calgary Herald, a Canadian newspaper. Hare claims that three billion tons of carbon are spewed into the atmosphere annually by automobile exhausts and industrial smokestacks. Computer studies show that even with moderate economic growth, carbon-dioxide levels would double by the year 2075. “We’ve created a global problem,” and without regulation of the environment on a global scale, “we’ll be in trouble,” said Hare.
What Dr. Hare recommends is indeed logical. Still, can man ever hope to establish a global government that would be able to do such things as regulate economic growth, develop nonpolluting energy sources, and convince humankind to embark on a program of worldwide environmental care?
Hardly! God’s Word clearly says: “To earthling man his way does not belong. It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) However, this does belong in the hands of God. As the “Prince of Peace,” his Son, Jesus Christ, will administer a world government that will rule in justice and righteousness. Under his heavenly rulership, mankind will not imperil the environment.​—Isaiah 9:6, 7; 11:9; Daniel 2:44.
Bad Advice
Is it a bad thing for a child to disobey his parents? Not necessarily, claims Leon Kuczynski, professor of developmental psychology at the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada. In fact, The Toronto Star reports that after studying 70 mothers and their children, Kuczynski believes that the “techniques a child uses to disobey his parents are important in his social development.” According to the article, if children fail to do what they are told, parents are not to despair. The reason? Kuczynski says that such conduct is normal. The professor also feels that “a child’s refusal to obey his parents can be a sign of independence and maturity.”
The failure of children to obey their parents is not a sign of maturity. On the contrary, wise King Solomon wrote: “Foolishness is tied up with the heart of a boy.” (Proverbs 22:15) While some may even conclude that a child’s disobedience produces positive results, God’s Word does not agree. Centuries ago the apostle Paul wrote: “You children, be obedient to your parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.” (Colossians 3:20) Wise parents will look to Jehovah God as their authority for child training.​—Proverbs 19:18; 29:15.

