You Can Find Priceless Treasures!
“CAN you see anything?” asked the wealthy Englishman. “Yes, wonderful things,” replied the Egyptologist. The year was 1922, and Howard Carter had just peered into the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamen in Egypt’s Valley of the Kings. Excitement pervades Carter’s words:
“As my eyes grew accustomed to the light, details of the room within emerged slowly from the mist, strange animals, statues, and gold​—everywhere the glint of gold. For the moment​—an eternity it must have seemed to the others standing by—​I was struck dumb with amazement . . . We had never dreamed of anything like this, a roomful​—a whole museumful it seemed—​of objects.” Carter admittedly felt “the strained expectancy . . . of the treasure-seeker.”
That discovery brought to light fabulous treasures hidden over 3,000 years ago. But God wants us to engage in a much grander treasure hunt. It is a quest far more rewarding than any search for gems, gold, or silver. This treasure hunt is for godly wisdom, and one of its most precious valuables is eternal life.​—John 17:3.
Effort Essential
Great effort is required to excavate an archaeological site. It is not easy to dig in wild terrain or descend into perilous waters in search of hidden, buried, or sunken treasure. But earnest treasure-seekers gladly make such efforts. They often endure severe hardships and surmount seemingly impossible obstacles. Well, is not the search for godly wisdom worthy of even greater effort?
We can find priceless treasures if we put forth needed effort to study the Bible and true Christian publications designed to help us find the gems of wisdom they contain. Continued effort is vital. We would not become rich if we began digging for material treasures but gave up after merely scratching the surface. The same would be true if we began to dig for spiritual treasures and soon quit because we thought it was too exhausting to continue. “Wisdom from above” is for those who exert themselves to acquire it. (James 3:17) Should you not make the effort needed to find the priceless treasures of godly wisdom?
[Picture Credit Line on page 2]
Cover and page 3 photo: K. Scholz/​H. Armstrong Roberts

