VOL. XXXVII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Portrait of Pastor Russell .... 355 
His Biography 356 

His Teachings 356 

His Work 357 

Will and Testament of Charles Taze Russell 358 

An Editorial Committee of Five . . 358 

His Legacy of Love 359 

The Funeral Services 359 

The Floral Display 359 

Address at Morning Service .... 360 
Addresses at Afternoon Service . . . 360 

Pastor Russell's Last Days . . . 360 
View of Floral Designs on Temple Rostrum . 369 
Oration at Evening Service .... 373 

Pastor Russell's Sermon .... 374 

"Morning Cometh— A Night Also" . . 374 
Closing Scenes in New York and Pittsburgh 378 
Letters Expressing Sympathy and Loyalty . 378 

Confidence in Lord's Arrangement . . 380 
"All the Way My Savior Leads Me" . . . 384 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS STREET, 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



The Watch Tower Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an 
Editorial Committee, at least three of whom must have 
read and have approved as Truth each and every article 
appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial 
Committee now serving are: W.E. VAN AMBURGH, J.F. 
RUTHERFORD, H.C. ROCKWELL, F.H. ROBISON, R.H. HIRSH. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 



for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, POLISH AND DANO-NORWEGIAN 
EDITIONS. SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 

For the information of our readers we give below a list of 
the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English, German, Swedish, Finnish, Greek. 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



"ANGELICO" 

The Angelophone Company request us to advise that they are now 
prepared to fill all orders promptly, as per announcement in previous 
TOWER. ADDRESS ALL LETTERS and make REMITTANCES to 
the ANGELICO, 182-184 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 



A GERMAN MEMORIAL NUMBER 

A Memorial issue of THE WATCH TOWER is being prepared in the 
German language and another in the Polish language; extra copies, 
5c each. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 14; (2) 189; (3) 259; (4) 222; (5) 324; 
(6) 230; (7) 92; (8) 197; (9) 224; (10) 265; (1 1) 165; (12) 130; 
(13) 291; (14) 78; (15) 105; (16) 272; (17) 1; (18) 221; 
(19) 65; (20) 264; (21) 228; (22) 273; (23) 25; (24) 313; 
(25) 134; (26) 393; (27) 289; (28) 145; (29) 22; (30) 203; 
(31)32. 



"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Divine Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the 
Divine Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and 
restitution: 416 pages, in embossed cloth, 50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, 
India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time 
of the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 432 pages, in embossed cloth, 50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, 
India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers the "Time of the End," 
glorification of the Church and establishment of the Kingdom; it also 
contains a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 432 pages, in embossed cloth, 
50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution 
of the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It notes specially Our 
Lord's Great Prophecy of Matt. 24 and also Zech. 14:1-9: 720 pages, 
embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features of 
Divine grace revolve: 596 pages in embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 
Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1, 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to these: 816 pages, embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 
Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

IN MAROON KARATOL BINDING, pocket edition, red edges, same price 
as regular cloth edition. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, stiff covers, same size as cloth edition, 
gilt edges, the set (6 vols.), $6.00 (Ice 5s.). 

The above prices include carriage charges. 

Prices on the above to Colporteurs and to I.B.S.A. Classes, in lots 
of 50 volumes or more, charges collect, one-half the above prices. 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German, Swedish, 



Finnish and Dano-Norwegian, six vols.; French, Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian, Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Greek, Lettish, Slovak, 
Armenian, Ukrainian, Korean, Chinese and Japanese, one vol. each; 
bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 
For the Blind, in American Braille, English Braille and N.Y. Point. 



R5997 : page 356 

BIOGRAPHY 

CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL, known the world 

over as Pastor Russell, author, lecturer and 

minister of the Gospel, was born at Pittsburgh, 

Pa., February 16, 1852; died October 

31, 1916. He was the son of Joseph L. and 

Eliza Birney Russell, both of Scotch-Irish 

lineage. He was educated in the common 

schools and under private tutors. Author of 

"OBJECT AND MANNER OF OUR LORD'S RETURN," 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS," 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS," "THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE 

AGES," "THE TIME IS AT HAND," "THY KINGDOM COME," 

"THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON," "THE ATONEMENT," "THE 

NEW CREATION," "WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT 

HELL," "SPIRITISM," "OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS," "THE 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION," et cetera, et cetera. 

He was married in 1879 to Maria Frances Ackley. 
No children blessed this union. Seventeen years later 
they disagreed about the management of his journal and 
a separation followed. 

Reared under the influence of Christian parents, at an 
early age he became interested in theology, uniting himself 
with the Congregational Church, and became active 
in local mission work. The doctrine of eternal torment 
of all mankind except the few elect became so abhorrent 
to him that at the age of seventeen he was a skeptic. He 
said, "A God that would use His power to create human 
beings whom He foreknew and predestinated should be 
eternally tormented, could be neither wise, just nor loving; 
His standard would be lower than that of many 
men." He continued to believe, however, in the existence 
of God, but was not willing to accept the commonly understood 
teachings as God's revelation of Himself to man. 
He turned his attention to the investigation of heathen 
religions, only to find all of these unsatisfactory. 

HIS TEACHINGS 

Naturally of a reverential mind, desiring to worship 
and serve the true God, he reasoned, "All the creeds of 
Christendom claim to be founded on the Bible, and these 
are conflicting. Is it possible that the Bible has been 
misrepresented? It may not teach the terrible doctrine 
of eternal torment." Turning again to the Bible he determined 



to make a careful, systematic study of it without 
reference to creeds of men. As a result the remainder 
of his life was wholly devoted to teaching the Bible, 
writing and publishing religious books and papers, lecturing 
and proclaiming the message of Messiah's Kingdom. 
He was the greatest religious teacher since St. Paul, and 
did more than any other man of modern times to establish 
the faith of the people in the Scriptures. 

He was not the founder of a new religion, and never 
made such claim. He revived the great truths taught by 
Jesus and the Apostles, and turned the light of the twentieth 
century upon these. He made no claim of a special 
revelation from God, but held that it was God's due time 
for the Bible to be understood; and that, being fully consecrated 
to the Lord and to His service, he was permitted 
to understand it. Because he devoted himself to the development 
of the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit, 
the promise of the Lord was fulfilled in him: "For if 
these things be in you and abound, they make you that 
ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:5-8. 

He clearly taught and proved his teachings by the citation 
of Scriptural authority— that man does not possess 
an immortal soul, that he is a soul and is mortal; that the 
wages of sin is death— not eternal torment; that death 
came upon man as the just penalty for the violation of 
God's Law; that death means the destruction of man; that 
God, in His goodness, has provided the great Ransom-price 
whereby man may be delivered from the bondage of 
Sin and Death; that God's beloved Son, Jesus, became a 
man and grew to manhood's estate, was put to death as 
a man and raised again from the dead a spirit-being, possessing 
the Divine nature; that by His death and resurrection 
Christ Jesus provided and produced the Ransom-price 
for man's deliverance and restoration; that Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man; 
that every man in God's due time must, therefore, have a 
fair trial for life, and to this end there shall be a resurrection 
of all the dead; that Jesus Christ ascended into 
Heaven and must come the second time; that the period of 
time elapsing between the First and the Second Coming of 
the Lord is devoted to the election of the members of the 
Body of Christ, taken from amongst men; that the requirements 
for election to that exalted position are, full 
faith in the shed blood of Jesus as the Ransom-price, a 
full consecration to do the Father's will, and a faithful 
continuance in obedience to the Father's will even unto 
death; that all who thus are consecrated and begotten of 
the Holy Spirit and are overcomers shall have part 
in the Chief Resurrection, and be exalted to positions in 
the Heavenly Kingdom of God and participate with Christ 
Jesus in His Millennial Reign for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth; that during the thousand-year 
reign of Christ all of the dead shall be awakened, and 
given a fair and impartial trial for life or death; that 
under said Reign the wilfully disobedient shall be everlastingly 



destroyed, while those obedient to the righteous 
rule of Christ shall be fully restored to human perfection 
of body, mind and character; that during this Millennial 
Reign the earth shall be brought to a state of Edenic 

R5998 : page 357 

Paradise and made fit as a place habitable for perfect 
man; that man, fully restored to perfection, will inhabit 
the beautiful earth in all the ages to come. 

HIS WORK 

Seeing that God has such a wonderful Plan for the 
blessing of mankind. Pastor Russell gave all of his power 
and energy to making known these great truths to the 
world. He never took a vacation; he worked until the 
day of his death. 

Like other Christians he was looking for the Second 
Coming of Christ. Between 1872-6 he discovered 
that the Scriptures clearly teach that the Lord would 
not return in a body of flesh, but would return as a spirit 
being, invisible to human eyes, and that His second 
presence was due in the autumn of 1874. This led to 
the publishing of a booklet entitled, "The Object and 
Manner of Our Lord's Return," which had a phenomenal 
circulation. 

Many students of the Bible throughout the United 
States and Canada responded to the information derived 
from that book, and his correspondence became voluminous. 
Realizing the necessity of keeping the Truth before 
the minds of those who had begun to investigate, in 1879 
he began the publication of THE WATCH TOWER AND 
HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, and was its sole Editor to 
the time of his death. This journal is issued semi-monthly; 
it never publishes advertisements, but is devoted 
exclusively to religious topics. Among the English 
speaking people in the United States, Canada and Great 
Britain, its semi-monthly circulation is 45,000 copies. 
It is also published in German, French, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and Polish, reaching a large number of subscribers 
in America and Europe. 

He was President of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY from its organization in 1884 until his 
death. He was also President of the PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION, organized in 1909, and the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION, incorporated in London, in 
1913, both of the latter corporations being adjuncts to 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. Through 
these religious corporations, as well as by word of mouth, 
he promulgated the Gospel of Messiah's Kingdom. He 
was the author of the following publications, issued between 
the years 1881 and 1914, each having phenomenal 
circulation, as given below: 

FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS 1,450,000 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS 1,000,000 

DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES 4,817,000 

THE TIME IS AT HAND 1,657,000 

THY KINGDOM COME 1,578,000 

BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON 464,000 

THE ATONEMENT 445,000 

THE NEW CREATION 423,000 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL 3,000,000 

He was also the author of WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES 
ABOUT SPIRITISM, OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, et cetera, 
et cetera. He was the author of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION, which had been exhibited prior to his death to 
more than nine million persons. He wrote and published 
the SCENARIO of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, which 
has had a very wide circulation. His publications were 
translated into thirty-five different languages. At the 
same time he was Pastor of more than 1.200 congregations 
of Bible Students, in different parts of the world. 
These he visited and taught as often as possible. 

He organized and conducted a Lecture Bureau which 
constantly employed seventy Bible lecturers, who traveled 
and delivered lectures on the Scriptures. He organized 
and managed an auxiliary lecture bureau of seven hundred 
men who gave a portion of their time to lecturing 
on Bible teachings. Each year he wrote practically all 
of the copy for the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, the annual 
distribution of which amounted to approximately 
fifty million copies. 

His weekly sermons were handled by a newspaper 
syndicate. More than 2,000 newspapers, with a combined 
circulation of fifteen million readers, at one time published 
his discourses. All told, more than 4,000 newspapers 
published these sermons. 

The Continent, a publication whose editor often opposed 
Pastor Russell, once published the following significant 
statement concerning him: 

"His writings are said to have greater newspaper circulation 
every week than those of any other living man; 
a greater, doubtless, than the combined circulation of the 
writings of all the priests and preachers in North America; 
greater even than the work of Arthur Brisbane, 
Norman Hapgood, George Horace Lorimer, Dr. Frank 
Crane, Frederick Haskins, and a dozen other of the best 
known editors and syndicate writers put together." 

HARVEST WORK 

Pastor Russell adhered closely to the teachings of the 
Scriptures. He believed and taught that we are living 
in the time of the second presence of our Lord, and 
that His presence dates from 1874; that since that time 
we have been living in the "time of the end"— the "end 
of the Age," during which the Lord has been conducting 
His great Harvest work; that, in harmony with 
the Lord's own statement, this Harvest work is separating 



true Christians designated as "wheat," from 

merely professing Christians, designated as "tares," and 

gathering the true saints into the Kingdom of the Lord. 

It is here interesting to note that Jesus said, "Who then 

is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath made 

ruler over His Household, to give them meat in due season? 

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when He 

cometh, shall find so doing! Verily I say unto you that 

He shall make him ruler over all His goods." Thousands 

of the readers of Pastor Russell's writings believe 

that he filled the office of "that faithful and wise servant," 

and that his great work was giving to the Household of 

Faith meat in due season. His modesty and humility 

precluded him from openly claiming this title, but he admitted 

as much in private conversation. For a more detailed 

account of his work, reference is made to THE 

WATCH TOWER of June 1st, 1916. 

In 1910 Pastor Russell visited Palestine and Russia. 
He there orally delivered lectures to thousands of orthodox 
Jews on the regathering of Jews to Palestine. In 
1911 he was one of a committee of seven who made a 
journey around the world and especially examined into 
the conditions of missionary work in Japan, China, Korea 
and India. On the same occasion he again visited the 
Jews in Palestine and Galatia, explaining to them that 
the prophecies teach that the Jews at an early date will 
again be established in Palestine. On his return to America 
he was given a great ovation at the New York City 
Hippodrome by thousands of Jews, his discourse on this 
occasion being published by Hebrew papers both in America 
and in Europe. 

During the 42 years of Pastor Russell's Christian work 
he never directly or indirectly solicited money. No collection 
was ever taken at any meeting addressed by him 
or by any of his associates. He had faith that the Lord 
would supply sufficient money to carry on His work; that 
the work was the Lord's, and not man's. The fact that 
voluntary contributions were liberally made by many persons 
throughout the world proved that his conclusions 
were correct. 

He devoted his private fortune entirely to the cause 
to which he gave his life. He received the nominal sum 
of $1 1.00 per month for his personal expenses. He died, 
leaving no estate whatsoever. 

Thus closed the career of a most remarkable man. 
He was loved most by those who knew him best. 



R5999 : page 358 

WILL AND TESTAMENT OF CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL 

Having at various times during past years donated to 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY all of my personal 
possessions except a small personal bank account of 



approximately two hundred dollars, in the Exchange National 
Bank of Pittsburgh, which will properly be paid over to my 
wife if she survives me, I have merely love and Christian 
good wishes to leave to all of the dear members of the Bible 
House Family— and all other dear colaborers in the Harvest 
work— yea, for all of the household of faith in every place 
who call upon the name of the Lord Jesus as their Redeemer. 

However, in view of the fact that in donating the journal, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, the OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY and 
the copyrights of the MILLENNIAL DAWN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Books and various other booklets, hymn-books, etc., to the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, I did so with the 
explicit understanding that I should have full control of all 
the interests of these publications during my life time, and 
that after my decease they should be conducted according to 
my wishes. I now herewith set forth the said wishes— my 
will respecting the same— as follows: 

AN EDITORIAL COMMITTEE OF FIVE 

I direct that the entire editorial charge of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER shall be in the hands of a committee of five brethren, 
whom I exhort to great carefulness and fidelity to the Truth. 
All articles appearing in the columns of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
shall have the unqualified approval of at least three of the 
committee of five, and I urge that if any matter approved 
by three be known or supposed to be contrary to the views 
of one or both of the other members of the committee, such 
articles shall be held over for thought, prayer and discussion 
for three months before being published— that so far as possible 
the unity of the faith and the bonds of peace may be 
maintained in the Editorial management of the journal. 

The names of the Editorial Committee (with such changes 
as may from time to time occur) shall all be published in 
each number of the journal— but it shall not in any manner 
be indicated by whom the various articles appearing in the 
journal are written. It will be sufficient that the fact be 
recognized that the articles are approved by the majority of 
the committee. 

As the Society is already pledged to me that it will publish 
no other periodicals, it shall also be required that the 
Editorial Committee shall write for or be connected with 
no other publications in any manner or degree. My object 
in these requirements is to safeguard the committee and the 
journal from any spirit of ambition or pride or headship, 
and that the Truth may be recognized and appreciated for its 
own worth, and that the Lord may more particularly be recognized 
as the Head of the Church and the Fountain of Truth. 

Copies of my Sunday discourses published in the daily 
newspapers covering a period of several years have been 
preserved and may be used as editorial matter for The 
WATCH TOWER or not, as the committee may think best, but 
my name shall not be attached nor any indication whatever 
given respecting the authorship. 

Those named below as members of the Editorial Committee 
(subject to their acceptance) are supposed by me to 



be thoroughly loyal to the doctrines of the Scriptures— 
especially so to the doctrine of the Ransom— that there is no 
acceptance with God and no salvation to eternal life except 
through faith in Christ and obedience to His Word and its 
spirit. If any of the designated ones shall at any time find 
themselves out of harmony with this provision they will be 
violating their consciences and hence committing sin if they 
continue to remain members of this Editorial Committee- 
knowing that so to do would be contrary to the spirit and 
intention of this provision. 

The Editorial Committee is self-perpetuating, in that should 
one of these members die or resign, it will be the duty of 
the remainder to elect his successor, that the journal may 
never have an issue without a full Editorial Committee of 
five. I enjoin upon the committee named great caution in 
respect to the election of others to their number— that purity 
of life, clearness in the Truth, zeal for God, love for the 
brethren and faithfulness to the Redeemer shall be prominent 
characteristics of the one elected. In addition to the five 
named for the committee I have named five others from 
whom I prefer that selection should be made for any vacancies 
in the Editorial Committee, before going outside for a 
general selection— unless in the interim, between the making 
of this Will and the time of my death, something should 
occur which would seem to indicate these as less desirable 
or others more desirable for filling the vacancies mentioned. 
The names of the Editorial Committee are as follows: 
WILLIAM E. PAGE, 
WILLIAM E. VAN AMBURGH, 
HENRY CLAY ROCKWELL, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN, 

F. H. ROBISON. 

The names of the five whom I suggest as possibly amongst 
the most suitable from which to fill vacancies in the Editorial 
Committee are as follows: A. E. Burgess, Robert Hirsh, 
Isaac Hoskins, Geo. H. Fisher (Scranton), J. F. Rutherford, 
Dr. John Edgar. 

The following announcement shall appear in each issue of 
THE WATCH TOWER, followed by the names of the Editorial 
Committee: 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

This journal is published under the supervision of 
an Editorial Committee, at least three of whom must 
have read and have approved as TRUTH each and every 
article appearing in these columns. The names of the 
Committee now serving are: (names to follow.) 

As for compensation, I think it wise to maintain the Society's 
course of the past in respect to salaries— that none be 
paid; that merely reasonable expenses be allowed to those 
who serve the Society or its work in any manner. In harmony 
with the course of the Society, I suggest that the provision 
for the Editorial Committee, or the three that shall 
be actively engaged, shall consist of not more than a provision 
for their food and shelter and ten dollars per month. 



with such a moderate allowance for wife or children or 
others dependent upon them for support as the Society's 
Board of Directors shall consider proper, just, reasonable— 
that no provision be made for the laying up of money. 

I desire that the OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY continue to 
appear as at present, so far as the opportunities for distribution 
and the laws of the land will permit, and that its issues 
shall consist of reprints from the old issues of THE WATCH 
TOWER or extracts from my discourses, but that no name 
shall appear in connection with the matter unless the same 
is required by law. 

It is my wish that the same rules apply to the German, 
the French, the Italian, the Danish and the Swedish or any 
other foreign publications controlled or supported by the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

I will that a copy of this paper be sent to each one whose 
name has appeared above as of the Editorial Committee or 
the list from whom others of that committee may be chosen 
to fill vacancies and also to each member of the Board of 
Directors of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 
This shall be done immediately on my death being reported, 
so that within a week, if possible, the persons named as of 
the Editorial Committee may be heard from, their communications 
being addressed to the Vice-President of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY-whoever may be holding 
that office at that time. The answers of those appointed shall 
be to the point, indicating their acceptance or rejection of 
the provisions and terms specified. A reasonable time shall 
be allowed for any one mentioned who may be absent from 
the city or from the country. Meantime the remainder of 
the committee of at least three shall proceed to act in their 
capacity as editors. It shall be the duty of the officers of 
the Society to provide the necessary arrangements for these 
members of the Editorial Committee and to assist them in 
their duties in every possible manner, in compliance with 
the engagements made with me bearing on this matter. 

I have already donated to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY all my voting shares therein, putting the same 
in the hands of five Trustees, as follows: Sr. E. Louise Hamilton, 
Sr. Almeta M. Nation Robison, Sr. J. G. Herr, Sr. C. 
Tomlins, Sr. Alice G. James. 

R5999 : page 359 

These Trustees shall serve for life. In event of deaths 
or resignations successors shall be chosen by the WATCH 
TOWER SOCIETY Directors and Editorial Committee and the 
remaining Trustees after prayer for Divine guidance. 

I now provide for the impeachment and dismissal from 
the Editorial Committee of any member thereof found to be 
unworthy the position by reason of either doctrinal or moral 
laches, as follows: 

At least three of the Board must unite in bringing the impeachment 
charges, and the Board of Judgment in the matter 

shall consist of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S 
trustees and the five trustees controlling my voting 



shares and the Editorial Committee, excepting the accused. 
Of these sixteen members at least thirteen must favor the 
impeachment and dismissal in order to effect the same. 

R6000 : page 359 



DIRECTIONS FOR FUNERAL 

I desire to be buried in the plot of ground owned by our 
Society, in the Rosemont United Cemetery, and all the details 
of arrangements respecting the funeral service I leave 
in the care of my sister, Mrs. M. M. Land, and her daughters, 
Alice and May, or such of them as may survive me, with 
the assistance and advice and cooperation of the brethren, 
as they may request the same. Instead of an ordinary funeral 
discourse, I request that they arrange to have a number of 
the brethren, accustomed to public speaking, make a few 
remarks each, that the service be very simple and inexpensive 
and that it be conducted in the Bible House Chapel or 
any other place that may be considered equally appropriate 
or more so. 

MY LEGACY OF LOVE 

To the dear "Bethel" family collectively and individually 
I leave my best wishes, in hoping for them of the Lord His 
blessing, which maketh rich and addeth no sorrow. The 
same I extend in a still broader sweep to all the family of 
the Lord in every place— especially to those rejoicing in the 
Harvest Truth. I entreat you all that you continue to 
progress and to grow in grace, in knowledge, and above all 
in love, the great fruit of the Spirit in its various diversified 
forms. I exhort to meekness, not only with the world, but 
with one another; to patience with one another and with all 
men, to gentleness with all, to brotherly kindness, to godliness, 
to purity. I remind you that all these things are 
necessary for us, necessary that we may attain the promised 
Kingdom, and that the Apostle has assured us that if we do 
these things we shall never fail, but that "so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

It is my wish that this my last Will and Testament be published 
in the issue of THE WATCH TOWER following my death. 

My hope for myself, as for all the dear Israel of God, 
is that soon we shall meet to part no more, in the First 
Resurrection, in the Master's presence, where there is fulness 
of joy forevermore. We shall be satisfied when we awake 
in His likeness— 

"Changed from glory unto glory." 

(Signed) CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL. 

PUBLISHED AND DECLARED IN THE PRESENCE OF THE WITNESSES 
WHOSE NAMES ARE ATTACHED: 

MAE F. LAND, 



M. ALMETA NATION, 
LAURA M. WHITEHOUSE. 

DONE AT ALLEGHENY, PA., JUNE TWENTY-NINE, NINETEEN HUNDRED 
AND SEVEN. 



R6000 : page 359 

THE FUNERAL SERVICES 

The remains of Pastor Russell— announcement of 
whose death was published in the last issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER— arrived in New York from the West on Friday 
morning, November 3, accompanied by his traveling secretary, 
Menta Sturgeon. 

When the body reached Chicago, a large number of 
friends had assembled at the station, and as it was necessary 
to transfer the casket from one depot to another, 
a long procession of automobiles bearing the sorrowing 
friends formed and followed through the city. The 
casket was opened during the delay here, and many took 
the last look at him whom they knew so well and loved 
so much. From Chicago the body was accompanied by 
a delegation, delegations from other cities joining en 
route to New York. 

The remains reached the Bethel Home on Saturday, 
where they were viewed by the Family and by members 
of the Congregation. On Sunday morning they were removed 
to The Temple and lay in state until 10 o'clock in 
the evening. Thousands saw them here for the last time. 

All day Saturday and Sunday representatives of congregations 
in many of the cities east of the Mississippi 
and in Canada arrived on almost every incoming train. 
The Temple was inadequate to accommodate them all. 
The lecture room below was opened for the overflow. 
Every inch of available space was occupied from the basement 
to and including the second balcony. 

Two services had been announced for The Temple- 
one to be held in the afternoon for the friends, the other 
for the public in the evening. But in view of the rapidly 
increasing numbers, the Committee of Arrangements 
provided an additional service, to be held on Sunday morning. 
The speaker was Brother Macmillan, whose remarks 
will be found elsewhere. 

The afternoon service, which had been especially announced 
for the friends, was opened with a solo, "Be 
Thou Faithful Unto Death." These words were especially 
impressive, because one of the most beautiful floral 
designs surrounding the casket bore a broad white ribbon 
on which were the words of this beautiful hymn. The 
other hymns were 23, "Blest be the tie that binds," so 
frequently used by the classes and by conventions when 
welcoming Brother Russell in their midst; and No. 273, 
"Sun of my soul, my Father dear," one of Brother Russell's 



favorite hymns. 

Each speaker, when he had completed his remarks 
at the side of the casket in the main Auditorium, proceeded 
to the lecture room below and repeated the same 
address to the friends crowding the smaller Auditorium. 
All of the addresses— seventeen in number— appear in this 
issue of THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE FLORAL DISPLAY 

Elsewhere in THE WATCH TOWER will be found a full-page 
view of the floral display on the rostrum. It was the 
finest we have ever seen on such an occasion. The scene 
surpassed description. The rostrum of The Temple was 
so completely occupied by plants, ferns, flowers and a most 
wonderful collection of appropriate floral designs as to 
leave barely room enough for the speakers and the remains 
of our beloved Pastor. Moreover, the entire facing 
of every balcony and box was artistically decorated with 
a great variety of ferns and flowers. 

At the foot of the casket was placed a broken pillar 
of flowers, fittingly representing that dear body which, 
like the Lord's body, had been broken in the service of 
the brethren; while at the head was a magnificent floral 
cross and crown, the cross symbolizing his share in the 
death of Christ, and the crown symbolizing the Crown of 
Glory, which we believe he now wears with our dear 
Lord in Heaven. 

The rostrum was not large enough to contain all the 
floral designs, nor was there space available in the interior 
of The Temple to display all the floral contributions. 
But however beautiful and numerous all these were, they 

R6000 : page 360 

but very imperfectly represented the degree of love and 
esteem in which our departed Pastor was held by all who 
knew him well. 

The Committee of Arrangements were of course desirous 
of following Brother Russell's suggestion in his 
Will, and to this end requested several brethren to speak 
at the services. Among these were A.H. MacMillan, 
Menta Sturgeon, W.E. Van Amburgh, P.S.L. Johnson, 
E.W.V. Kuehn, Toledo, O.; C.A. Wise, Indianapolis, 
Ind.; J.T.D. Pyles, Washington, D.C.; I.I. Margeson, 
Boston, Mass.; F.W. Manton, Toronto, Canada; C.B. 
Shull, Columbus, Ohio; G.C. Driscoll, Dayton, Ohio; Dr. 
L.W. Jones, Chicago, III.; D. Kihlgren, Springfield, 
Mass.; Dr. A.E. McCosh, Detroit, Mich.; C.J. Woodworth, 
Scranton, Pa.; George Draper, Wichita, Kansas; 
C.H. Anderson, Baltimore, Md.; W.L. Abbott, St. Paul, 
Minn.; and J.D. Ross, Truro, N.S. But to have carried 
out the program in its entirety would have consumed considerable 
more time, and as The Temple was so crowded 
that many were obliged to stand for hours, it was deemed 
wise to reduce the number of speakers. The addresses 



/ 



s 



m 



y 



4*y 




fit* 



i 




-*ft^ 




> 



< 






*^^ 




ii*HU£:V»' 



* 



fffi 






- 



A 



, 




4 »■ 



!»■!■ 



. 






of those at the three services follow in regular order: 



R6000 : page 360 

ADDRESS AT MORNING SERVICE 
BY A. H. MACMILLAN-NEW YORK 

I am satisfied that I am expressing the sentiments of all 
present when I say that if the English language contains 
words capable of describing our feelings at the present 
time, we have not learned them yet. We are happy and 
sad, confused and perplexed; yet the way is clear— and we 
are glad! Death invariably causes a gloom wherever its 
clammy hand appears; yet, as the Apostle Paul expresses 
it, "We sorrow not as those that have no hope." Our 
glorious hope buoys us up in this trial hour, and we are 
happy because we know our Beloved Pastor is even now 
with the Lord. Numerous questions crowd themselves into 
our minds: We wonder if the work will continue in the 
future as it has in the past; whether the waters of Jordan 
will be "smitten"; who will write the Seventh Volume; to 
whom shall we go with our perplexing trials and difficulties 
as individuals and as ecclesias? It is my purpose to attempt 
to answer briefly some of these questions by relating to you 
the arrangements made by our dear Pastor before his death. 

Following the Newport Convention in July, Brother Russell 
had a serious sick spell, during which illness he called 
me to the Study and spent three and a half hours outlining 
the work that he felt was yet to be done, and endeavoring 
to make plans to carry it on. He asked me then if I would 

R6001 : page 360 

like to come back to Brooklyn and help in the work of the 
Home and Tabernacle. I gave him my reply later, offering 
my services to do what I could to help him and the other 
friends there. He told me at that time that he realized 
his strength was rapidly ebbing away and that he would 
not be with us much longer. 

From that time on it seemed to be Brother Russell's purpose 
to place much more responsibility on the heads 
of the various departments in the Tabernacle and Bethel 
work. Just before he departed upon his last trip he did 
something he was never known to do before; viz., to write 
letters to the different friends in charge of the various departments 
of the work, outlining their duties to them. Upon 
his departure he asked me to ride with him in the taxi to 
the depot. On this ride he affectionately placed his hand on 
my knee and said, "What do you think of those letters I 
have written?" I replied that I considered superhuman 
wisdom directed him in writing them and that to my understanding 
the organization for the work here was complete. 
He said, "I am glad. Brother; for no one can work without 



an organization. Now that you have my plans before you, 
proceed and do your best." Later on he wrote a letter home 
numbering the tables in the dining room, and designating 
who would serve at the head of each table. Thus you see 
that everything that he thought could be done to organize 
matters, to the end that they might run smoothly, was done. 

Respecting the continuance of THE WATCH TOWER: An 
Editorial Staff of five brethren has been appointed, and 
sufficient matter prepared to last for an indefinite period, 
so that we can continue to read the Lord's message through 
our Pastor as published in THE WATCH TOWER, even though 
he is not present with us in the flesh. It appears clear 
now that the Lord left our Beloved Pastor with us to the end 
that he might, as did St. Paul in his day, "bear the Church 
in birth until Christ would be formed" in us; and now that 
we should be able to stand without an earthly leader, the 
Lord has removed the faithful one He placed over us. 

The work before us is great, but the Lord will give us 
the necessary grace and strength to perform it. The Prophet 
Zechariah clearly indicated this course when he said that the 
Lord would smite the man that was His fellow, even as He 
smote the Shepherd. As Jesus quoted a portion of this text 
and applied it to His own experiences, we believe the remainder 
of the text is being fulfilled now. When Jesus, 
the Shepherd, was smitten, the sheep were scattered abroad 
and were rent, torn and greatly perplexed until they were 
gathered at Pentecost and endued with power to go on with 
the work. We notice in this connection, however, that following 
the smiting of the Lord's "fellow," there would be 
no scattering of the sheep, but the reverse— the "Hand" or 
power of the great Jehovah God would rest upon the little 
ones left over.— Zech. 13:7. 

And now, dear friends, what are we to think about 
this matter? The Lord has taken away our earthly leader; 
and some faint-hearted workers may think the time has 
come to lay clown our harvesting instruments and wait until 
the Lord calls us home. This is not the time for slackers to 
be heard. This is a time for action— more determined action 
than ever before! Let us, by God's grace, resolve that we 
will take up the work where our Beloved Pastor left it, and 
with determined purpose keep high aloft the banner of Truth, 
until the waters of Jordan have been smitten and divided 
asunder, and the last member of the Elijah class has been 
taken to Heavenly glory. May the Lord help us all as we 
endeavor to serve Him! 



R6001 : page 360 

ADDRESSES AT AFTERNOON SERVICE 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S LAST DAYS-BY MENTA STURGEON-NEW YORK 

On Monday afternoon, October 16th, at five o'clock, 
Brother Russell left the Bethel Home for the last time. 



At the noon hour he informed the dearest family (to him) 
on earth that he expected to be absent from them for a 
short time, and expressed for them the hope that during 
his absence they might be happy and prosperous under the 
blessings of the Lord. He also said that he expected that 
he and the one accompanying him would enjoy themselves 
in the Lord's service. Then, while he and the family stood 
at their places, he offered a solemn prayer, beginning with 
the words: 

"O Lord, Thy promised grace impart. 

And fill each consecrated heart!" 
and quietly withdrew to his Study. There he dictated nine 
letters, giving instructions to various ones respecting their 
duties. At the appointed hour he went forth, never more 
to return, saying "goodby" to the friends in the hall as he 
passed out and started for the station. 

When the Lehigh Valley train pulled out of Jersey City 
at six o'clock p. m., it carried away our precious Brother 
on his last pilgrim journey, which was to end in Heaven. 
Having held public meetings at Providence and Fall River 
the day previous, he was tired to start with, and consequently 
did not dictate on the train that evening, as was 
his custom. In fact, he retired earlier than usual, saying 
"Good-night" as he did so. In the morning, in answer to 
the question as to how he rested, he gave his usual answer 

R6001 : page 361 

during his recent trips, "On both sides," meaning, of course, 
that he changed sides frequently during the night. 

He often told us of late that he scarcely slept at all, 
was awake every hour of the night, and thought pretty 
much day and night. He had the care of all the churches 
upon his heart, and his physical ailments would not permit 
much rest. He always ate sparingly, and would carefully 
note the effect of everything he ate or drank. Frequently 
would lie divide his portion with his companion, in order 
to economize. It was his invariable custom to return thanks 
before all meals, whether in hotels, on trains, or where not. 
He had a beautiful way of making the one who traveled with 
him feel at ease, and not consider himself merely as a servant, 
by handing him enough money at the beginning of the journey 
to cover all his incidental expenses during the trip. He 
would then arrange that we pay each other's expenses alternately; 
he paying all expenses for both one day, and his companion 
paying all expenses for both the next day, and so 
on during the entire trip. 

On Tuesday morning we passed over the line into Canada; 
and he wittily inquired, "Did you not feel the bridge bulge 
in the center as we crossed over?" Respecting Canada he 
said, "They will not molest us so long as we are just 
passing through; and as to visiting Canada, I have no desire 
to do so if they do not want me." On two previous occasions 
he had had severe trials in Hamilton, Ontario; but 
on this occasion he did not even recognize Hamilton as 
we passed through. We changed trains, and also our 



watches, at London; and ere long made our first stop, Detroit, 
on Tuesday afternoon. It was at this point that 
Brother Russell's trials began; and they grew steadily deeper 
and severer until the end of the way. He was physically weak 
and weary, yet listened patiently to a brother's grievances 
as he recited them, and then did what he could to reconcile 
two brethren. The chauffeur took us to the wrong place 
and consumed valuable time. Our street car connections 
were poorly made. A matter of the greatest importance in 
connection with the Harvest work fell flat. He was much 
disappointed and perplexed. 

DIFFICULTIES ON THE WAY 

Aboard the Pere Marquette en route for Lansing, Mich., 
he remarked, "We did not expect that we would be traveling 
together to Lansing when first we met"; and the listener 
was surprised to find that he well remembered our 
first meeting together years ago, in Allegheny. This was 
his way of showing his interest in and love for the one 
whom he had taken with him from Bethel to accompany 
him on this last journey. The public meeting at Lansing 
was well attended; but, for some reason, the interest 
waned and many left; so much so, that Brother Russell 
spoke of it afterwards, and seemed puzzled. At the railroad 
station he conversed with a dear brother on business 
matters until midnight, when he remarked that he would 
have to retire. 

The next morning, Wednesday, at seven o'clock we expected 
to be in Chicago, but found ourselves instead side-tracked 
at Kalamazoo, without any reliable information as 
to what to expect. The wreckage of a freight train during 
the night had caused the delay, we were informed, and a 
detour of fifty miles would be necessary to enable us to reach 
our destination. There was no dining car on the train, and 
neither could we secure anything to eat on account of uncertainties. 
It was at this point that a box of peanut butter 
sandwiches, which had been given to us by a thoughtful 
friend in Brooklyn, came in just right. It made our breakfast, 
and afterwards our lunch. Reaching Chicago some 
six and a half hours late, we found that we had missed 
our connections for Springfield and would consequently be 
unable to make the appointment for that place, even though 
we figured every possible way. It was at Chicago that his 
physical endurance was taxed to the limit. Circumstances 
made it necessary for us to walk several miles, until the 
writer was growing weary and was sure that Brother Russell 
must be worn out also, although no remarks of the 
kind passed between us. All of this occurred after a few 
hours' rest during the previous night and with but little to eat. 

It was in the Union Station at Chicago, while making 
preparations for leaving on the Wednesday evening train 

R6002: page 361 

for Kansas City via Springfield, that a lady from the South, 



who had been visiting with her daughter and her son in 

Chicago for some time, came up to Brother Russell, introduced 

herself as the daughter of a certain lady who had 

formerly lived in Allegheny, who was a believer in the 

Truth, and whose funeral Brother Russell had conducted. 

She explained that, while she was not "one of us" in the 

fullest sense, yet she believed, and was especially interested 

in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION-so much so that she was 

writing a book on it, calling it The Golden Age; and she 

desired to have a copy of the SCENARIO. This SCENARIO was 

both promised and sent. Brother Russell, as usual, inquired 

respecting the consecration of herself and daughter, and they 

expressed themselves as seriously considering the matter. 

How many times have I heard him ask people on the trains, 
in the stations, hotels, everywhere, "Are you consecrated?" 
He nearly always brought this in. He had many opportunities; 
for people recognized him everywhere and desired 
to speak or have a few words with him. People on the 
train knew him— brakemen, porters, conductors and passengers. 
In the stations, hotels, on the streets, everywhere, he 
was recognized. Many a time people came to me on the train 
and inquired. "Is that not Pastor Russell? and would say. 
"I knew him by his picture in the paper," or "I heard him 
lecture at such and such a place." Sometimes they would 
inquire just after he had walked through the train, "Who 
is that distinguished gentleman with you'.'" In this way 
we were able to send out many First Volumes and other 
printed matter of the Society. 

LOSS OF BROTHER RUSSELL'S VALISE 

It was toward midnight when we reached Springfield, 
where tickets would have to be procured. Brother Russell 
sat up late and intended to stay up until we reached Springfield; 
but, responding to gentle persuasion, he left the matters 
to be attended to in my hands, and retired. It was a 
rainy, cold night; but still there were faithful friends waiting 
at the station in order to give him his mail and have a few 
words with him. They were satisfied when we explained 
the conditions to them, gave the writer Brother Russell's 
mail and sent much Christian love to him, which he much 
appreciated. The brother who substituted for Brother Russell 
at Springfield said that the friends had encountered 
less objection in preparing for the public lecture than at 
any previous time; and he attributed this to the good 
and thorough work done on a previous visit, when Brother 
Russell spoke at the State Fair. 

At Kansas City on Thursday morning we encountered 
so many difficulties in purchasing tickets for the West that 
it became necessary that I make a trip up into the city 
through the rain, and with such delay that Brother Russell 
did here what we had never before known him to do; 
viz., run to catch a train. We are saying these things to 
show how different this trip was from anything that had 
ever preceded it, and how his trials increased as he proceeded 
on his journey. We reached Wichita Thursday afternoon 



in time for an afternoon meeting; but it, with other 
work in Wichita, was more or less interfered with by the 
loss of Brother Russell's valise. The dear brother who 
took it in charge, in getting his auto ready, placed the valise 
on the foot-board, and in starting off, forgot to take it in 
with him, with the result that it fell off somewhere between 
the station and the place of meeting. This caused the writer 
to leave off taking notes of the discourse, and go back with 
the brother in an effort to locate the lost article. We did 
everything we could, to no avail, and finally inserted a 
notice in the newspaper offering a reward to anyone who 
would return the grip. 

We remained over the next day in the hope of getting 
it, and in the meantime made some necessary purchases of 
articles that Brother Russell would need on the journey. 
The public meeting was held at night, after which he was 
quite tired. The next morning he was later than usual 
in coming from his room; but after breakfast we worked 
together until noon on some documents and letters that 
he had previously dictated. It was here that a traveling 
salesman of fine appearance introduced himself to Brother 

R6002 : page 362 

Russell as interested in his writings. He proved to be the 
son of a prominent minister in Allegheny who, at one 
time, bitterly opposed Brother Russell and the work he 
was doing. This gentleman's wife was also interested; and 
we afterwards met her at the public meeting in Dallas, 
Texas. Having done everything we could to locate the missing 
valise, we finally gave up the search, and were shortly 
on the train en route for the Dallas Convention. 

EXPERIENCES AT DALLAS 

As we arrived at Fort Worth at an early hour, it was 
not convenient for the friends to meet us, and we took the 
Electric for Dallas. The State Fair at Dallas was in progress, 
and every hotel was crowded. On account of Brother 
Russell's physical condition we were obliged to leave the 
car before reaching Dallas; so that when we came in by 
foot, after walking some seven blocks through crowded 
streets, all connections with the brethren were broken. After 
some difficulty they found us. The hotels were all over-crowded; 
we were consequently taken to a private rooming 
house, where several of the brethren attending the Convention 
were located. There we remained Saturday and Sunday, 
until our departure for his next appointment. 

Brother Russell closed the Dallas Convention with a Love 
Feast and was much impressed with the earnestness and 
evident sincerity of the friends there. That night he spoke 
to the public for two and a half hours, during the course of 
which talk there was no little confusion on the rear of the 
stage by the coming and going of a theatrical troupe that was 
to play in the theater that night. One of the members of this 
troop recognized Pastor Russell as the speaker and asked 



permission to join in the closing song. He had a strong, 
mellow voice, and joined heartily in singing, "All hail the 
power of Jesus' name!" After a little rest at the nearest 
hotel, several of us walked to the station, and there had to 
work our way slowly through the jam as best we could, it 
taking us fully a half-hour to reach our train after arriving 
at the station. Boarding the train at Dallas that night, 
October 22d, Brother Russell was tired, and his head was 
aching. Some medicine was taken, and he retired. 

Upon arriving in Galveston the next morning, he was not 
well by any means; but the brethren having arranged for 
a morning meeting, he consented to speak to the friends 
at 1 1:30, following a discourse by Brother Sturgeon. It 
was at this meeting that he did something we never knew 
him to do before. He wrote on a piece of paper his text 
and one verse of a song, and told the friends that he 
had done so that he might make no mistake. This paper 
is now before us and reads: 

"WHEN YE SEE THESE THINGS begin to come to pass, 
then lift up your heads and rejoice, knowing that your 
deliverance draweth nigh." 

"Then let our songs abound. 

And every tear be dry; 

We're traveling through Immanuel's ground, 

To fairer prospects nigh." 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S LAST MEAL 

This discourse was taken down, and will be printed in 
due time. The last letters Brother Russell dictated were 
just before going to this meeting. After it was over the 
brethren gave him a drive down the Sea Wall Boulevard; 
and he seemed to enjoy the balmy sea breeze and the beautiful, 
rolling waters of the Gulf of Mexico. During the little 
outing on the Boulevard, a dear brother laid before Brother 
Russell his troubles and received advice. There were 
nine brethren who took dinner with us that day at the 
Hotel Galvez; and he answered their questions, and seemed 
to enjoy the fellowship and the meal. This proved to be 
the last meal that Brother Russell ate. Hereafter it was 
to be a little fruit juice, a swallow or two of a soft-boiled 
egg, or something like that. 

We were presently off for the public meeting in Galveston, 
which was held in a capacious, beautiful auditorium; 
but, it being Monday afternoon, not more than 500 were 
present. However, he had to work just as hard, and even 
harder, and was very tired at the close. Going by auto 
to the Post Office and then to the train, the friends were 
there to talk and ask questions until time for leaving, 
he, in the meantime, eating nothing. At 7:45 we were at 
Houston, and there were eager, earnest friends waiting for 
him, who accompanied him to a well-filled auditorium containing 
some 1,200 people, to whom he spoke for about two 
and a half hours, making a total of six hours talking on 
Monday, Oct. 23d. Was he tired? Was he worn and weary? 

Traveling all night then and reaching the home of Sister 



Frost Tuesday morning, it was not surprising to find him 
in much physical pain. His labors were telling on him more 
than ever. His overworked body began to break at its weakest 
point. Cystitis was becoming acute. We secured various 
things for him that morning— in fact, everything he wished, 
and he seemed to know exactly what to get and do. He 
worked faithfully on his case all morning; and although we 
had gone to see a doctor who was somewhat interested in 
the Truth and who would gladly have called to see him, 
yet it was not his wish. He appreciated the kind offer, 
but indicated that he would not need a physician's services. 
He had himself the best knowledge of the case to be had, 
was most skilful in its treatment, and had a servant at 
hand who would do readily and gladly anything he desired. 
This was all he wished. The choicest of fruit was placed 
just outside his door, but he did not touch it. 

R6003 : page 362 

Conditions were getting serious. Brother Russell signed a 
few letters we had written, gave us to understand that we 
were doing a more important work than we realized and 
then had us substitute for him at the 1 1 o'clock meeting at 
the Hall. Sister Frost generously placed her auto at our 
disposal, so that we could easily and quickly go to and fro. 
He went to dinner with us, talked pleasantly to everyone, 
and was as humorous as usual; but he ate nothing, although 
the dinner was excellent. After the meal we went upstairs 
together arm in arm to his room; and after talking for 
awhile, he asked us to take the consecration service at the 
Hall at 3 o'clock. This we did and returned immediately 
to his room. 

I then went to every telegraph office in town in search 
for a telegram which he felt sure would be here from 
Chicago, since we had not received it at Dallas. His valise 
had, however, been received at Dallas. A little girl, having 
found it in Wichita, had held it until she learned what to 
do with it, through the notice we had inserted in the newspaper. 
She received her reward, and was glad. Brother 
Russell was disappointed again and again at not receiving 
certain telegrams. Returning, we remained close to him the 
rest of the day, and in fact, was very close to him for the 
next week. One week thence he would be in glory. 

HIS LAST PUBLIC DISCOURSE 

The night was drawing on. I was seated on the low 
window sill close by his side, my hands rested upon his 
knee and my face was turned up toward his. Love like 
electricity was flowing from face to face and heart to heart. 
We talked in whispered tones; and he said during the quiet, 
lovely conversation, "Dear brother, please remain close tonight 
and be ready to pick up the thread of thought where 
I drop it." All this seemed very unusual, and yet was 
spoken in such a way as not to be disquieting. His companion 
was being deeply impressed, and watched his face. 



eyes and words as with an under-sight. He was meditative. 
He was responsive without saying a word. 

The evening lecture was given in the largest and best 
theater in San Antonio. It is indeed a beautiful structure. 
The dress circle below and the three balconies above were 
filled with earnest, intelligent faces. We have never seen a 
meeting more beautiful. The lecture on the subject of "The 
World on Fire" was begun under the most favorable conditions. 
You can picture it at your best, and you will not 
miss it far. 

When all was in readiness at 8:10, Brother Russell stepped 
to the front of the platform and began his last public discourse. 
The scene was most beautiful and impressive. I was 
seated at his right, behind the screen, and could see every 
motion he made. All went well for about forty-five minutes, 
when I thought I could see that he was going to leave the 
platform. Without any sign of suffering, with perfect self-poise, 
quietly did he walk off the rostrum, while I endeavored 

R6003 : page 363 

to walk on just as orderly and quietly, and, without a word 
of explanation, "picked up the thread where he had dropped 
it." I continued for about five minutes, when he returned, 
at which time it became my privilege to retire as quietly 
as did he, and resume my seat behind the curtain. My 
eyes were riveted upon him for another half hour, when 
he left again and I came on, endeavoring to clinch what he 
had taught them by the use of Elijah as a type. 

He returned the second time, after an absence of seven 
minutes, and proceeded with his discourse. He was telling 
the audience about the formation of the first creed at 
Nicaea, by the Bishops under the direction of the Roman 
Emperor Constantine, when he left again. The thread of 
history was easily gathered up and carried forward for 
about ten minutes, when the thought began to run through 
my mind, "I wonder if he wishes me to close the discourse?" 
Then in our dear teacher came, just in time to bring the 
whole discourse to a fitting close. It was a wonderful climax 
to all his public lectures. He seemed to me to stand in a 
halo of glory. Leading the great audience in singing, "All 
hail the power of Jesus' name," he prayed most impressively, 
and found me waiting for him as he came from the platform. 
He sat in the chair which I had been using; and 
while resting, a friend took several kodak pictures of him. 
They being the last, we hope they may be the best. 

EN ROUTE TO CALIFORNIA 

We were escorted to the train by the one who had entertained 
us in her home and supplied our every need, of 
whom it may be truly said, "She hath done what she could." 
She said that she was glad to break the alabaster box, and 
handed me money enough to secure a Pullman drawing-room 
from San Antonio to our western destination. Brother Russell 
at first refused this, thinking it was too much, but was 



afterwards induced to accept the kind offer, and well he 
did; for that night he was up thirty-six times in seven hours! 

It was just after leaving San Antonio that I had the 
privilege and pleasure of untying and removing his shoes 
for the first time. Hitherto he would not permit this, although 
I had several times made the offer; but now he 
acquiesced readily, and said, in his gracious manner, "Thank 
you!" The next morning he was a sick man, although he 
was not ready to admit it. He kept to his bed all day 
Wednesday. While he lay there in his berth, I took a seat 
on the couch, near him. I watched every move he made, 
stroked his head, and thought what a stupendous amount of 
work that brain had done! Taking his soft, gentle right 
hand and letting it rest in the palm of my left hand, I gently 
stroked it with my right; and thinking of his lecture at San 
Antonio the previous night and of the many times I had seen 
him use that hand so graciously when exposing the errors 
of the creeds of men as contrasted with the Word of God, 
I said to him, "That is the greatest creed-smashing hand I 
ever saw!" He replied that he did not think it would smash 
any more creeds. 

This led me to inquire, "Who will smite the River 
Jordan?" To this he responded, "Some one else can do that." 
"But how about the payment of the penny?" I asked. He 
hesitated for a moment and said, "I don't know." Brother 
Russell was evidently perplexed. We then talked about his 
physical condition. What he said about his sufferings was 
this: "I always thought I should have some severe sufferings 
before I finished my course, but thought when I had 
the trouble in Pittsburgh, that was it. But if the Lord wants 
to add this also, it is all right." 

During the course of this conversation he said, "What 
shall we do?" Prayerfully considering the matter, I said, 
"Well, Brother Russell, you seem to know your case better 
than anyone else could know, and you have thought of 
everything that can be done. Have I done everything that 
you can think of that I ought to do?" His answer will 
never be forgotten. His words were laden with comfort 
ocean-deep, when in a still, small voice he said, "Yes, you 
have; I do not know what I would do without you." 

Every move he made and every word he uttered only 
made me think the deeper, and yet I could hardly think of 
Brother Russell's life coming to a close. My thought was 
his thought, and the thought of all the friends, that he 
would probably be here until the last, and would be translated 
after the work is over. Having this in mind, I answered 
his question by saying, "Since we have done everything 
we know, and you are getting weaker all the time— your 
vitality is being drained while you are eating nothing to 
replenish it— I think that if we return to Brooklyn, you will 
find something there that will put you on your feet again." 
His reply to this suggestion was, "The Lord permitted us to 
make out this route." From this I inferred that he meant: 
The route that we had laid out, and according to which our 
whole schedule had been arranged, represented the will of 
the Lord for us; and we must therefore do our utmost 



in carrying it out. The writer's original thought about this 
route was, that after Brother Russell had had such a heavy, 
strenuous summer season on account of the many Conventions 
attended, it would be better to take the Mallory 
Line Steamer at New York and go all the way to Galveston 
by water; but his objection was that it was too round-about 
and would take too much time. 

DETAINED AT DEL RIO 

We were moving rapidly through southern Texas on 
the Southern Pacific and were approaching Del Rio when we 
learned that a bridge ahead of us had been burned during 
the night and that we would likely be held up for some 
time. Our train halted at Del Rio; and we found ourselves 
in the midst of an encampment of border soldiers. 
The soldiers were marching through the streets, the bands 
were playing, and much noise was made in every direction. 
In addition to this, three train loads of troopers were pulled 
in on the siding near us; and these men, not being permitted 
to leave the trains, were continually yelling and engaging 
in all kinds of frivolities and jokes. This continued 
all through that day and night. Besides, the weather was 
hot down there. But never one word of complaint did 
Brother Russell make. He did not even make mention of 
the soldiers and the noise. 

Del Rio being a town of some 10,000 inhabitants, we 
were able to get a few needful things there. At one time 
we suggested to Brother Russell that he let us go up into the 
town— get the leading doctor, and ascertain his idea of what 
would be the best thing to do in a case similar to his without 
letting him know for whom we were seeking the information; 
but this did not appeal to him to be the proper thing. 
The steward on the dining car knew Brother Russell, came 
in to see him, showed us many kindnesses, and offered to 
do anything he could. The diner was three Pullmans ahead 

R6004 : page 363 

of us. Consequently we had to walk that distance for every 
little thing needed. After one full day's delay we pulled 
out of Del Rio on Thursday morning, and were the first 
ones to pass over the rebuilt bridge. 

When our train began to go over the bridge, we hastened 
in to tell Brother Russell. We reached the drawing-room 
just as our car had come to the middle of the bridge. Upon 
our mentioning it to him, he sat up in bed and looked out 
the window. By that time we were over, whereupon we remarked, 
"Brother Russell, we have often heard you speak 
about the time when we shall pass over the river; and now, 
at last, we are over." A sweet smile came over his face, 
but he said not a word. We began to think that he might 
pass over, but surely not very soon. It was October, and 
it occurred to us that as we were delayed one day before 
passing over the river in southern Texas, so he might tarry 
with us one prophetic day and pass over by October, 1917. 



With these thoughts running through our mind, we were 
doing our best to serve our dear, patient, uncomplaining, 
appreciative Brother Russell in every way we could. It 
was difficult to give him a drink of water without spilling 
it except we first raised him. There was plenty to do night 
and day, and we esteemed it a great privilege. We often 
thought to be all the more faithful because of the dear 
friends at home. 

On Friday night, when we reached a junction point in 
California where we had to change trains. Brother Russell 
arose and dressed as usual, although, of course, he was 

R6004 : page 364 

very weak. This is just what we thought he would do 
when it came time for his next meeting; for he had often 
done so before. All day Saturday, under severe pain, in 
great weakness, with obstructions piling up before him every 
moment, he struggled with business propositions like a giant. 
We have never seen or heard of anything to equal his heroism. 
Friends had disappointed him, and he wondered if the 
Lord were not against him in some things. His trials thickened 
and deepened. Not a murmur or complaint did lie utter. 
He had promised the Lord that he would not, and he kept his 
promise. He was so great that I nearly always hesitated about 
drawing near to him. 

ON TO LOS ANGELES 

Our train was an hour or more late in arriving in Los 
Angeles on Sunday morning, October 29th, and we had had 
nothing to eat. The brethren were rejoiced to see us, but 
their countenances changed when they saw our dear Brother 
Russell. They saw that he was weak, but they knew not 
how sick he was. Besides, he would not yet admit that he 
was really sick. By ten o'clock we had reached the hotel, 
and I asked him if I could not get him something to eat. He 
said he was not hungry and asked me to suggest something. 
This I did. He consented to my getting something, but only 
tasted a little of it. Upon bringing it to him, he asked if I 
had had my breakfast; and when I answered, no, he wanted to 
know why. I told him that it was because I wanted him 
to have his first. He said he would not eat his until I 
had first had my breakfast. 

This was just like Brother Russell. He was always so 
considerate of others. Whenever he would ask me to do 
anything for him, lie would say "Please"; and when it was 
done he would invariably say, "Thank you." He was a 
wonder! Brother Homer Lee did what he could for Brother 
Russell while we were there and, upon our departure, gave 
me his best remedies, and hoped they would do him good. 
The brethren in Los Angeles were kind in every way. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S LAST ADDRESS TO THE CHURCH 

When the time came for the meeting with the friends 



in the afternoon. Brother Russell arose and made ready to 
go, the brethren having come for him in their auto. It was 
4:30 Sunday afternoon when we left the hotel for the meeting, 
which was held in the same auditorium in which the 
Los Angeles Convention was held during the first part of 
September. It is a quiet and suitable hall. We do not know 
of any better or more appropriate place in which Brother 
Russell could have given his last message to the Church. He 
cautioned the brethren against exposing his physical condition 
by saying, "Don't give me away. Brethren." 

You know that our dear Brother was so considerate of 
the feelings of others that he never drew much on the sympathy 
of the friends— so considerate was he, that but few knew 
that he had been a physical sufferer for thirty years. On 
one occasion recently he sent word to the Bethel Family 
that he would not be down to breakfast; and afterwards 
he told me that it was on account of the family that he 
did not come— that they had such deep sympathy for him 
that he did not like to draw on their vitality. He had learned 
to lean on the Strong Arm alone! He did not need us 
particularly, but we needed him. 

We were on the alert to comply with his every wish; 
and therefore no one called attention to his condition, and 
in that sense did not "give him away." However, he gave 
himself away. To a keen observer his very presence spoke 
volumes. But more than that, when he stepped to the front 
of the platform to begin to speak, out of consideration for 
the splendid audience before him (for every seat was occupied) 
he said, "I regret that I am not able to speak with 
force or power," and then beckoned to the Chairman to 
remove the stand and bring a chair. As he sat down, he 
said, "Pardon me for sitting down, please." In deep humility, 
in great suffering and in the most solemn manner, he spoke 
for about forty-five minutes, and then answered questions for 
a short period. 

Finally he said, "I must say goodby to you all, and 
give you a text for your remembrance— Numbers 6:24-26: 
'The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make His 
face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the 
Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and give thee 
peace.' May the Lord's blessing be with you richly; He 
has blessed the Los Angeles Class a great deal. Each one 
should desire to do his own share. No matter what others 
may do, each one do his share. Now sing Number One: 

"Abide, sweet Spirit, Heavenly Dove, 

With light and comfort from Above; 

Be Thou our guardian, Thou our Guide, 

O'er every thought and step preside.'" 

PRESERVE THIS SPIRIT IN YOUR MIDST 

Continuing, he said, "Isn't this a beautiful thought? Preserve 
this spirit in your midst. Have perfect confidence in 
the Lord, and you will be led aright. We were not brought 
into the Truth by any human catch-word, but by the Word 
of the Lord. We know that the Lord will bring out everything 



all right. I bid you all good by." Thus, at 6:05 p. m. 
Sunday, October 29th, when he left that platform, he had 
delivered his last address to the Church on this side of 
the veil, forever. Our hearts are bowed low! We humbly 
worship God, our Heavenly Father, at the feet of Jesus. We 
would prefer to keep silent; but for the Church's sake we 
will proceed: 

Several tried to speak to Brother Russell in the auto 
as we rode away, but they were too late. We were presently 
at the station; and when we stepped out, we left one 
behind. It was the privilege of Brother Sherman to be with 
us at the station and to do us many kindnesses. When 
Brother Russell signed his name to the railroad ticket at 
Kansas City, it was his last. It was now our privilege to 
sign his name for him. We went to the train while Brother 
Sherman went to the nearest drug store to make a purchase 
for him. He returned at 6:30 and we said goodby. 
Santa Fe train No. 10 pulled out; we entered the drawing-room 
of car Roseisle; and in shutting to and locking the door, 
we shut him in and shut others out forever. Thenceforth 
Gethsemane! Victory! Glory! 

THE RETURN JOURNEY BEGUN 

He had me place various articles that he would need 
during the night in convenient places— under the covers, under 
his pillows, on the window-sills, so that he could reach 
them without disturbing me. We did everything just as he 
directed, were glad to do so, and told him so. He said, "Thank 
you; I have you do some things because you are so willing." 
It was my pleasure to be the nurse while he was 
both physician and patient; and when the patient— how true 
the name!— no longer needed the services of either the 
physician or the nurse, the nurse became the undertaker 
and did those last sad and solemn rites which lie had seen 
others do before. I was careful to inquire, "Is everything 
all right. Brother Russell?" He assured me that it 
was, thanked me, asked me to take my rest, indicated how 
he would call in case he needed me, bade me good night, and 
turned on his left side with his face toward the window. 

We do not know how long it was afterwards when we 
were aroused from slumber by his knocking and calling us 
by name— it was probably a couple of hours. But we went 
to him quickly, did what was required, heard him say again 
"Thank you," and again lay down. This time, however, we 
did so with the thought that we would not sleep so soundly. 
In another hour he knocked and called again; and we were 
at his side, and soon discovered that another chill was coming 
on. He had had his first one two nights before. We put 
five Pullman blankets upon him and tucked them in close 
on every side; but still he shook. We gave him what was 
required, and was glad when the rigors ceased. We remained 
by his side, lying down at times on the couch beside him. 

PREPARATIONS FOR DEATH 



Toward morning he had me make a robe for convenience 
sake by pinning a sheet inside of a blanket, wrapping him 
in it like a robe and fastening it under his chin. He stood 
up on the floor for this purpose, and then lay down on the 
couch instead of returning to his berth. I therefore sat on 
his bed while he lay before me. After several hours his 
robe proved to be rather inconvenient, because the sheet 

R6005 : page 365 

and blanket could not be kept together. It was then that he 
stood again and said, "Please make me a Roman toga." 

I did not understand what he meant, but did not like to 
have him repeat, because he was so weak. His voice had become 
so weak that he had to repeat nearly everything he said. 
I had said to him at several times, "Dear Brother Russell, I 
do not like to ask you to repeat anything (It had always 
been my custom to listen to him so closely in all his dictation 
as not to require any repetition); but your voice is so 
weak that one can scarcely hear you." He would always repeat 
until at last the repetition would do no good, after 
which he made signs. Finally the signs failed. 

I said, "Brother Russell, I do not understand what you 
mean." He said, "I will show you." He had me take a 
clean sheet and turn it down twelve inches from the top; 
and then a second one the same. Placing his left hand on 
his right shoulder, he said, "Fasten them together here." Having 
in my pocket a paper of safety-pins which I had recently 
purchased, it was easy for me to hold the sheets together 
on his right shoulder and at the same time reach into my 
pocket and get a safety-pin. The sheets being fastened with 
the pin, as he had directed, he said, "Now fasten them together 
on the other shoulder." This I did. There he stood, 
one sheet extending from his neck to his feet in front and 
the other in the back, fastened together on his two shoulders, 
and folded together at the edges. He stood erect before me 
for a moment without saying a word, then lay down on the 
couch on his back, closed his eyes, and lay there before 
me as in a shroud, a perfect picture of death. 

I sat on the side of the bed watching him, beholding 
him, and the thought of death went through my mind. It 
was difficult for me to get the thought into my head that 
Brother Russell was going to die. I could not exactly believe 
it, even now. It all seemed so foreign to what we 
had expected. However, I know now that the Lord was 
gradually teaching us both from the time we had left San 
Antonio until now that Brother Russell's end was drawing 
on apace. How much Brother Russell may have understood 
or meant by these movements we may not surely know. They 
were at least the wisest things that could be done in his 
case; but to us they mean far more, and we believe that 
the Lord so arranged. The toga was worn by Roman officials 
and sometimes by priests, and sometimes symbolized 
victory and peace, and at other times that the one wearing 
it had fulfilled his vows. To the writer's mind all these 
things are meant. He had fulfilled his vows! he had gained 



the victory! he was at peace! Thenceforth there was laid 
up for him a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord would 
shortly place upon his noble brow. 

CONCERNING THE SEVENTH VOLUME 

With those scenes before me and with thoughts of the 
end running through my mind, it was only natural for me 
to say to myself. Had you not better ask Brother Russell 
concerning some things? It was in this mood and in this 
connection that we inquired respecting the Seventh Volume, 
and received his answer, "Some one else can write that." 
We were satisfied. He had spoken concerning the smiting 
of the Jordan, the payment of the Penny and the writing 
of the Seventh Volume; and this was enough. There was 
nothing left to doubt or fear. We believe that he said 
everything that he desired to say, and that the Lord gave 
through him all that He wished the Church to have respecting 
these great, vital and important matters. Brother 
Russell seemed to have no desire, neither did there seem 
to be any need, to say and do a lot of little things at the 
close of his life that had been left undone. He had finished 
his course. His labors were o'er. He was ready to be offered. 

We were solemnly busy throughout the day (Monday), 
so much so that we had no time for either dinner or supper. 
When night drew on, he was in his berth; and I lay down 
on the couch, with clothes on, to rest awhile. I was just 
about to sink into sleep when I thought I heard the words, 
"Brother Sturgeon." As I came to, the experiences of Samuel 
came into my mind. I leaned over him and said, "Brother 
Russell, did you call me?" He answered "Yes," and gave 
me some little thing to do, after which I lay down the 
second time. Ere long I thought I heard my name called 
again. I inquired as before, bent over close to him 
and heard him whisper, "I am trying to find something for 
you to do." From this I inferred, "Brother Russell wants 
me to stay awake tonight"; and it proved to be even so. 

DEATH DRAWING NEAR 

I kept doing many little, necessary things in harmony 
with his words or signs until another chill (the third one) 
came on. I folded blanket after blanket over him, tucked 
them in close to him; but still he shook. I therefore lay on 
him and pressed my face to his until I felt the warmth returning 
to his body. The fact that this was the third chill 
in four nights deepened the impression in my mind that the 
end was drawing near. 

About midnight a great change came over him. He no 
longer cared for any of his medicine, and did not even seem 
to thirst for water as heretofore. Some things almost ceased. 
His pain settled deeper in. He could no longer lie straight 
in bed as formerly. He must sit up; and when he would 
lie down, he would double together, and his head would 
rest straight toward the window and free from the pillows. 
In this posture he would be quiet for awhile until his mouth 



would fill from his stomach, and he would signal to be 
raised. Being relieved of this, he would request to be lowered 
for comfort, until, to prevent strangulation, he would be 
raised again. This prevented it, and proper attention given, 
he would lie down again to get relief from pain. 

This continued for seven hours with increased frequency 
and weakness. When he could no longer make his wishes 
known by words, he would do so by signs. When lying 
across the bed and desiring to be raised, he would lift his 
right hand and arm in such a way that my head would fit 
in the curvature of his arm and he could cling to my neck, 
while my left arm could fit around his neck, and thus elevate 
him to a sitting posture. This continued until the thought 
arose in my mind as to who would become exhausted first. 
I thought of the friends at home, of the many interested 
friends everywhere. I looked to the Lord, and steeled myself, 
saying, "I will stay with him to the finish." 

In the early morning he surrendered. He was exhausted; 
and I could now lay him straight in bed with his head on 
the pillow in its accustomed place, and he could at last rest. 
The calm after the storm had come. He was now to die 
gradually, regularly, peacefully; and I was to stand by watching 
him, loving him, and expressing my affection for him 
by gently stroking his hair and his beard and rubbing his 
head, his face, his hands, and his feet. I did not seem 
to be able to do enough for him, now that he had passed 
beyond a certain line. 

THE LAST HOURS 

Several times on Monday I raised him up in bed, sat 
behind him so as to brace him; and his head would lean 
against mine. Once he whispered, "Have you anything to 
suggest?" I had; for I wished him to return direct to Galveston 
and take the steamer for New York, or else go 
through by train without stopping at Topeka, Tulsa or 
Lincoln. He answered, "Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof," by which I understood him to mean that Topeka 
and other places would take care of themselves when we 
got to them, and that we need not consider them as yet. It 
was then that I asked him respecting the Seventh Volume, 
and afterwards sat meditating what to suggest. After a 
period of perfect silence I thought I would say something 
to him about dying and certain matters connected therewith, 
but I hesitated and hardly knew how to begin. He was sitting 
up in bed and I put my arm around his neck and said, 
"Brother Russell, you are a very sick man." His lip quivered; 
we lowered him, and turned away to weep. I had gone far 
enough in that direction. I knew not to attempt that again. 
It was evident that neither he nor I could stand it, and 
that nothing more could be done. 

The most wonderful thing about this most wonderful 
man was that, during all his sufferings, trials, inconveniences 
and perplexities, he spoke not a word of complaint'. 

R6005 : page 366 



he heaved not a sigh; he uttered not a moan; he shed not 
a tear. He had resolved that he would not murmur nor 
complain, and he kept his resolution to the end. He literally 
died in doing the Father's will, and thus fulfilled his vow. 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth." 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S DEATH 

We watched by his side all Tuesday morning with but 
little to do except to watch and pray. Noticing that this 
was the last day of October, we concluded that he would 
died before midnight, and consequently wrote out the following 
telegram to the friends in Brooklyn: "Before October 
closes our dearly Beloved Brother Russell will be with the 
Lord in glory. We are alone in Car Roseisle on Santa Fe 
train No. 10, due in Kansas City 7:35 Wednesday morning, 
and he is dying like a hero. After embalming will come 
home with his remains, or else go direct to Pittsburgh." We 
called in the Pullman conductor and also the porter and 
said, "We want you to see how a great man of God can 
die." The sight deeply impressed them, especially the porter. 

R6006 : page 366 

I called in the regular conductor, and telegraphed for a 
physician to board the train at Panhandle; and he did. He 
saw the condition, recognized the correctness of the diagnosis 
and conclusion, gave me his name, and was off before the 
train got under headway. 

At one o'clock all were dismissed from the room, the door 
was locked, and we quietly watched over him until he breathed 
his last. We had observed the approaching signs of death 
before calling in the trainmen. These continued until the 
finger nails became discolored, the cold perspiration settled 
upon that noble forehead, his hands and feet grew cold, 
his face indicated a break, he drew his feet up in the bed 
like Jacob of old, his quiet breathing became less frequent, 
his drooping eyelids opened like the petals of a flower and 
disclosed those eyes— those wonderful eyes! in all their magnificence 
—that we will never forget. Presently he breathed no 
more; we pressed our lips upon his noble brow, and knew 
that he had gone to be forever with and like the Lord, whom 
he loved so well. 

"Dear Lord, oh, use me as the Angel in Gethsemane! 

Oh, fill me with Thy Holy Spirit of Divinest love! 

Oh, make me sympathetic, wise, that every anguished heart 

May come, nor seek in vain for consolation from Thy Word, 

And strengthened, comforted, go forth to prison or to death. 

To suffer patiently the cruel mockings of the tongue; 

To bear the cross unto the bitter end, and then to calmly say, 

'Tis finished,' and with faith unwavering pass beneath 'the veil!'" 



R6006 : page 366 

ONE OF GOD'S NOBLEMEN 
BY W. E. VAN AMBURGH-NEW YORK 

The pages of history record many of mankind who have 
left conspicuous footprints upon the sands of time. Some 
have been great within the boundaries of their local communities. 
Some have reached out to the national borders. 
Others have leaped all national bounds and exerted a 
world-wide influence. Some have gained greatness because 
of positions of influence; others by their ability to command 
conquering armies or otherwise sway the destinies 
of nations; some by noble deeds; others by their ability to 
inspire their fellowmen to nobler lives and ambitions. 
Some have been born to great positions; and some have 
seemingly been forced into greatness by the exigencies of 
time or conditions; others, inspired by love and zeal for 
God, have laid down their lives willing sacrifices upon the 
altar of devotion. 

The world is quick to applaud the conquering hero and 
the prince of finance, but slow to recognize the true 
worth of the daily smouldering sacrifices of those who heed 
the Master's admonition, "Be thou faithful unto death." It 
is left to other generations to enshrine the real heroes; as 
in the case of our Lord and His disciples; and we believe 
the same will be true of Pastor Russell. Contemporaries 
too often misunderstand, misjudge, severely criticize and 
persecute. How true this has been of all of God's noblemen 
of the past! But God promises that all such as worship 
Him in the beauty of holiness in the midst of persecutions 
shall shine as the sun in the Kingdom of their 
Father— when their true greatness shall be revealed. How 
glad we are that God is taking cognizance of all sacrifices 
of love in His behalf! 

Today we are paying our last loving tribute to the 
memory of one of God's noblest men. His life will speak 
for itself, when fully understood by succeeding generations. 

I desire to add a brief personal testimony. For over 
twenty years. I was personally acquainted with our beloved 
Pastor, and for over fifteen years closely associated 
with him in business and otherwise; so I speak from personal 
knowledge and close observation. I first learned of 
him through his writings, and was drawn closer to the 
Lord by his logical exegesis of the Scriptures. It may seem 
strange, but 'tis true I scarcely noticed the writer. He 
was hidden behind the message. Later I became acquainted 
with him personally, and was closely drawn to 
him when I perceived the spirit that actuated him— the loving, 
loyal, consecrated heart, seeking to follow his God, 
seeking daily to do good unto his fellowmen, to the best 
of his ability, and seeking to assist them to a clearer perception 
of the true character of our God. 

That he was misunderstood by many of his fellowmen 
mattered little to him, so long as he kept his heart right 



with God and had His approval. I never met a man who in 

my estimation endeavored more earnestly to live close to 

God, or fought harder to keep his body under. His influence 

upon others has been written in the hearts and lives 

of thousands all over the world whom he has assisted to a 

closer walk with God and a fuller consecration to the Lord 

and His Word. His SCRIPTURE STUDIES and his other expositions 

led me to see more of the Wisdom, the Justice, 

the Love and the Power of God than I had ever recognized 

before, and helped me to serve Him more intelligently 

than I had been able to do previously, although since 

childhood I had earnestly sought to do God's will to the 

best of my ability. As I saw with increasing clearness the 

Prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, I was 

led to consecrate to my Savior every ability I possessed 

and to seek further understanding. This consecration was 

made intelligently to my Lord, and I have ever endeavored 

to carry it out faithfully. 

I would like now, as a further expression of my appreciation, 
to renew that consecration publicly. There may be 
others here also who have been assisted to a far better 
understanding of God's great Plan and His love for mankind 
through the ministries of our dear Pastor. (Thousands 
have so indicated.) Would you also like to make 
this an occasion for renewal of your consecration? My 
consecration was to no one but the Lord. I recognized our 
beloved Brother as a servant of God— and a highly honored 
one. But my consecration was to God. This great world-wide 
work is not the work of one person. It is far too 
great for that. It is God's work and it changes not. God 
has used many servants in the past and He will doubtless 
use many in the future. Our consecration is not to a man, 
or to a man's work, but to do the will of God, as He shall 
reveal it unto us through His Word and providential leadings. 
God is still at the helm, and His work will continue 
in harmony with His Plan. Arrangements have been made 
for the carrying on of this work more earnestly than ever. 
It will be conducted along the same lines of full loyalty to 
the Word of God and love for the brethren, and it is for 
us to determine whether we shall be among its supporters 
and beneficiaries. 

The speaker then asked, "How many would like here to 
renew their consecration to God, and to indicate it by rising?" 
Almost the entire audience, which packed the building, 
rose to their feet. A most impressive moment followed. 
The speaker's face was raised to Heaven; and silently the 
audience followed the words: 

"Our Father, which art in Heaven, who canst look into 
the inner recesses of our hearts. Thou who dost 
not need the expression of our lips, to Thee, at this time, 

R6006 : page 367 

we desire to renew our Covenant made with Thee by 
Sacrifice. 
"We consecrate afresh to Thee and to Thy service our 



every ability— our talents, and our opportunities— to be 
used as Thou in Thy wisdom mayst grant us understanding 
through Thy Holy Word and Thy daily leadings. 

"May we realize more and more the great privilege of 
being considered by Thee an acceptable sacrifice, through 
the atoning merit of Thy well-beloved Son, our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 

"And may the inspiration of the love of God, which 
constraineth us, and the Prize of the High Calling of God, 
in Christ Jesus, spur us to greater devotion to Thy cause 
and assist us to endure more faithfully than ever before, 
and to reflect in our every thought, word and deed Thy 
glorious character!" 



R6006 : page 367 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S RELATION TO THE PILGRIMS 
BY PAUL S. L. JOHNSON-COLUMBUS 

I am now standing at the bier of one whom, since the 
days of the Apostle Paul, God has more widely used in His 
service than He has any other person. I am standing at 
the bier of one who has been to me a brother and a friend, 
having done me more good than all other people that have 
ever come into touch with me. I am standing at the bier 
of one whom I have loved more than I ever loved any 
other human being. I am standing at the bier of one of whom 
I have the assurance of faith that he is now in glory with 
our adorable Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. One can realize, 
therefore, how hard it is to control one's feelings under 
circumstances like these. 

I have been asked to speak of the relation of Pastor 
Russell to the Pilgrims. He had two relations to them— 
an official and a personal relation. His official relation to 
the Pilgrims can be understood when we recognize the 
office to which the Lord was pleased to call him, i.e., to be 
the special channel for giving the "meat in due season," 
as well as for arranging and directing the work of the 

R6007 : page 367 

Household of Faith. The Pilgrims, therefore, were related 
to him as fellow-servants of the same God. Therefore 
as God's representatives, and also in a sense as Brother 
Russell's representatives, they traveled throughout the 
world preaching the "Glad Tidings." Just as Moses was 
given as his colaborers the Seventy to whom God gave 
the Spirit that he had put upon Moses, because the work 
was too much for Moses to perform alone, so our Heavenly 
Father was pleased to give to this devoted servant of 
His colaborers to assist him in the labor of dispensing 
meat to the whole Church; for this work was too great for 
him alone to perform. Therefore the Pilgrims were to 



bear part of the burden and toil that were his. They, 

therefore, in a certain sense represent him. In writing to 

them he at times reminded them that he loved to think 

and speak of them as being in a certain sense his representatives, 

though recognizing them primarily as the 

Lord's representatives. 

It was this office, therefore, that gave him a close and 
directing relation to the Pilgrims. He was eminently fitted 
by nature, by grace, and by experience to fill the demands 
of this place. He had a giant intellect with marvelous 
perceptive faculties, remarkable memory and clear, deep 
and true reasoning powers, combined with an exceptional 
knowledge of human nature and with tactful aggressiveness. 
These gave him great executive ability, which, of 
course, eminently fitted him to direct the work of the Pilgrims. 
Our Heavenly Father endowed him with a natural 
disposition, especially in his religious capacities, that very 
few of the fallen human race have had. Under careful cultivation 
of the Holy Spirit these natural capacities were 
developed in a most remarkable degree into a character 
that had and combined all the qualities necessary to discharge 
the duties, responsibilities and privileges of his official 
relation to the Pilgrims. 

His experience as a Pilgrim fitted him all the better to 
exercise properly and profitably the functions of this part 
of his office. Therefore his relation to the Pilgrims officially 
was that of directing their work. It was God's will that he 
should be the human agent whom God would use to select 
the Pilgrims. In the selection of these servants no arbitrariness 
nor partiality was used. His will was fully submitted 
to the Father's will as to how their selection should 
be conducted. He subjected the Pilgrims to the three tests 
demanded by God's Word as proper to be placed upon 
public servants of God. First of all he required of them 
that, in addition to a full consecration, they have a large 
degree of loving zeal, deep humility, exemplary meekness 
and an accurate knowledge of God's Word. He further 
required that they have in a large degree the talents necessary 
for teaching and preaching the Word of God clearly, 
acceptably and winsomely to responsive hearts. Lastly he 
required their providential situation to be such as would 
enable them in harmony with the Word to assume the duties, 
responsibilities and privileges of the Pilgrim service. 
When these three things met in an individual. Brother 
Russell was very glad to arrange for his having a part in 
the Pilgrim service. His methods in selecting such were 
quite unique; e.g., unobserved, he listened to a Brother, 
whom he did not know, explain the chart to several of 
the friends. The explanation was so clear that he inquired 
who that Brother was. Finding out his name he 
entered into correspondence with him, inviting him to 
enter the Pilgrim service. Those who were to be given 
the privilege of this office were subjected by him to certain 
tests that would demonstrate the possession or lack of 
meekness, humility, zeal, clearness in presenting the Truth, 
and a large measure of love and self-control. 



His instructions to the Pilgrims were very simple. He 
believed that few instructions were better than many. A 
Pilgrim, on starting out asked him, "Brother, have you 
some word of instruction, encouragement or caution to 
give to me that will prove helpful to me in the service?" 
He answered, "No; Brother." Then thinking a while he 
said, "Yes; Brother, I have. Be full of loving zeal and 
deep humility, and everything will be well." He was wont 
to say, 'If you are in any difficulty or if you have a problem 
which you cannot solve, remember you always have 
an open ear and a willing hand here." 

He allowed as much liberty to the Pilgrims as the good 
of the Cause and themselves warranted. He allowed them 
to choose their subjects and to use their way of presenting 
the message, not wishing to interfere with their individuality, 
believing the Lord was directing with respect to 
each one. Only such restrictions were made as were necessary 
for the profit of the Cause and its participants. 
Whenever correction was necessary it was given in a remarkably 
sweet form. One of the Pilgrims asked for too 
frequent vacations, alleging that he needed more time for 
study. Brother Russell, feeling that the Brother should 
have had more zeal, suggested that the Brother take a 
year's time off from the Pilgrim service for study. The 
Brother, catching the Pastor's meaning, immediately declared, 
"Brother, that would be a loss of too much time. 
I will go right on." 

He was always on the alert to encourage others; and 
no Pilgrim left his presence without being encouraged, if 
he was in an encourageable condition of heart and mind. 
When correction was needed, it was given with the greatest 
tact and leniency, allowances being made for good intentions. 
Whenever he had any changes to make, promotions 
or demotions in the service, they were made not from 
personal reasons, but because of the principles in the 
Heavenly Father's Word. His course was that of completely 
sinking his will into the Lord's will and of searching 
to find out what that will was in relation to each Pilgrim, 
that he might be able the better to help him in the 
good work. Whenever a dismissal from the work had been 
arranged for, it was done in the most tactful and quiet way, 
that others would not need to realize the reason, nor the 
Pilgrim experience unnecessary pain. The person was in a 

R6007 : page 368 

very gentle and loving way invited to enter some other 
field of activity, to the glory of God and his own profit. 

His attitude toward the Pilgrim work was one full of 
encouragement to the Pilgrims. One of his greatest services 
to them was his example of faithful service. This influenced 
them in many ways, even in tone and gesture. 
Undoubtedly the Pilgrims will remember with joy the 
thought that as his first Harvest work was that of a Pilgrim, 
so his last Harvest labor was Pilgrim work. 

But we are not to think that his official relation to the 



Pilgrims was all there was in his relation to them. He was 

not an official simply, nor one that no one could approach. 

He was a most lovable and considerate person, always 

inviting confidence. In addition to his official relation he 

sustained a many-sided personal relation to the Pilgrims. 

First of all, he was like a faithful father to them. Not 

having natural children, he was blessed by the Lord in begetting 

many spiritual children with the Truth; even as 

the Apostle Paul said he did in the case of many. Brother 

Russell introduced many people into the Lord's family, 

and not a few of the Pilgrims were among these. A Pilgrim 

recently remarked, "I never consciously had a father, 

until I entered the Pilgrim service and came in direct contact 

with Brother Russell." 

He was not only a father, but also an elder Brother 
to the Pilgrims, always ready to stand side by side with 
them. Therefore he was not regarded solely with the 
feeling that people should have for a father. As elder 
Brother, he inspired the Pilgrims with confidence in, together 
with respect for, himself. He was, furthermore, a 
true friend. He did not whimfully take one up today and 
drop him tomorrow. He was faithful to his friends with a 
loyalty based upon the good Word of God. Every Pilgrim 
recognized that he could depend upon the friendship of this 
beloved servant. He was an affectionate companion. 

Our dear Brother Sturgeon told us a little while ago 
how he showed his comradeship to the last. He was also 
a most sympathetic comforter. Any one in distress, especially 
spiritual distress, seeking comfort, would find in 
him an attentive ear, a sympathizing heart, a cheering 
word and an encouraging thought. By nature he was very 
richly endowed with sympathy and by grace this was 
more highly developed than the majority of his other 
qualities. This enabled him to enter into the feelings of so 
many when they came to him with the things that pressed 
them sorely. This made him a sympathizing comforter. 

Furthermore, this good servant of God was an optimistic 
well-wisher. He always put the best construction on 
everything. He gave each one credit for good intentions. 
His desires and expectations were that these beloved colaborers 
of his might have a glorious entrance into the 
blessed Kingdom into which we feel sure that he has entered, 
who was called by the Lord not only "wise," but 
also "faithful." He was a cheerful helper. Nothing pleased 
him more than to serve others. He was continually thinking 
and planning how he could help by counsel, by example, 
and by deeds. Every rightly disposed person who 
came in contact with him was refreshed and encouraged. 
He was always thinking, not of himself, but of others. That 
is why his death was so glorious. He had thought that he 
would probably pass away as a martyr. In many respects 
his death has been more glorious than a martyr's; for to 
him was given the privilege not to allow a large measure 
of his life to be taken from him by violence, but to use up 
every ounce of his strength in service, for he died in the 
harness. Such a death was best for him. God will decide 



what kind of a death is best for each. 

[Addressing the remains, the speaker said: O servant of 
the Lord, in prophetic type God called thee Eldad, beloved 

R6008 : page 368 

of God. Beloved of God wast thou while in the flesh, art 
now in the spirit, and to all eternity shalt be. Thou hast 
been also beloved of God's people, art now and shall forever 
be. Therefore we name thee Ameldad, Beloved of 
God's people.] 

We can no longer pray for our Brother, as we have, day by 
day, "God bless our beloved Pastor." But, Beloved, we 
can pray with respect to him that God bless his memory. 
He is beyond the need of our prayers; but oh. Beloved, 
let us not leave a vacancy in our prayers where we were 
wont to pray, "God bless our beloved Pastor." Let us, in 
that place, pray "God bless the memory of our beloved 
Brother Russell." Who among us will join with the 
speaker in the resolution daily to pray with respect to him, 
God bless the memory of our beloved Brother? Oh, let the 
Israel of God everywhere daily pray GOD BLESS HIS MEMORY! 



R6008 : page 368 

"GOD FIRST-SELF LAST" 
BY G.C. DRISCOLL-DAYTON 

No greater honor could come to me than to stand here 
as the delegate of the Dayton, Ohio, Ecclesia, who have 
elected our dear Brother annually for many years as their 
beloved Pastor, whom we recognized as a special servant 
of God. He was doing a special work at this time, 
and we certainly learned to love him. For years I have 
been intimately associated with our dear Pastor as his publicity 
representative and for the Society. It has been my 
special privilege to arrange with newspapers in various 
countries for the publication of his sermons, and also to 
interview editors throughout the world in respect to his 
personal work; and, dear friends, as one who knew him intimately. 
I am glad to be here to say that he was nothing 
if not a thorough-going, conscientious, sincere Christian, 
whose greatest endeavor was to serve the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren. 

I know that he has been assailed many times unjustly; 
and it was my special privilege often for at least seven 
years to defend his character. When his sermons were 
first syndicated, Brother Russell refused to permit his portrait 
to be used in connection with them. He was very 
modest in that respect. He felt that he was entitled to 
the privacy of his own picture; that it should not be paraded 
before the public. But the newspaper editors, who 
were glad to get his sermons, could not be ignored; and 
the demand was uniform that they should have it, that 



they should be privileged to publish it in connection with 
his sermon. Brother Russell finally gave his consent; 
for he came to the conclusion that by the publication of 
his picture, he would get a wider reading for his Message, 
the Message of God, the Message regarding the Kingdom. 
For this reason, and this alone, he gave his consent. 

As for the picture, there has been no man in this age 
to equal our dear Brother. He was an outstanding figure in 
a crowd. No matter whether he was seated in a train or 
in a street car or was walking on the street, people would 
stop and turn around to get a second look. Many a time 
I have heard people say that he looked like the Lord, if 
ever a man did. His very appearance widened his influence 
for the glory of God. As his influence grew, the opposition 
also grew, and they learned to hate that picture 
because he stood for something different from what they 
did. I remember one preacher stating that he could not 
pick up a paper to read the news without having Pastor 
Russell stare him in the face. 

POSSIBLY MORE THAN IN THE PAST 

Now, my friends, this was all distasteful to our dear 
Brother. But the Message of the Kingdom was thus 
brought before the people, and he had evidences day by 
day, many times over, that the people were receiving a 
blessing. In that way he received a blessing also; and the 
use of his portrait gave the Message of the Love of God 
wider use in various ways. 

Now that this noble face is soon to be covered to be 
seen no more, we can confidently say, "This mortal has 
put on immortality." This wonderful character was sown 
in weakness, but we are sure that it was raised in power. 
He has served us in many ways. His picture has also 
served us in many ways in the past; and I am sure if we 
give the cooperation which we now shall have the opportunity 
to give, by the Lord's grace, we can still use his 
personality and his picture possibly more than in the past. 



R6008 : page 370 
"BLESSED ARE YE WHEN MEN SHALL REVILE YOU" 
BY FRANK W. M ANTON-TORONTO 

Unexpectedly I have the honor of representing the Toronto, 
Ont., Ecclesia here this afternoon in paying the last 
tribute of esteem to the memory of our Beloved Pastor. 
Three hundred or more of the Toronto Ecclesia, together 
with many sympathizers, are rejoicing today in the fact 
that our Beloved has triumphantly finished his course. 

But we have no apologies to make for sadness. We 
remind you of our Lord, when at Bethany at the tomb of 
Lazarus; we read that even "Jesus wept." 



Under the circumstances you will pardon a personal 
reference. About nine years ago I was brought into contact 
with the Truth, and accepted it in a measure, as most 
of us do at first, reservedly. I was prepared to meet our 
Beloved Pastor on his first visit to Toronto after my contact 
with the Truth with some degree of prejudice. We 
had heard so much about "Brother Russell" that we had 
considered it in a large measure a form of hero worship; 
and not being a hero-worshiper, I received him with these 
thoughts in view. 

Being invited to dine with him at the hotel with other 
friends, I was on the alert to find, if possible, some flaw; 
but, to my great surprise, I never met a character in every 
way so beyond reproach. 

Immediately after dinner, having to take the car for the 
public meeting, I endeavored to carry his hand-bag, but he 
was too quick for me. Before that day was over my prejudice 
had melted as the hoar frost before the morning sun. 

Another incident which impressed me happened some 
years ago. Sitting at my desk one day, I received a telegram: 
"Will you serve as Chairman at my Ottawa meeting?" 
I thought. Now I have found him in a mistake! 
He had never heard me speak in public, because I had 
never attempted to do so. I did not reply to the telegram 
for several days, meantime counseling with my wife. 

I overcame my hesitation and wired back, "Yes." After 
the telegram had gone and the end of the week had come, 
and it was time for me to go, my wife pointed out that 
there was something in Brother Russell's telegram that I 
had overlooked. I tried to ignore that fact, but after the 
discourse in Ottawa, when our Beloved Pastor was bowing 
himself off the platform, he lifted his hands and said, 
"Mr. F.W. Manton, of Toronto, will lecture in the Family 
Theater here next Sunday afternoon." 

Dear friends, I was not an Elder, I had never spoken 
in public, and I thought, I have him now; he has again 
made a mistake! I struggled with my feelings during the 
following week— almost struggled myself out of the Truth. 
Dear friends, he did not make a mistake in the Lord's 
sight, I am sure; I am striving to do my best in His service, 
and if it had not been for our dear Pastor's keen 
insight, I might never have had this privilege. 

The third and most vivid impression was made upon 
me by our Pastor recently. You were all moved to indignation, 
no doubt, when you learned that the gates of Canada 
were unjustly closed to our dear Pastor. I had the 
honor of standing with him in the Toronto Union Depot 
when word was received that he would not be allowed to 
address further public meetings in Canada. 

The righteous indignation of those present there was 
stirred; we wanted to demand what right the authorities 
had to shut out a Christian gentleman who had in no way 
dishonored himself or his cause, and who had every right 
to speak. He merely said, "I will not go where I am not 
wanted. If they want me, I will come." There was not 
the least note of resentment in his words. We were rebuked. 



by his example, for our resentment. We had been 
tempted to reclaim the life-rights which we had laid down 
in sacrifice; we were not citizens of that country, but of 
the Heavenly one! 

Especially would I bring to the notice of the Elders 
of the various Ecclesias at this time the beautiful picture of 

R6009 : page 370 

"The Sheep in the Storm"— how they are huddled together, 
head to head, for safety and protection. Let us 
keep this in mind. It was the first thought that came to 
me when I fully realized that our Beloved Brother had 
passed beyond the Veil. The next thought was of joy, 
born of the assurance that he is now part of the glorified 
Body of The Christ, and beyond the reach of his enemies! 
"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute 
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely 
for My sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is 
your reward in Heaven." 



R6009 : page 370 

SORROW AND JOY COMMINGLED 
BY J.T.D. PYLES-WASHINGTON, D.C. 

In the city of Washington, whence I came, there are 
many sad hearts today, on account of the loss sustained 
in the death of our Beloved Pastor. Not only several 
hundred Bible Students, who diligently search the Scriptures, 
aided by his writings, but many thousands of others, 
recognizing the grandeur of his character, mingle their 
tears together. Sorrow and joy are mixed; for we are 
mindful that he has finished his course, that he was faithful, 
and therefore must now have the promised reward. 

I have known Brother Russell intimately for twenty 
years. He has many times been a guest at my home, and 
I have also been a guest at his home. I was privileged to be 
associated with him for four months in a tour around the 
world; I lived with him, day and night, under varied circumstances; 
he was a gentleman, aye, more, a Christian, 
a highly developed Christian; in fact the most highly developed 
Christian I ever knew, a noble representative of 
our Lord. I loved him in life, I honor him now in death, 
and pay tribute to his memory. 

His STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES will continue to make 
luminous the Bible. The Associated Bible Students 
throughout the earth will continue to look to Brooklyn 
as heretofore, thankful to our Lord for the wise provision 
our Beloved Pastor has made for the perpetuation of the 
work. Confidence and loyalty will be manifested by all true 
children of God; for the Truth is just as precious to us 
today as ever it was. It came from our Heavenly Father 



through our Lord Jesus, and was made plain by his servant, 
our dear Brother Russell, whom we all highly esteemed 
in love for his works' sake. 



R6009 : page 370 

"HE BEING DEAD-YET SPEAKETH" 
BY C.A. WISE-INDIANAPOLIS 

We bring to you on this momentous occasion, the love 
and sympathy of the Church at Indianapolis, many of 
whom have known and loved our Beloved Pastor, and for 
years have been loyal to him— their teacher and friend. 
Now that he has been taken away, we have resolved to 
stand shoulder to shoulder and to hold high the banner 
of our King, whom our Pastor so dearly loved. 

Twenty-five years ago it was my privilege to meet for 
the first time the few Bible Students who met yearly in 
Allegheny at the Memorial season. There at the home of 
our Brother we were privileged to meet him who has now 
sacrificed his life for the Truth he so dearly loved. 

As years passed, we became more closely associated with 
him, and as we were enabled to see in him that wonderful, 
Christ-like character which has been a source of great 
blessing to many, our love and respect for him increased. 
We have never been disappointed in him. 

As our studies in the Word of God progressed, perplexing 
questions continually arose. These we were privileged 
to take to him; and like the disciples of old our own 
hearts burned within us as we listened to his clear and 
beautiful unfolding of the Word of God. We thus learned 
that we were sitting at the feet of a man of God, and also 
the greatest Bible scholar since the days of the Apostles. 

His kind, loving words and noble deeds will live on; 
and "he, being dead, yet speaketh." 



R6009: page 371 

MUST LOYALLY COOPERATE 

BY DR. L.W. JONES-CHICAGO 

No greater honor could be accorded me at the present 
time than to be here to speak a few words of tribute to 
the memory of our dear Brother. My relationship to him 
has been different in some respects, perhaps, from that of 
any other individual; for I have been closely associated 
with him for a great while. Many a time I have stood on 
the platform and introduced him to various audiences in 
this country and abroad. I am glad to be here at this time 
to say a few words. 



For ten years my work in connection with the Convention 
Reports has brought me in close contact with 
Brother Russell and the work of the Society in general. 
Our understanding has been thorough on this matter. 
Then, too, I have traveled extensively with him as his 
secretary on various trips, particularly in connection with 
the world tour in 1912, when for nearly four months we 
were closely associated. Many times Brother Russell discussed 
with me his personal and private affairs, as well as the 
work in hand; and I desire to say that his one aim was to 
seek to do the will of God, and in it all he recognized 
that the work he was doing was not his, but Jehovah's. 

When the friends in Chicago learned through the 
newspaper reports that Brother Russell's death had taken 
place, they could not believe their ears and eyes, and repeatedly 
called me up to verify the reports. As soon as 
we told them, "Yes, it is true that our dear Pastor has gone 
beyond," immediately they would say, "Brother, now we must 
keep close together. We must put our shoulders to the wheel. 
We must loyally cooperate." It did me much good to see the 
faith of the brethren and know that they would stand loyal to 
the Truth. Therefore at this time I voice the sentiments not 
only of the Chicago Church as a whole, but of the various 
Classes in the vicinity of Chicago, numbering about twelve 
or fifteen. Their determination is to stand loyal and faithful 
to the new organization and to cooperate with it in 
every possible way. They realize that our dear Pastor 
has opened before us the Scriptures, and has made them 
so plain that everything necessary for the making of our 
calling and election sure, has been laid before the faithful 
and loyal, that we may press on to a glorious consummation, 
even unto death, as he did. It is our determination 
to be more loyal, more faithful, that we may promulgate 
this glorious Gospel— "glad tidings of joy"— in this Harvest 
work which he so grandly started, which he so faithfully 
carried on until the great God whom he served said, 
"Enough, come up higher!" 



R6009: page 371 

LEFT THE STORE-HOUSE FULL 

BY INGRAM MARGESON-BOSTON 

The Boston Class of Bible Students were greatly 
shocked when the news came over the wire telling of our 
beloved Pastor's death, or home-going. We felt such a 
sadness and loneliness; yet our hearts rejoiced to know 
that our dearly beloved Brother had been changed from 
the human to the Divine nature; that his has been the 
blessed privilege of entering into the presence of the King 
of Kings, even into Heaven itself. Yes; how blessed! He 
has gone to be forever with the Lord. We keenly feel our 
loss. He whom God had been pleased to use as our light-bringer 



and comforter can no longer give personal words 
of comfort and advice. Yet, by Divine Providence, so 
much has come to us from his pen we feel the store-house 
has been left filled with food; and our desire is to partake 
of this provision, doing our part in telling out the Gospel 
message, which is good tidings of great joy, and which 

R6010: page 371 

shall, thank God, in due time be known by all people. 

A special meeting of the Boston Church was called almost 
immediately, and from four to five hundred quickly 
came together. Resolutions were unanimously passed, expressing 
our sincere Christian love and sympathy for all 
the bereaved ones throughout the world, and in a special 
way to the dear Bethel Family and Tabernacle workers. 
All were commended to God for His special care and blessing. 
The words of the Apostle comfort us: "My God 
shall supply all of your need, according to His riches in 
glory by Christ Jesus." 

As a personal testimony, I wish to state that it has been 
my privilege to travel with our dear Brother Russell for 
days, weeks and months at a time, both in America and 
during his journey around the world. My greatest impressions 
were, how implicitly he trusted the Lord in 
everything! Whether on train, steamboat or at hotel, before 
taking up the day's work, he would kneel and ask 
God's blessing and help. We shall never forget his ceaseless 
and untiring love for all the Church, ever trying to 
enlighten and comfort them, even laying down his life 
for the brethren when his body was worn and racked with 
pain. He would never murmur nor complain, but would 
say, "We have it so much easier than did the Apostles and 
our dear Lord." WHAT AN EXAMPLE HE HAS LEFT US! Truly 
he has earned the victor's Crown! 



R6010: page 371 

MOULDED THOUGHT OF MILLIONS 
BY A.I. RITCHIE-NEW YORK 

Our Pastor was very dear to the Bethel Family. He was 
a loving, yet just head over the Home, and all the members 
of the Family had ready access to him with their perplexities 
and troubles. It was interesting to notice how almost all 
went away from these interviews smiling, as if all difficulties 
had been cleared up. He seemed almost intuitively to understand; 
and was always sympathetic and tender, even when he 
himself was suffering great pain. 

When I read his DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES in 1888, it 
answered all my questions; and as I continued to read my 
love and admiration for him increased, though I never met 
him until 1905. My later years of close association with him 



were a constant inspiration to me. The better I knew him, 
the better I loved him. He was the best man I ever saw, and 
I never expect to see his equal. There is none like him. 

He entered so fully into our lives that there might be 
a danger of thinking of him as belonging peculiarly to the 
Bethel Family, or to the New York Ecclesia, or at least to 
the Bible Students of America. But he was broader than 
all these; he was loved and respected by Bible Students and 
Truth seekers the world over. He was also respected and 
loved by devout Jews in almost every part of the world, and 
helped much to revive their faith in their Bible promises. 

Besides all this I am convinced that he did more to mould 
public thought— especially in the religious world— than all 
other contemporary religious leaders. Very few now believe 
the doctrine of eternal torment; thanks to his efforts! He 
brought many other religious truths to light. 



R6010: page 371 

OPENED OUR EYES OF UNDERSTANDING 
BROTHER C.J. WOODWORTH-SCRANTON 

Our dear Redeemer taught us that "man shall not live 
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God." The words that our Redeemer 
Himself spoke were especially precious to our Brother, so 
that the Lord's slightest word or act spoke volumes to 
him. One little point he explained in reference to the man 
whose eyes the Lord opened. The Lord spat upon the 
ground; and out of the clay and the spittle He made an 
ointment, with which He anointed the eyes of the blind 
man. Then the man washed in the pool of Siloam, and 
returned seeing. 

Brother Russell calls our attention to the fact that this 
illustrates how the Spirit of the Lord, coming out of His 
mouth, comes down and mixes with the clay of earth; and 
thus that clay, if plastic enough, can be applied for the 
opening of the spiritual eyes of those that were born blind. 

R6010: page 372 

And so today, all over the world, throughout the countless 
ages of eternity, men and women can rejoice that Jesus our 
Savior and Redeemer used this clay lying before us here 
to bring us out of the kingdom of darkness and into the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son. Praise His name for the blessings 
brought to us through our dear Pastor! 



R6010: page 372 

"REPRESENTED ALL THAT WAS NOBLEST, HOLIEST, BEST" 



BY D. KIHLGREN-MASS. 

The Ecclesia at Springfield, Easthampton and Holyoke, 
Mass., wish me to express to you their heartfelt sympathy 
and Christian love. 

Our beloved Pastor's death has aroused in our hearts 
all that is noblest, holiest, best. We rejoice unselfishly 
that his labors are over, and that he has entered into his 
rest and reward. We sorrow as we feel keenly the loss 
of his faithful ministry. We sympathize with one another 
in our bereavement, and especially with those closest to 
him in his labors. We feel an increased concern for the 
continuance of the work he was God's instrument in carrying 
forward. We are resolved that by God's grace we 
shall be inspired by our Beloved Brother's life and teachings 
to greater faithfulness. 

It was my privilege to know our Pastor upwards of 
twenty years, and his personal example was perhaps even 
more inspiring than his teachings. He never worried, was 
never impatient. His peace of mind was wonderful. 

Our Beloved Pastor took a genuine, personal interest 
in all of the Lord's people. He rejoiced in their progress, 
and treasured their interesting experiences in his wonderful 
memory. To illustrate: When on the way home from 
a one-day convention he asked one of our number: "Is old 

Brother K living yet?" "Yes." "Kindly give him 

my Christian greetings and tell him that I remember the 
testimony he gave in Allegheny some twenty years ago." 

Brethren, our beloved brother has left us a noble example. 
Shall we not follow him, as he followed Christ? 
Shall we not lay down our lives for the brethren, as he 
did? By God's grace we will! May our end be as his! 



R6010: page 372 

RENEWAL OF CONSECRATION DAILY 
BY DR. E.A. McCOSH-DETROIT 

I esteem it an honor to be here on this occasion. I 
wish to convey to you from the Detroit Church their 
greeting and their desire to let you know that they will 
be loyal to the memory of our dear Pastor. 

It was my privilege to know our dear Brother personally; 
and I wish to state one thing with regard to him 
that possibly not all know. For years he suffered with a 
peculiar ailment, which rendered him very, very weak at 
times; and he could hardly go on with his discourses for 
pain. We can better appreciate the wonderful character 
of our beloved Pastor when we know that he was usually 
under stress and pain. I prescribed for him at one 
lime: but when two years after. I asked him if he had 
taken the medicine, he remarked, "Dear Brother, I have 



not had time." 

If our beloved Pastor, now glorified, has shown us such 
a wonderful example of cheerfulness and long suffering 
it behooves us to follow faithfully in his steps. The action 
of the Detroit Class, taken at the testimony meeting Wednesday, 

R6011 : page 372 

was in the nature of a renewal of their consecration, 

and they determined to renew it daily to the cause 

for which our loving Pastor so loyally laid down his life. 

We wish to assure those whom the Pastor has left in 
charge of the Society's affairs of our loyalty and of our 
resolution to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ at all times. 
When a vacancy comes to the ranks, let us press together 
the harder, shoulder to shoulder, and close it up as best 
we can. Let us crystallize our character, so that we may 
be able to endure all things, for God will cause the wrath 
of man to praise Him and will prepare us for His presence 
by means of reproaches and persecutions, which probably 
await us. 



R6011 : page 372 

BURY OUR SORROW IN SERVICE 
BY C.B. SHULL-COLUMBUS 

As a representative of the Columbus, Ohio, Ecclesia, 
I bring you their fervent Christian love and an expression 
of mutual joy and sorrow. We rejoice in thinking of the 
transcendent happiness our Beloved Pastor is now realizing 
in its fullness, because of his faithfulness even unto 
death; and we resolve by God's grace to bury our sorrow 
in the service of those who are yet hungering and thirsting 
for His true Message. 

I feel that I am voicing the sentiment of the Columbus 
Class when I assure you that we are determined, with Divine 
help, to carry on the work which our Beloved Pastor 
has left with us, and we wish to cooperate to the fullest 
extent with Headquarters in the further smiting of Jordan. 

How glad I shall be to tell the dear friends at home 
of the wonderful manifestation of the Spirit of Christ 
which I have witnessed here— how well you have all 
learned your lessons in this most wonderful School in the 
world, with a real, kingly priest as teacher! 

What an exemplar of our Lord Jesus Christ we had in 
our Beloved Pastor! But God has called him Home; and 
it now remains for each of us to demonstrate to the Lord 
how well we have learned our lessons. 

On one occasion our Beloved Pastor was telling me 
of the order and system at Bethel. He said, "Business 
men were glad to employ clerks who received their training 
in my stores years ago, and I am now wondering. 



Will others be asking for our help because of the wonderful 
privileges enjoyed in this training School?" 

May God help us to respond heartily to the call and be 
faithful even unto death! 



R6011 : page 372 

REJOICING IN OUR PASTOR'S VICTORY 
BY E.W.V. KUEHN-TOLEDO 

I deem it a privilege and an honor on this occasion to 
offer a tribute of love and esteem in memory of our departed 
Brother and Pastor. The grandest, noblest character of our 
day, whose life has been, and ever will continue to be, an 
inspiration for us to follow him, as he followed Christ. 

To have known and understood him, as was my privilege 
for twenty-seven years, and of late years most intimately, 
was to love and respect him for his noble Christian qualities. 

Like the Apostle Paul's, the laying down of his life in 
the Master's service must have sent up a very rich perfume, 
and his sacrifice a sweet odor to God. 

Eminently chosen of the Lord (Matthew 24:45) to serve 
the "Household of Faith with meat in due season," and 
elsewhere (Ezekiel 9:2,1 1) described as the "man in linen 
with the writer's ink horn at his side," HE HAS DONE AS HE 
WAS COMMANDED, finished the work given him to do, and 
has entered upon his reward, leaving us who remain a noble 
legacy of privilege in continuing the Society's work. 

In this connection I voice the sentiment of the Toledo 
(Ohio) Class as expressed in a telegram forwarded to the 
Society on November 1st, as follows: "Greetings! Scriptural 
consolation; sympathy. We loved our dear Pastor, and 
keenly feel our loss, but realize our Father doeth all things 
well. We rejoice in our dear Pastor's victory. His faithful 
loyalty is an inspiration; and we are determined to cooperate 
with you in the Kingdom Work with renewed energy." 



R6011 : page 373 

ORATION AT EVENING SERVICE 

BY J.F. RUTHERFORD 

Charles Taze Russell was loyal to God, loyal to Christ 
Jesus, loyal to the cause of Messiah's Kingdom. He was loyal 
to the core— yea, loyal even unto death. God has declared 
in His Word that loving loyalty to Him is the price of greatest 
riches. Pastor Russell has received his great reward. 
It is a wonderful thing to receive the approval of God, the 
great and mighty Creator of the Universe, the all-wise, all-powerful 
and all-loving One. In His Book, the Bible, God 



has made favorable mention of certain men; and in every 
instance that favorable mention has been because of their 
loving loyalty to Him and His cause of righteousness. When 
God's record concerning the Church is fully written, the people 
will find that Charles Taze Russell not only has received 
favorable mention from God, but has been born in Zion— a 
member of the Royal Family of Heaven. (Psalm 87:6.) The 
Psalmist has assured us that this is especially true of those 
who are faithful unto death. What a wonderful privilege 
it will be for the world to have the real truth concerning 
martyrs to the cause of righteousness! 

We who have come into closer contact with Pastor Russell, 
and who knew him as he was, are privileged by the Lord 
to know these things in advance of the world. Happy is 
our lot to thus be favored of God. 

Lives of great men stand as monuments in the earth. 
Silently they beckon to those who are hurrying on in the 
mad rush of human affairs, and say, "Stop and learn wisdom." 

The greatest man that has lived since the Apostle Paul 
has passed from the earth. We have come aside this evening 
from the busy rush of this great city to pay tribute to the 
memory of Pastor Russell. Let us in calmness and sobriety 
seek to know why this man was great, why we say with 
such assurance that he had the approval of God. 

God's laws are fixed and unchangeable. To all of His 
intelligent creatures he says, "Obey My Laws, and receive 
My approval and blessing. Take a different course, and 
you will fail to receive My blessing." Pastor Russell walked 
with the Lord in harmony with His law. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S SEARCH FOR TRUTH 

Nearly 65 years ago, a child was born in Allegheny 
County, Pennsylvania. His parents christened him Charles 
Taze Russell. His parents loved God and sought to obey 
Him. The parental influence was good for Charles. They 
trained the small twig; and it grew in the direction of the 
Lord. Early he became a Christian. 

But like other good, honest, conscientious Christian men 
and women, his parents had been taught the man-made 
creeds of the Church Nominal. Young Charles was taught 
that God is great and good, yet that He had made all men 
inherently immortal, and had provided a lake of fire and 
brimstone in which he would eternally torment all except a 
few whom He had predestinated should be saved. The honest 
heart of the lad revolted against such a horrible thing; 
and he in substance said, "I cannot believe that there is a 
just and wise God who would do such a thing to a poor, 
unfortunate human being." Forthwith he forsook the religion 
of the creeds; but while he was investigating other religions, 
his mind was turning to the Lord in an inquiring 
manner. Then he said, "I will study the Bible, and see 
whether or not it teaches that God has such an arrangement." 

True to his inborn character, he honestly and prayerfully 
searched the Scriptures. To his astonishment and joy he 
found that the Bible is God's great Word of Truth; that 



God has a great Plan of Salvation, provided by Him before 
the foundation of the world, which shall ultimately result 
in the blessing of human-kind. From the Bible he learned 
that God created the father of the human race— Adam, the 
first man— a perfect being, gave unto him a perfect wife, 
placed him in a perfect home under perfect conditions, and 
advised him that obedience to the Divine law would enable 
man to maintain this condition of perfection; that Adam 
violated the law of God and was sentenced to death; that 
he was then driven from his perfect home into the unfinished 
earth; that God permitted him to live for 930 years after he 
had been sentenced to death; that while undergoing this sentence, 
Adam for the first time exercised his power and authority 
to beget children; that by the law of heredity all of his 
children were born in sin and shapen in iniquity, and hence 
all came under the effects of the just penalty that had come 
upon the father— "that as by one man sin entered into the 
world, and death by sin, so death has passed upon all men, 
for all are sinners"; that ultimately the whole human race 

R6012: page 373 

would perish from the earth (death meaning destruction;) 
that man is a soul; that he does not possess one; that the 
soul consists of the body and the breath of life— the life 
principle— and these being separated, the soul is dead. 

HIS SEARCH REWARDED 

Then he learned that God had lovingly provided a Plan 
of Redemption of man from this condition of death— that 
God so loved the world that He gave His Only-Begotten 
Son, that whosoever would believe in Him should not perish, 
but have life everlasting— that Jesus, having a pre-human 
existence as a spirit being, was made human and grew to 
manhood's estate, in order that He, by the grace of God, 
might give His own perfect life whereby the purchase price 
would be provided for the redemption of Adam and all his 
race— that He died upon the cross and provided this price- 
that He was raised from the dead, no longer a man, but now 
Divine, and that He ascended into Heaven, there to use the 
merit of His human sacrifice according to the will of God 
—for the blessing of mankind. 

Furthermore, he learned from the Scriptures that the Lord 
Jesus would return and establish a Kingdom for the blessing 
of mankind; that in the interim between His resurrection 
and His Second Coming, God has been and is holding an 
election for the purpose of selecting from amongst men those 
who shall be associated with Christ Jesus as members of the 
Royal Family, and who, together with their Head and Master, 
will be the instrument through which Jehovah will bless all 
human-kind with the privileges of life, health and happiness; 
that the terms of this election are that everyone who desires 
to run for such a Prize must believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and consecrate his life— his all— to the service of the 
Lord; that those who would prove faithful, true and loyal 



unto death would participate in the First or Chief Resurrection, 
and be made kings and priests unto God and unto 
Christ and reign with Christ for the blessing of mankind. 

This wonderful story of the love of God thrilled the heart 
of young Russell. He readily and joyfully consecrated his 
all to the service of the Lord, and continued faithful in that 
service even unto death. 

Charles Taze Russell loved his fellow-men. Seeing the 
great truths contained in the Bible, he said, "I must preach 
these to my fellow-creatures; I must use all my power to 
lead the people out of darkness, that they may see the love 
of God." Vehemently he declared, "If the Bible does teach 
that eternal torture is the fate of all except the saints, it 
should be preached— yea, thundered from the house-tops 
weekly, daily, hourly; if it does not so teach, the fact should 
be made known, and the foul stain dishonoring God's holy 
name removed." 

With a strong physique, a fertile brain, and a brave heart, 
wholly devoted to the Lord, he consecrated and used all of 
his power to teach man the great Message of Messiah's Kingdom 
and the blessings which it will bring to the world. 

Early in his manhood he possessed a fortune of no mean 
size. He spent it all that the minds of men might be enlightened 
and their hearts made glad. Early in his battle 
for righteousness he spent, out of his own private fortune, 
forty thousand dollars in this great city of New York for 
the publication and free distribution of a booklet setting forth 
clearly the Truth concerning the doctrine of the Hell of the 
Bible, that all might learn that Jehovah is a God of Love. 

Other Christian people, sadly aware of the fact that they 
were not receiving spiritual food in the various churches to 
which they had attached themselves, had the eyes of their understanding 
opened by reading their Bibles in the light of the 
explanation thereof given by Charles Taze Russell. Gladly 
they began to support him and the righteous work in which 
he was engaged. Without solicitation or invitation, they joyfully 
brought forth their money and said, "What can we 

R6012: page 374 

do to have part in this glorious work which you have begun?" 

More than thirty years ago, a congregation of Christian 
people formed at Pittsburgh, Pa., selected Charles Taze Russell 
as their Pastor; and he served that congregation continuously 
as Pastor to the end, being able, however, to visit 
them only occasionally since the removal of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY headquarters to Brooklyn several 
years ago. He wrote and published a series of books— 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES-in six volumes, which turned 
a great flood of light upon God's Word. Millions of these 
have gone into the homes of men throughout the earth, 
bringing gladness to their hearts. For more than thirty 
years he edited and published a semi-monthly journal, THE 
WATCH TOWER AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, wholly devoted 
to the cause of Messiah's Kingdom. Be it known that 
this is the only publication on earth that has ever announced 



the presence of our Lord. The Lord Jesus promised that 
at His Second Coming, which should be invisible to human 
eyes. He would have one wise and faithful servant whom He 
would make ruler over all His goods to give meat to the 
Household of Faith in due season. Christians throughout the 
world who are familiar with the work of Pastor Russell 
readily recognize that he has long been that wise and faithful 
servant of the Lord. 

The work grew to great proportions; and desiring that it 
might be conducted in a systematic manner and perpetuated 
after his death, he organized the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY— a corporation, the charter of which was written 
by his own hand and is admitted, by men who know, to 
be a most remarkable document. Through this channel he has 
promulgated the message of Messiah's Kingdom to all the 
nations of the earth. Branches of this Society have been 
established and are maintained in the countries of Great 
Britain, Germany, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, 
Switzerland, France, South Africa, Australia, and in many 
other parts of the world. His publications have been translated 
into 34 different languages, and millions of copies have 
been supplied free to the people by means of money joyfully 
contributed by those with him who love the Lord and 
His cause of righteousness and who are looking with joy 
to the establishment of His Kingdom. 

Pastor Russell traveled and preached to the people throughout 
the world. He was elected Pastor of the Congregation 
at this Temple, and of the Brooklyn Tabernacle, of the London 
Tabernacle, of the Temple Congregation at Washington, 
D.C., the Congregation at Pittsburgh, the Auditorium Congregation 
at Chicago, the Congregation at St. Louis, Los 
Angeles, and those in many other parts of the world. These 
he visited at regular intervals, to encourage and comfort and 
help them. During the past few years his sermons have not 
only been heard from the platform, but have been published 
in approximately four thousand papers; and in practically 
every home of the United States and Canada Pastor Russell 
is known. He did a greater work for the cause of Messiah's 
Kingdom than did any other man that ever lived on the earth. 

HIS DYING HOURS 

A few weeks ago he started on a trip to the Pacific Coast, 
preaching every evening, and traveling throughout the remainder 
of the night and of the day. His last sermon he 
preached to the Congregation at Los Angeles; and being too 
weak to stand, he sat throughout the discourse. He left Los 
Angeles Sunday evening on his return to Brooklyn, and 
rapidly grew weaker. Seven hours before his death, addressing 
his traveling companion. Brother Menta Sturgeon, he said, 
"Make me a Roman toga." Using the bed sheets. Brother 
Sturgeon made a toga, which Brother Russell put on himself. 
He stood erect for a moment, and then lying down on the 
couch in his Pullman drawing room, closed his eyes, thus in 
symbolic language speaking of death. A great deal of the 
Bible is written in symbolic language, and it was quite appropriate 



that he should speak his last message in symbols. It 
is interesting here to know what a Roman toga symbolizes: 
Augustus' Poet Laureate, said, "It is by the toga that the 
royal nation is recognized." The word toga means a covering 
garment (white robe). It was the official robe of higher 
magistrates, priests and of persons discharging vows, and was 
worn on special occasions, such as celebrating a triumph. 

We are reminded of the last experiences of the Apostle 
Paul, who traveled with his beloved companion Timothy, 
whom he called his son— not a natural son, but, as St. Paul 
stated, he had begotten this young man in the spirit. Likewise 
Pastor Russell begot Brother Sturgeon in the spirit, in 
that he brought Brother Sturgeon to a knowledge of the 
Divine Plan. Shortly before St. Paul's death he wrote, "I 
am now ready to be offered up, and the time of my departure 
is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for 
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous 
Judge, shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but 
unto all them also that love His appearing." (2 Timothy 4:6-8.) 
Our dear Brother Russell not only loved the appearing 
of the Lord Jesus, but above all men on the earth he 
declared the presence of the Master. Brother Russell was a 
very modest man and never exalted himself. It was exceedingly 
difficult to get him to speak of himself. He chose, therefore, 
a symbol which we could afterwards interpret to speak 
practically the same thing spoken by the Apostle Paul. By 
wearing the toga Brother Russell in effect said, "I have 
fought the good fight; I have triumphed and shall be received 
as a member of the Royal Family of Heaven." 

What a wonderful example and inspiration for the other 
members of the Body of Christ this side the veil to earnestly 
strive to receive the approval of the Lord! 

This evening we see here lying, silent in death, the body 

R6013 : page 374 

which he so faithfully used to the last. But he is not dead! 
St. Paul wrote, "Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall not 
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." (1 Cor. 15:51,52.) God's Word points 
out that the resurrection of the saints would take place at 
the presence of the Lord and before the inauguration of His 
Kingdom; and the Scriptures clearly teach that this resurrection 
is now in progress; that our dear Brother and 
Pastor sleeps not in death, but was instantaneously changed 
from the human to the Divine nature, and is now forever 
with the Lord— glorious reward for a true and faithful servant. 

It has been announced that he was to speak in this Temple 
tonight. God had directed otherwise! Brother Russell had 
prepared a sermon to preach to you, and I am sure you will 
be glad to hear it. The lips of the body he used on earth 
are silent, but his words yet are spoken. By God's grace it 
is my privilege here to be used, and to speak forth to you 
the message which he left. My friends, give heed, if you 
please, while I read this message to the Church and to the 



world. Behold, how appropriate the subject: 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMON 
"THE MORNING COMETH AND A NIGHT ALSO" 

THE NIGHT WAS LONG-ITS SORROWS AND TEARS WERE MANY 
-GOD'S PROMISES ALONE ILLUMINATED IT-THE MORNING HERE 
AT LAST-A WONDERFUL DAWNING-THE DAY TO BE STILL MORE 
WONDERFUL-PROOFS ALL ABOUT US CONSIDERED-A BRIEF NIGHT 

OF TROUBLE SETTLING DOWN-ALREADY BEGUN IN EUROPE- 
AFTER IT A GLORIOUS SUNBURST. 

"Watchman, what of the night?. ..The morning cometh, 
and a night also."— Isaiah 21:1 1,12. 

"The literature of the world shows that intelligent 
men have refused to believe that the Divine Purpose in 
the creation of our earth has yet been attained. Continually 
we find references to 'the Morning of the New 
Day,' to the 'Golden Age,' etc., etc. Yet not to the longings 
of men's hearts, but to the promises of our God, do 
we look for real instruction on this subject. The Bible 
most emphatically declares that the entire period of human 
history thus far has been a night time. 

"The Prophet David explains, 'Weeping may endure 
for a Night, but joy cometh in the Morning.' (Psalm 30:5.) 
Thus prophetically we are assured that there will 
be a Morning whose glory, brightness and blessings will 
fully compensate for all the dark shadows of the Night 
time past. Our text is another prophecy along the same 
line. The message of the Lord is, 'The Morning cometh.' 
St. Paul writes that up to his time the world had 
been under a reign of Sin and Death, not under a Reign 

R6013 : page 375 

of Righteousness and Life. (Romans 5:21.) He points 
out also that the Day of the Lord will come, and will 
come gradually, stealthily, taking the world unawares— 
'as a thief in the night.'— 1 Thessalonians 5:1-6. 

"All of the Apostles assure us that it is not God's 
purpose to permit the reign of Sin and Death to continue 
forever. They tell us that the Divine Program is that 
Messiah, in the Father's appointed time, will take to Himself 
His great power and reign King of kings and Lord 
of lords— putting down sin and every evil thing, uplifting 
humanity and granting a Divine blessing where for six 
thousand years there has been a Divine curse. The Bible 
writers explain that this does not signify a change in the 
Divine Purpose, but that God had planned this thing in 
Himself from before the foundation of the world; and 
that although He had permitted Sin to enter and Death 
to reign. He had made fullest provision for the Redeemer 
to die for our sins and eventually to become the Restorer 
and Life-giver to Adam and his race— to as many of 



them as will accept everlasting life on the Divine terms. 

"The Apostles tell us that during the 'night time,' 
since Jesus' death, God has been doing a special work- 
selecting from mankind a special class, a saintly few— 
'the Church of the First-borns, whose names are written 
in Heaven.' These are not taken from any one nation 
or denomination. This 'little flock,' to whom it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom (Luke 12:32), 
is composed of all the saintly followers of Jesus, who 
walk in His steps in the narrow way during this Gospel 
Age. Their experiences are to qualify them for association 
with their Redeemer in His Messianic Kingdom. 
Their trials, their obedience and their sufferings for 
righteousness' sake are to work out for these a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Suffering with 
the Master for the Truth's sake in the present life, they 
are to share His glory, honor and immortality in the life 
to come. They are to be His joint-heirs in His Kingdom. 
-Galatians 3:29; 2 Timothy 2: 1 1, 1 2. 

THE KINGDOM SUNRISE NEARING 

"Amongst the Lord's people even, few yet understand 
that Jesus distinctly teaches that the 'Sun of Righteousness,' 
which will arise with healing in His beams and 
whose light will constitute the New Day, will be composed 
of the Church of Christ glorified— changed from human to 
Divine nature by participation in the First Resurrection. 
Our Lord Jesus tells this in the parable of the Wheat and 
the Tares. He declares that in the end of this Gospel 
Age all of the wheat class will be gathered into the 
Heavenly Garner, and that 'then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the SUN in the Kingdom of their Father.' 
(Matthew 13:43.) We must not think, however that this 
signifies the Church without the Redeemer, but must remember 
that Jesus is 'the Head over the Church which is 
His Body.'— Ephesians 1:22,23. 

"How wonderful, how beautiful, how appropriate are 
the word-pictures of the Bible! No one but the Lord 
knew of the great Divine Plan. No one but Him, therefore, 
could give these pictures of its development. In 
various terms and figures of speech the Bible attempts 
to give us a little glimpse of the glorious conditions of 
that Day. The New Day and the Kingdom will be 'the 
desire of all people.' In that Day the righteous will 
flourish, and evil-doers will be cut off from life. During 
that thousand-year Day of Messiah's Kingdom, Satan is 
to be bound, 'that he may deceive the nations no more.' 
(Revelation 20:2,3.) Landlordism will come to an end; 
for 'they shall not build and another inhabit; they shall 
not plant and another eat the fruit thereof,' but 'shall 
long enjoy the work of their hands.'— Isaiah 65:22. 

"The earth is to yield her increase. (Psalm 67:6.) 
Streams are to come forth in the desert; the solitary 
places are to be made glad. The entire earth is to become 
like the Garden of Eden. It is God's footstool, and 



He declares that He will make it glorious. It is not to 
be burned up with literal fire, as once we supposed. It 
is to 'abide forever.' (Ecclesiastes 1:4; Psalm 104:5.) 
'He formed it not in vain; He formed it to be inhabited.' 
-Isaiah 45:18; 66:1; 60:13; 35:1,7. 

WONDERFUL FOREGLEAMS OF LIGHT 

"The most wonderful thing that the Bible tells us 
respecting that New Day is that it will bring great intelligence 
and enlightenment to every creature. The light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth as the waters cover the face of the great deep. 
(Isaiah 1 1:9; Habakkuk 2: 14.) 'And they shall teach 
no more every man his neighbor, and every man his 
brother, saying. Know the Lord; for they shall all know 
Me, from the least of them unto the greatest, saith the 
Lord.' (Jeremiah 3 1 :34.) Ultimately every knee shall 
bow and every tongue shall confess, to the glory of God. 
-Philippians 2: 1 1 ; Isaiah 45:23. 

"What an enthusing prospect the Bible holds out before 
the Church and before as many of the world as can 
exercise a measure of faith to believe! The world indeed 
sees to some extent that great blessings are coming; 
but just what these are and how they are to come mankind 
know not; for 'the world by wisdom knows not God.' 
(1 Corinthians 1:21.) The worldly wise have rejected the 
Bible, and do not trust it as a Revelation from God. 
Thus the wise are caught in their own craftiness. (1 Corinthians 3:19.) 
Their boasted wisdom ensnares them 
and blinds them to the Divine Revelation. 

"Nevertheless, some of our greatest thinkers— Mr. 
Edison and others— are rapidly seeing that the world is 
just on the verge of the most wonderful inventions and 
knowledge, which will transform the face of the earth 
and the people thereof. They are corroborating the Bible 
unwittingly; for they believe it not and know not the 
character of its messages. 

THE DAWNING BEGUN IN A.D. 1874 

"Let us not stop now to discuss the darkness of the 
Night and its weeping. Let us awake, and take note of 
the fact that the dawning of the New Age is already 
here. For the past forty-two years we have been in it 
and enjoying many of its blessings. But those blessings 
came so stealthily— 'like a thief in the night'— that few 
recognize their import. Some few have been calling attention 
to the fact that we have been in the Millennial 
dawn ever since 1 874. 

"Bible chronology quite clearly teaches that the six 
thousand years since Adam's creation have ended— six 
great Days of a thousand years each, mentioned by St. 
Peter— 'a Day with the Lord is as a thousand years.' 
(2 Peter 3:8.) Now the great Seventh Day, also a thousand 
years long, has commenced. We have been enjoying 



its dawning. It is to be a grand Day! What wonder if 
the dawning be remarkable! 
"It may surprise some to be told that the past forty-two 

R6014: page 375 

years mean more to the world in increase of education, 
increase of wealth, increase of all manner of labor-saving 
inventions and conveniences, increase of safeguards and 
protections for human life, than did all the six thousand 
years which preceded them— many times over. The world 
has probably created a thousand times as much wealth 
during these forty-two years as during the entire six 
thousand years preceding. Yet these changes have come 
so gradually that few have noticed them. 

FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY EVERYWHERE 

"Forty-two years ago man labored from sun to sun; 
today we are rapidly approaching an eight-hour day. 
Forty-two years ago nearly all the labor of the world 
was done with sweat of face; today it is nearly all accomplished 
by machinery. Forty-two years ago the sewing-machine 
was just reaching perfection; today it is 
everywhere indispensable. So with the thousand household 
conveniences. So with nearly all of our sanitary 
and plumbing arrangements. So with farming implements. 
Reapers and binders, mowers, automobiles, gas 
engines, etc., etc., all belong to these forty-two years. In 
our cities the modern conveniences are wonderful. Solomon 
in all his glory never even dreamed of such things 
as the poorest human being in America may enjoy! 

"Prophecies respecting streams in the desert and the 
wilderness blossoming as the rose are having fulfilment— 
not miraculously, but in harmony with the Divine order 
of an increased intelligence amongst men. Artesian wells 
are being drilled, irrigating canals constructed, not only 
in the Western part of the United States and Canada, but 
also in far-off Mesopotamia. The results are marvelous. 
Land previously not worth fencing is valued at $500 per 
acre today. The increase of knowledge has been supplemented 
by governmental arrangements for the distribution 
of that knowledge amongst the people. The soils 
of various localities are being analyzed at public expense; 
and the tillers of the soil are given knowledge as respects 
what kind of fertilizers are required to bring 
satisfactory results. 

R6014: page 376 

"Under these conditions it does not surprise us to know 
that as much as 156 bushels of corn have been raised to 
one acre, and that 600 bushels of potatoes and over are 
not an uncommon record. Is not the Bible being fulfilled? 
Who can dispute these facts? What do they 
signify? We answer that they exactly corroborate the 



Divine declaration which describes our day: Many shall 
run to and fro; knowledge shall be increased; the wise 
of God's people shall understand; and 'there shall be a 
Time of Trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation.'-Daniel 12:4,10,1; Matthew 24:21. 

INCREASE OF WORLD-WIDE DISCONTENT 

"We are in the Morning of our text. Ah, what a 
glorious Morning! How changed the human conditions 
from those of our grandfathers! How thankful the whole 
world should be! Paeans of praise should be rising 
from all the people of the favored lands of civilization; 
and helping hands should be outstretched to carry the 
same blessings to heathen lands. But is it so? Are the 
people happy and rejoicing? Are they appreciative of 
the New Day?— of the gifts of Divine Providence? 

"No! In proportion as the blessings of God have 
come, the discontent of humanity has increased; and unbelief, 
not only in respect to the Bible as the Divine 
Revelation, but in many instances in respect to the very 
existence of an intelligent Creator. Notwithstanding the 
great increase in the world's wealth, and the fact that 
there are some noble souls who are using their share of 
the wealth in a praiseworthy manner, nevertheless the 
general operation of the law of selfishness prevails; and 
all the legislation which has been enacted, or can be 
enacted, fails to restrain the giant institutions— corporations 
—of our day, fails to hinder them from exploiting 
the masses in the interests of the comparatively few. 

"Did God know all these things? What will He do 
about them? Will He bring in the Millennial blessings, 
and risk that men shall take for granted that they have 
won the secrets of nature by their own wisdom and perseverance, 
and forget God entirely? Will they become 
more discontented? Would a Millennium of discontent 
be advantageous? What will God do about it? 

THE DARK NIGHT ALREADY SETTLING 

"According to the Bible, God foreknew the conditions 
of our day as we are now reviewing them; and in 
our text He gives a key to the situation— elsewhere in 
the Scriptures made very plain. Through the Prophet, 
God tells of the dark Night coming— after the Morning 
Dawn had been well ushered in— a dark storm-cloud 
just at sunrise. This dark hour is described in the 
prophecy of Daniel, and also in that of our Lord Jesus, 
to be 'a Time of Trouble, such as never was since there 
was a nation.' 

"Bible students see this great Time of Trouble already 
beginning in the letting loose of the winds of strife in 
Europe. In the light of the Bible they perceive that the 
result of this present war will be the great weakening of 
the nations— of the governments of the earth— and increased 
knowledge and discontent amongst the people. 



"The next phase of the Trouble, according to the 
Bible, is to be the 'great earthquake, such as was not since 
men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so 
great.' (Revelation 16:18.) This is not a literal earthquake, 
but a symbolic one— revolution. Then the third 
phase of the calamity— the darkest of all— will be the 
symbolic fire of anarchy, which will utterly destroy our 
present civilization. Then, in the midst of that most 
awful Time of Trouble, Messiah, the great King, will 
take His great power and will exercise it, with the result 
that the raging waves of the sea of human passion will 
all be quieted, the fires of anarchy will all be extinguished, 
and the Reign of Righteousness and Peace will begin. 

MESSIAH WILL "MAKE ALL THINGS NEW" 

"Cannot we see the wisdom of the great Creator's 
Program? He has determined to permit mankind to convince 
themselves of their own impotency, of their need 
of a God, and of the fact that there is a God, and that 
His glorious purposes for humanity are revealed in His 
Word. Ah, it is no wonder that the Bible speaks of that 
revelation of the Lord as the 'still small voice of God,' 
speaking to mankind through Messiah's Kingdom! No 
wonder the Lord declares that 'then He will turn to the 
people a pure Message, that they may all call upon the 
name of the Lord, to serve Him with one consent'! 

"St. Peter gives us a vivid picture of the New Order 
of things in Messiah's Kingdom. He says, 'The Day of 
the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which 
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the 
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and 
the works that are therein, shall be burned up;. ..the 
heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved. ...Nevertheless 
we, according to His promise, look for new heavens 
and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.'— 
2 Peter 3: 10,12,13. 

"The 'new heavens' will be the glorified Church, consisting 
of Jesus the Head and His Bride class, selected 
from the world during the past eighteen centuries. The 
'new earth' will be the new social order under the control 
of the new heavens. There will be no patching of 
present institutions, but a clean sweep of them by the fire 
of Divine wrath preceding the establishment of the New 
Order, wherein only that which is righteous, just, equitable, 
true, will be recognized. 

"We rejoice that such glorious things are coming- 
even though the world must necessarily reach them 
through the tribulation of the Time of Trouble. Happy 
are those whose eyes and ears of understanding are open 
now, and who are in such heart relationship with the 
Lord that He can make known to them in advance something 
of the riches of His grace, and show them how 
the coming troubles will work out blessings for the human 
family." 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S CHARACTER 

In this dark hour upon the nations let the peoples of 
the earth hear this message and heed it as one from the 
Lord. For forty years Pastor Russell has set forth in his 
writings that this dark hour would come soon. He reached 
this conclusion based upon the Word of the Lord. Behold, 
it is fully confirmed by the events we see. Let the Christian 
people of the earth, therefore, awake to the importance 
of the hour and heed the message-"THE KINGDOM OF 
HEAVEN IS AT HAND!" 

"Arise and shine; for thy light is come and the 
glory of the Lord is arisen upon thee."— Isaiah 60: 1. 

Enemies? Yes; he had some— God pity them! Jesus 
had enemies who relentlessly persecuted Him. I would not 
mar this occasion by reference to the enemies of Pastor 
Russell, but I know that he would be glad for me to speak 
anything that would help to open the eyes of understanding 
of those who are blinded to God's purposes. Blind prejudice, 
based upon false accusations of enemies, has tended 
to keep some in the dark. 

Truly it can be said that Pastor Russell's character was 
and is without blemish. He was the cleanest, purest and 
best man I ever knew. His enemies sought to make him 
of no reputation. By insinuation— the most cruel of 
weapons— they sought to destroy his power and influence, 
and hence his work. They utterly failed. I feel constrained, 
under the circumstances, to read to you a paper signed 
by Pastor Russell. 

In the year 1911 he was starting on a trip around the 
world. At that time the fiery darts from the enemy were 
coming thick and fast. He wrote out this instrument, made 
oath to it, and placed it in my hands, saying, "You may 

R6015 : page 376 

make it as public as your judgment dictates." It reads: 

"In view of my soon departure for a foreign shore, 
and in view of the increasing virulence and threats of my 
enemies, and under the assumption that they may await 
my absence to make a fresh attack, by advice of my 
counsel I make under oath the following sweeping statement; 
namely, 

"THAT I never was guilty of immorality toward any 
person. 

"FURTHERMORE, I never cohabited with any person at 
any time and, 

"FURTHER, I have never desired so to do. 

"WITNESS my hand and seal to this declaration this 
Twenty-Eighth day of Sept., 191 1, at Brooklyn, N.Y. 

(Signed) CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 

"Subscribed and sworn to before me this 3d day of 
October, 1911. C.H. MERRITT, 

"Commissioner of deeds for the City of New York." 

[Seal.] 



R6015: page 377 

But persecutions only stirred him to greater efforts in 
the cause of the King of kings, knowing, as he did, that 
such persecutions are evidences that the night is drawing 
on when no man can work. Without murmur or complaint, 
early and late, in winter and in summer, in heat and 
in cold, in season and out of season, amidst storms and in 
sunshine, as a mighty giant he fought on to the goal, never 
faltering or looking back. Truly, he died a hero, and died 
in the harness! "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of His saints." Truly at the close of his earthly career, 
as such a hero, he could say: 

"I have fought my way through; 

I have finished the work 

Thou didst give me to do." 
Silently listening we hear the response from the Throne 
of the Lord and Master: 

"Well and faithfully done; 

Enter into My joy and sit 

Down on My Throne!" 
Is his work finished? Ah, no indeed! Of such faithful 
ones who die during the presence of the Lord the 
Great Master said, "Blessed are the dead which die in the 
Lord from henceforth; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may 
rest from their labors; and their works do follow them."— 
Revelation 14:13. 

THE PRESENCE OF THE LORD 

The work that Pastor Russell did was not his work 
alone, but it was and is the Lord's work. It was Jesus who 
said that at His coming He would gird Himself and cause 
His servants to sit down at meat; and that He would come 
forth and serve them.— Luke 12:37. 

For forty years the Lord has been present, feeding 
those who have been hungering and thirsting for righteousness. 
For forty years Pastor Russell— that faithful 
servant of the Lord— has set forth clear and unmistakable 
evidence of the presence of the Master. He nailed the banner 
of Christ's presence on the title page of THE WATCH 
TOWER; and it shall never come down until the Kingdom 
is known in the earth. The flood of Present Truth has been 
rising for more than forty years, and it is rising higher and 
higher. As well might the enemies of the Truth seek with 
a common broom to sweep back the waves of the mighty 
Atlantic as to try to suppress the flood of Truth that is 
rising now. In spite of all the opposition that can be 
brought to bear, it will continue to rise until, as the Prophet 
declares, "the knowledge of the glory of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth as the waters fill the deep"; until 
such time as it will not be necessary for any man to teach 
his neighbor, saying. Know ye the Lord; for all shall know 
Him, from the least unto the greatest."— Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The thousands of Christian men and women in the 
earth today who have fought by the side of Pastor Russell 



have not been blindly following him. They have followed 
the Lord; they have followed Pastor Russell only as he 
followed the Lord. Recognizing him as the special servant 
of the Lord, they have fought by his side as his 
brethren, looking to Jesus, the Captain of their salvation; 
and having thus started in the fight, they will fight on until 
every one of the Kingdom class has gained the victory. 

A PERSONAL TRIBUTE TO THE PASTOR 

I cannot pass this moment without paying a personal 
tribute to Pastor Russell. He was my friend, and a true 
friend indeed. It is written, "A true friend loves you all 
the time." I loved him; I know he loved me. Long before 
I knew Pastor Russell, he had done much for me. 
While I was engaged in the law practice in the Middle 
West, there came into my office one day a lady, bearing 
some books in her arms. She was modest, gentle and kind. 
I thought she was poor, and that it was my privilege and 
duty to help her. I found that she was rich in faith in 
God. I bought the books and afterwards read them. Up 
to that time 1 knew nothing about the Bible: 1 had never 
heard of Pastor Russell. I did not even know that he was 
the author of the books at the time I read them; but I 
know that the wonderfully sweet, harmonious explanation 
of the Plan of God thrilled my heart and changed the 
course of my life from doubt to joy. 

Why should not I love him? I know that he loved me. 
A little incident illustrates this: Several years ago he 
requested me to go on a mission of importance. After 
talking with him I said, "Brother Russell, I feel that I cannot 
do it." He answered, "Yes you can, by the Lord's 
grace." I said, "I am willing to try." "Go on," he replied, 
"and I will pray God to give you the wisdom." "I went"; and 
having succeeded far beyond my expectations I returned 
and gave him a report. Seated in his study, as I went 
over the report in detail, his face lighted up with joy; and 
like a loving father he rose and put his arms around me, 
drew me to him and kissed me, saying, "Brother, 
I love you very much." I have walked with him; I have 
talked with him; I have eaten with him; I have slept with 
him; I have been with him through trials and triumphs; 
I have seen him in storm and in sunshine. Amidst all of 
these I have marked his complete joy in the Lord, his 
magnanimous heart, and his absolute loyalty and devotion 
to the Lord and to His cause. Gentle, kind, fearless and 
affectionate, magnanimous, sincere and filled with the 
spirit of the Lord, he was a giant of power in the world. 
I count it the greatest honor that I have known to have 
had Pastor Russell for my true and loyal friend, and that 
I have been privileged to be associated with him. 

I will relate to you an incident that throws some light 
on his sweet relationship with the Lord. For more than 
a year prior to his death he suffered a great deal of physical 
pain, yet never did he murmur. His great desire was 
to have the approval of the Lord and Master. He spoke 



the Master's name in loving terms, and his face lighted 
when he mentioned the Lord. A few weeks prior to this 
last illness, speaking to one whom he loved very dearly 
and in whom lie had great confidence, he said. "I have had 
such a longing desire to be embraced by the Lord Jesus, 
to think of myself as the woman, or bride, and to have the 
Master press me to His bosom. I have prayed earnestly 
to the Lord that I might experience this sweet relationship, 
and He has given me this assurance that I do enjoy 
that sweet relationship." Truly the Lord loved him much! 
Truly for him to live was for Christ to live! 

God's Book is written for those who are loyal to Him. 
His promises are to such. Among these sweet promises 
are the words of the Master: "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee the Crown of Life." "These shall be 
kings and priests unto God and unto Christ and shall reign 
with Him." Long ago God caused the Sweet Singer to 
record in His holy Book, concerning the faithful and loyal 
followers of Christ Jesus, these sweet words: 

"The king shall joy in Thy strength, O Lord: and in Thy 
salvation how greatly shall he rejoice. Thou hast given him his 
heart's desire, and hast not withholden the request of his lips. 
Selah. For Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness; 
Thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head. He asked life 
of Thee, and Thou gavest it him, even length of days forever 
and ever. His glory is great in Thy salvation; honour and 
majesty hast thou laid upon him, for Thou hast made him most 
blessed forever; Thou hast made him exceeding glad with Thy 
countenance."— Psalm 21:1-6. 

Truly these words fittingly apply to our beloved Brother 
and Pastor! 

Charles Taze Russell, thou hast, by the Lord, been 
crowned a king; and through the everlasting ages thy 
name shall be known amongst the people, and thy enemies 
shall come and worship at thy feet. 

We take the last view of this piece of clay that so faithfully 
bore the banner of the King. He has been a true, 
loyal, faithful ambassador of Christ. Thanks be to God, he 
has entered into his everlasting reward. The greatest desire 
of our lives is that we, together with him, may soon 
be forever with the Lord and participate in blessing all 
the families of the earth. God help us, as we here renew 
our consecration, to keep it faithfully to the end. 

We sorrow not for him who has gone, because we know 
he has entered into his everlasting joy. For him we rejoice; 
but we sorrow for ourselves. Yet trusting in the 
Lord we will continue to fight the good fight of faith. 

R6016 : page 378 

EXHORTATION TO FAITHFULNESS 

My beloved brethren— we who are here, and all who 
are in the earth— what shall we do? Shall we slacken our 



zeal for the cause of our Lord and King? No! By His 

grace we will increase our zeal and energy, to finish our 

course with joy. We will not fear nor falter, but will stand 

shoulder to shoulder, contending for the faith, rejoicing 

in our privilege of proclaiming the Message of His Kingdom. 

He has promised, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 

thee." "Faithful is He that calleth, who also will do 

it." Then why should we for one moment doubt the outcome 

of His work and His cause! True, the enemy of 

death has taken from us at a time when we did not expect 

it, our beloved Brother; and for this cause we are bowed 

down. Yel we are not dismayed, we are not discouraged. 

Let us lift up our heads and rejoice, for surely our deliverance 

draweth nigh! "THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND!' 

Today we are beholding the death throes of the nations 
of earth; we are standing at the portals of the Golden 
Age. Everyone who has accepted the Truth of God's 
Plan, in the love of the Truth, and who holds fast in that 
spirit, will win. Let everyone look well to his Armor. 
Let us gird up the loins of our minds, be sober and hope 
to the end. He who has led us thus far will lead us on. 
Remember, he who is faithful unto death shall receive the 
Crown of Life. 

United in the sacred and holy bonds of Heavenly love, 
as we journey the remainder of this race course, may we 
in sincerity and with understanding sing: 
"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above. 

"Our glorious hope revives 

Our courage every day. 
While each with expectation strives 

To run the Heavenly way." 



R6016 : page 378 
CLOSING SCENES IN NEW YORK AND PITTSBURGH 

The evening oration, the reading of Brother Russell's 
sermon which he himself had prepared to deliver in the 
Temple that evening, and the sweet strains of several 
hymns were still fresh in the minds of the vast audience 
when the pall-bearers carried forth from The Temple the 
casket containing the remains of our dear Brother Russell. 
Accompanying the body to Pittsburgh were two Pullman 
cars loaded with devoted and faithful friends, who were 
met by hundreds of loved ones at that place. 

The large auditorium of the Carnegie Library in Allegheny 
was packed at two o'clock the following afternoon, 
when the fourth part of the funeral services began under 
the direction of Dr. W.E. Spill, representing the Pittsburgh 
congregation. Love and deep interest were written 



upon every face in this vast audience also. Every available 
space on the platform was used to display the rich 
floral offerings of every description sent by Bible Students 
and friends from various sections of the country. 

The blending of the voices composing the double quartette 
in their rendition of sweet Christian hymns was the 
means of conveying blessings of comfort and encouragement 
to many sorrowing hearts. After the reading of the 
Holy Scriptures by Brother R.E. Bricker, also of the 
Pittsburgh Ecclesia, Dr. W.E. Spill delivered an address. 
He was followed by Brother Sturgeon, after which, while 
the congregation was taking its final view of the face of 
that noble Christian lying before them, the choir sang the 
last song given out by Brother Russell during his recent 
visit to Los Angeles: 

"Abide sweet Spirit, Heavenly Dove, 
With light and comfort from Above; 
Be Thou our Guardian, Thou our Guide, 
O'er every thought and step preside." 

The funeral cortege consisted of 101 automobiles and 
a train of several trolley cars. The beautiful Rosemont 
Cemetery was reached at dusk, where a company of five 
hundred friends were gathered on the hillside to witness 
the last sad rites in connection with the placing of our 
loved one in the grave. An avenue lined with flowers 
was formed, through which came the mourners with bared 
heads, bearing solemnly the casket containing the remains 
of our Pastor. The walls of the grave were lined with 
ferns and white chrysanthemums. At the foot of the 
grave was a floral design inlaid with colors of gold, which 
silently expressed the belief that the victorious Christian 
soldier, whose body lay before us, had gone home, and 
was now a partaker of the Divine nature. 

While the bier rested upon the supports over the open 
grave, prayer was offered, and the casket was lowered to 
its last resting place, during which the choir impressively 
sang the beautiful words of Hymn No. 98. 

It was fitting that while our Beloved had gone to be 
forever with the Lord and like Him, his remains should 
rest near the scenes of his earlier days, where the Harvest 
work began, and where the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
which contributed much to his fame, were written and 
first circulated. 



R6016 : page 378 

LETTERS EXPRESSING SYMPATHY AND LOYALTY 

[The Harvest Work, of which Pastor Russell was the leading 
spirit in the world for more than forty years, was and is the Lord's 
work. The friends everywhere recognize this. The great number of 
letters daily received from all parts of the land, since Brother Russell's 
death, clearly manifest the loyalty of the dear brethren to the cause 
of Messiah's Kingdom and evidence their determination to press forward 



along the mark for the Prize of the High Calling. The Society greatly 
appreciates these assurances of full cooperation in the Lord's work. 
What a great incentive to renewed zeal, courage and faithfulness! We 
give a few samples of these letters below. Others will be published 
from time to time in THE WATCH TOWER as space will permit:] 

AT THE GRAVE SIDE 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

Upon a hillside, sloping towards the south, we gathered 
round about upon that hallowed ground to pay our last sad 
tribute to the one we loved, the greatest man on earth in 
these last days— and great because he was approved of God! 
How ineffable the beauty of the scene! So peaceful and so 
still! The gently rolling hills, far as the eye can reach, reminding 
us that, "As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, 
so the Lord is round about His people from henceforth, 
even forever." A violet mist creeps softly through the 
valleys at our feet, and faintly dims the City's distant lights. 

The sacred silence is broken only by the singing of our 
choir, like angel voices floating out upon the evening air: 
"How vain is all beneath the skies! 
How transient every earthly bliss! 
How slender all the fondest ties 
That bind us to a world like this!" 
Above the purple haze, and low within the western sky, the 
last faint, crimson glow of sunset slowly pales into the silvery 
whiteness that precedes the night. And lo! the evening 
star! How like a star was our beloved! And how he shed 
the rays of Truth divine into the darkness of our minds and 
changed that darkness to "His marvelous light!" 
"The evening cloud, the morning dew. 

The withering grass, the fading flower. 
Of earthly hopes are emblems true. 
The glory of a passing hour." 
How exquisitely expressive of all about us! The withered 
grass beneath our feet, the fading flowers upon the upturned 
earth, and here and there the bare, brown trees, a few crisp 
leaves still faintly fluttering on their boughs. Their fruit has 
all been gathered, and they speak to us of harvest soon to end. 
"In this is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." Did 
our beloved Pastor bear much fruit? Ah, yes! How much, 
he now may know as he hath never fully known before! 
"But, though earth's fairest blossoms die. 

And all beneath the skies is vain, 
There is a brighter age now nigh. 

Beyond the reach of care and pain." 

R6016 : page 379 

And standing there, our hearts rejoiced with joy unspeakable 
that in His infinite love and mercy the Lord had not permitted 
that most precious clay to suffer violence, but, "Like 
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that 
fear Him," and He saved us from the anguish which might 
have been greater than we could bear! Yet he suffered— 



how greatly God only knows, for he never murmured or complained; 
but he suffered not by hands of wicked men, and so 
we rendered thanks to God! 

"Then let the hope of joys to come 

Dispel our cares, and chase our fears. 
Since God is ours, we're traveling home. 
Though passing through a vale of tears!" 
With eyelids closed, and sorrowing hearts, we bowed our 
heads in final prayer with one who also loved and labored 
with him to the end. 

R6017 : page 379 

And then in silent little groups the friends departed from 
the scene, and as we climbed the hill to reach the road, the 
moon shone full upon us. Ah, yes! The full moon of God's 
favor, and our hearts cried out, "How long, O God, until the 
night shall come, that night wherein no man can work!" 

One last and lingering look upon the scene recalled to mind 
that wonderful picture, "The Return from Calvary," with 
its three crosses faintly outlined on the evening sky, and the 
sorrowful women wending their way towards Jerusalem. 

And now it had grown strangely dark, no object was discernible 
on either side the road, as we, the Lord's still faithful 
followers of these later days, were swiftly borne towards the 
city of our beloved leader's birth. 

How wondrously appropriate all had been! The suggestion 
of the Harvest soon to end, the ingathering of the ripened 
fruits, the softly falling twilight, like a curtain dropped 
upon the scene, and now the darkness and loneliness of the 
flock of sheep whose faithful shepherd had been "smitten!" 

How necessary now to walk still more "by faith" in the 
Great Shepherd of us all, the One who is "too wise to err, too 
good to be unkind;" "who doeth all things well." Be brave, 
be strong, weep not, have faith in God! 

"It is the LORD, let Him do what seemeth Him good!" 

Thus. 
"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may!" 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



REGULARLY ELECTED PASTOR 34 YEARS 

We, the Pittsburgh Congregation of Associated Bible Students, 
deeply mourn the death of our Beloved Pastor, who 
has lovingly and faithfully served us for so many years. In 
loving consideration of his high honor and noble Christian 
character, his untiring labors on behalf of the Lord's people 
both here and elsewhere, his many noble sacrifices and patient 
endurance of much persecution on behalf of the Lord's Truth, 
his devoted faithfulness to the Lord and to the Lord's Word 
under every condition of trial; therefore, be it resolved. 

That this Congregation bear witness to Christians everywhere 
of our deep appreciation of the patient watchcare, the 



wise counsel, and the helpful and loving guidance of his 
thirty-four years as the regularly elected Pastor of this Congregation, 
both in the Word and work of the Lord. We have 
full confidence of faith that, his work finished, he has now 
entered into that blessed "rest that remaineth for the people 
of God." "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from 
henceforth; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from 
their labors, and their works do follow them." Be it further 

Resolved, That these resolutions be printed in the Pittsburgh 
newspapers, and that a copy be sent, with fraternal 
love in Christ, to the New York City Temple Congregation, 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle Congregation, the London Tabernacle 
Congregation and through them to all members of the 
International Bible Students Association, as an expression of 
our sympathy in our mutual loss, and of our prayer that the 
Lord's continued blessing be with them. 

We, the undersigned Chairman and Secretary of the Congregation 
herein named, do hereby certify that the foregoing 
was unanimously adopted by the Pittsburgh Congregation of 
Associated Bible Students, at a meeting held November 19, 
1916, at the Bible Students Auditorium, 305 Penn Avenue, 
Pittsburgh. Pa. 

W.E. SPILL, Chairman, 
R.H. BRICKER, Secretary. 



LETTERS OF RESIGNATION FROM EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

MR. W.E. VAN AMBURGH, MR. H. CLAY ROCKWELL, 13-17 
Hicks St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I have received and read with interest and care your 
valued letter of the 9th inst., and thoroughly appreciate the 
spirit of fellowship and consideration manifested. 

I am in full harmony with the judgment of the Editorial 
Committee and the Board of Directors that all the Editorial 
Staff should be in close personal touch, and not being situated 
so that I can take up my residence in Brooklyn, I hereby 
tender my resignation from the Editorial Staff to be effective 
at once. 

It is a matter of great satisfaction to me that there are 
able brethren on the ground, and nominated by our dear 
Pastor, who are probably more fully equipped than I to carry 
on the work outlined in the Will. 

I know it is unnecessary for me to say that I am in the 
closest and warmest head and heart sympathy and fellowship 
with all the work delegated to the various departments of 
the Society, and shall hold myself in readiness to respond to 
every opportunity for service that I can discern or you can 
designate. Yours in our Redeemer, W.E. PAGE. 



To A. I. RITCHIE, 



Vice-President W.T.B. & T. Society, 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RITCHIE:- 

In harmony with the Will of our dear Brother Russell, 
a copy of which I received, together with your letter of the 
3rd inst., I am addressing you and through you the other 
members of the Editorial Staff of THE WATCH TOWER. 

While I love the Lord and His people devotedly, and 
while I would greatly appreciate the privilege of serving as 
a member of the Editorial staff of THE WATCH TOWER, I am 
compelled because of conditions to decline to accept such 
place. As you know I was a member of the Bethel Family 
at the time Brother Russell added my name in his Will to 
the Editorial staff; that for more than a year past I have 
not been a member of the Bethel Family and am not now, 
because it became necessary for me to take a position in the 
world to earn a living for my family. After prayer and due 
consideration, I believe it to be in harmony with the Lord's 
will that I decline to accept the position assigned to me by 
the Will of our dear Brother Russell, and I therefore decline 
to accept the same. 

I offer my resignation, humbly awaiting the Lord's leading. 
Should you at a later time, by reason of vacancy in the 
Editorial staff, understand it to be the Lord's will and in 
harmony with the provisions of Brother Russell's last Will 
that I serve, I hope and pray, by the Lord's grace, that I 
will be ready to respond fully and promptly. Again craving 
an interest in your prayers. 

Your brother and servant by the Lord's grace, 
E.W. BRENNEISEN. 



REDOLENT OF RICHEST PERFUME 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

At a meeting of our Church this evening, I was requested 
by a unanimous vote to express to you as best I 
can the sorrow of heart under which we are laboring, because 
of the death of our faithful and Beloved Pastor; and 
to assure you of our desire and determination to cooperate 
heartily, in our feeble way, with those who shall have the 
privilege and responsibility of supervising and directing the 
Harvest Work during what we believe will be but a brief 
period before the coming storm shall burst upon us in all 
its fierceness and fury. 

As to our deep sorrow, let us say that it is not an unmixed 
sorrow; for while we shall no more see his dear 
face, and no more hear his wise and loving words of godly 
instruction, his exhortations to holiness of life, and his fatherly 
counsel, yet we rejoice that his sufferings are forever past, that 
his unremitting toils are over, and that the scorpion-tongue 
of vituperation, slander and vilification can never again 
reach and give pain to his great, loving, tender heart. 

His example of self-sacrificing loyalty to God, the Truth 



and the Church, his patience, perseverance and indefatigable 
zeal, the sweetness of his spirit, his freedom from 
animosity and resentment under the most cruel and malignant 
persecution, will ever remain an incentive to us to 
emulate him in the attainment of these fruits of the Spirit. 
Truly the memory of him is most precious, and redolent 
of the richest perfume. Truly may we, without irreverence, 
apply the words of the poet to him: 
"Long, long be my heart 

With such memories filled. 
Like the vase in which roses 
Have once been distilled; 
You may break, you may shatter 

The vase if you will. 
But the scent of the roses 
Will cling to it still." 
Your brethren and sisters in our dear Redeemer, 
SUFFOLK ECCLESIA.-Va. 

R6017 : page 380 

HAVE CONFIDENCE IN THE LORD'S ARRANGEMENT 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We are glad, dear Brethren, that through the providential 
leading of our dear Heavenly Father, in the affairs of His 
Church, an opportunity of service has been placed in our 
hands, respecting which we desire to take full advantage. 

Realizing the added responsibility which the Lord of the 
Harvest has seen wise to place in your hands at this time, 
through the removal of our dear Pastor from our midst, and 
anticipating your mingled feelings of loneliness and sorrow, 
and the loss which you, possibly more than any others of the 
Church still this side the veil have sustained, we hasten to 
extend to you our sincere, fervent love, and warmest sympathy 
in this your hour of special and peculiar trial. 

We wish to assure you, dear Brethren, of our full confidence 
in the wisdom of the Lord's arrangement, in that He 
now desires that the great work so faithfully and wisely 

R6018 : page 380 

introduced and carried on until the present time through the 
supervision of our Beloved Pastor, shall be continued without 
interruption through you as His chosen servants. 

We wish also to state that our earnest desire is to continue 
to cooperate with you in every possible way, in whatever 
work our dear Heavenly Father may yet have for His 
Church who still remain in the flesh. 

We pray for you, dear Brethren, that the Lord may pour 
out upon you very richly the spirit of wisdom and understanding 
in the knowledge and favor of the Lord, that you 
may be granted a knowledge of His will, together with the 
grace and strength which He has so graciously promised to 
all His faithful children. 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make 



His face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee. The 

Lord lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace." 
TORONTO ECCLESIA.-Can. 



SORROW GIVES PLACE TO JOY 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

Our hearts join yours in sympathy at the taking away of 
our beloved Brother and Pastor Russell. How sorrowful it is 
to be separated from the one we love so dearly! Our hearts 
cannot help being filled with sorrow for the loss of this faithful 
servant of the Lord, who so much loved us as to lay down 
his life in our behalf. 

But we "sorrow not as others that have no hope." When 
we think of his many years of toil and suffering patiently 
endured for the sake of his Master, when we think of the 
bitter persecution by relentless foes inside and outside of the 
Church, the befouling of his good name, and the besmirching 
of his good reputation, we rejoice greatly to know that his 
great tribulation has forever ended. 

In fact, our sorrow is displaced by joy when we contemplate 
the glorious exaltation that is his. We know that 
he is not "asleep" in death, but "changed" and "raised incorruptible" 
—"caught up" "to meet the Lord," and so shall he 
ever be with the Lord. Yes, we acclaim, "Blessed" are you, 
dear Brother; you are at rest from your labors and your work 
follows with you. "-1 Cor. 15:51,52; 1 Thes. 4:17; Rev. 14:13. 

How we all the more long for the time when we shall 
similarly have finished our course with joy and been ushered 
into the presence of our adorable Lord together with His 
saints! Meantime it is ours to press on with renewed zeal 
until the work be done and we at last receive the crown. 

We anticipate your increased responsibilities, dear brethren, 
and we pray the necessary increase of the Lord's Spirit 
upon you in carrying on the work of the ministry. 

TWIN FALLS ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS.-Idaho. 



WORDS OF COMFORT AND CHEER 

TO THE WATCH TOWER:- 

WHEREAS it has pleased our dear Heavenly Father to 
call our Beloved Pastor home, and inasmuch as our hearts 
have been made sad because we may no longer hear his 
kindly voice nor behold his dear face in the flesh, we nevertheless 
rejoice in the spirit, being confident that he has experienced 
his glorious resurrection change, having heard the 
sweet "Well Done," and is now counted worthy to see our 
Lord as He is; 

Resolved, That in the death of our Beloved Pastor, 
Charles T. Russell, we have sustained the sorrowful 
loss of a wise and efficient Pastor, a true and noble Christian 
character, a kind and loving friend, a safe adviser and counselor. 



a masterful preacher and author, a true and faithful 
interpreter of the Scriptures and an ambassador of Christ 
appointed of God the Father to bring forth things new and 
old from the Storehouse of knowledge for the enlightening 
of the people and for the perfecting of the saints in this, 
the Laodicean stage of the Church; and 

Resolved, That inasmuch as the work of this loyal man 
of God has been completed on this side of the veil and as a 
result he has inherited glory, honor and immortality as a reward 
of faithful self-sacrifice even unto death, we, the members 
of the Richmond Class, having been influenced by his 
noble life and Christian character, and appreciating the perfume 
exhaled therefrom, feel constrained to renew our efforts 
to press on with vigor toward the Heavenly goal; and be it 
further. 

Resolved, That we will cooperate with our brethren at 
the Bethel Home, and others of like precious faith elsewhere 
in harmony with the W.T.B. & T. Soc'y and its various 
auxiliaries, in the promulgation of the gems of Truth so 
precious to our dear Pastor; and we solicit Pilgrim visits in 
the future as in the past. 

Again, we further resolve, that having profited by 
his life of self-sacrifice, which has brought to us untold 
blessings and growth in Christian character, we will continue 
to raise our voices in heartfelt gratitude and thanksgiving to 
our dear Heavenly Father and blessed Redeemer for the privileges 
and favors which have been ours through his untiring 
zeal and loving ministry. 

Praying that the Lord's abounding grace may continue to 
abide with, and the influence of the Holy Spirit may over-shadow 
and guide in love and humility all those in charge 
of the work at the Bethel Home and elsewhere, and trusting 
to be remembered at the Throne of Heavenly Grace by all 
who have passed from death unto life, and especially those 
upon whom the mantle of our Beloved Pastor has fallen, 

With fervent Christian love, RICHMOND ECCLESIA.-Va. 



"BE STRONG IN THE FAITH" 

OUR DEAR BRETHREN:- 

With the passing of our dearly Beloved Pastor beyond 
the veil, and with the realization of all that this means to 
us, comes the thought of our dear Brethren at Brooklyn, 
who were so closely associated with him in the work, and 
on whom will now fall the heavier responsibility. We 
hasten to extend to you our loving sympathy, and to assure 
you of our confidence in you as you attempt to carry 
on the work to its completion, praying for you the Lord's 
special guidance and direction as you seek to know and 
to do His will. 

What a comfort we find in our Heavenly Father's Word! 
How doubly precious are the Promises, and with what 
special force they come to us in this hour, as though 
written especially for us at this time. It is written, "The 



Lord will not forsake His people," and we know "He is 
faithful who promised." Therefore "let us hold fast the 
profession of our faith without wavering." (Heb. 10:23,24.) 
How fitting is our text for the year: "Be Strong in Faith" 
—faith that will trust Him where it cannot trace Him! 

And while the sense of our great loss comes to us with 
crushing force, yet how we do rejoice for him that he has 
gone to his reward and has entered into that glorious rest 
promised to the faithful ones. Surely he was faithful in 
all that the Lord gave him to do; and we can lift up our 
heads and rejoice, knowing our deliverance must be drawing 
very near! How this thought, together with his loving 
example, should spur us on with doubled zeal to make our 
own calling and election sure. Brethren, let us all strive 
more earnestly to be faithful— even unto death! 

Your Brethren in Christ, BOULDER CHURCH.-Colo. 



IMPLORING HEAVENLY GUIDANCE FOR THE WORK 

DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

Whereas it has, in the determination of our great, all-wise 
and loving Father, pleased Him to suddenly take from our 
midst our Beloved Brother and Pastor, C.T. Russell, and, 
as we believe, give him a share of joy and service in the 
spiritual phase of the Kingdom, we hereby humbly bow before 
His unerring decision in taking from us that "faithful 
servant," and render thanks for the many blessings received 
through his ministrations; for the light upon God's Word 
that has come to us, and the joy of life and hope for the 
future that has been brought to us through his services. 

We realize and appreciate the great responsibility that has 
so suddenly been cast upon those who are directly associated 
with the central executive part of the work still remaining 
while we are here in the flesh. In the midst of these conditions 
we turn to our loving Father, to whom we can come 
courageously through our blessed Lord and Savior, asking 

R6018 : page 381 

that wisdom may be granted you to continue the work as 
would be most pleasing to our dear Lord. 

We will daily continue to pray for God's blessings to go 
with the members of the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel, 
and every member of our Father's family. 

DULUTH CHURCH.-Minn. 



CONFIDENCE IN SOCIETY'S REPRESENTATIVES 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

It was with mingled sorrow and rejoicing that we learned 
of the decease of our dearly Beloved Pastor. We sorrow because 
of our great loss, but rejoice as well because of his 



abundant gain. 

How we shall miss his wise counsel and helpful admonitions, 
the benediction of his radiant countenance, and the 
sympathetic touch of his hand! Yet our Heavenly Father 
has seen fit to remove him in the midst of his work to the 
place prepared for the saints beyond the veil, and we would 
bow humbly before that decree. Surely to be with Christ 
is far better! He had fought a good fight, he had kept the 
faith, his course was finished, and in obedience to the summons 
he is now with his Lord. Hallelujah, what a Savior! 

We would express our confidence and harmony with the 
Society's representatives at Headquarters, and our undivided 
sympathy and cooperation with those brethren and colaborers 
of the Bethel and Tabernacle who have stood so loyally and 
faithfully by our dear Brother. 

R6019: page 381 

We would unite our prayers with those of other Ecclesias 
for the Heavenly Father's guidance in every phase of 
the Harvest work. TRURO ECCLESIA.-Nova Scotia. 



PLEDGE LOYAL SUPPORT 

DEAR FELLOW-MEMBERS OF THE BODY OF CHRIST:- 

We desire to convey to you our deep Christian love and 
sympathy in the loss which all have sustained in the death 
of our Beloved Pastor, C.T. Russell. While we "sorrow 
not as do others," nevertheless we believe the dear family 
at Brooklyn will in a special sense miss our beloved 
Brother. We greatly rejoice on his behalf, believing that 
he has passed beyond the veil, has experienced his resurrection 
"change," and with the others of the faithful will 
henceforth be forever with the Lord. 

This Ecclesia, by a unanimous vote, pledges their loyal 
support in every way possible to those who shall continue 
to direct the affairs of the Society. We assure you, dear 
brethren, of our hearty cooperation so long as the Glad 
Tidings of the Kingdom shall be advanced in the same 
manner and spirit as during the life of our beloved Pastor. 
To this end you have our prayers. 
With mutual sympathy and Christian love, 

ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS.-New Brighton, Pa. 



PRAYERS FOR WISDOM, COURAGE, GRACE 

WHEREAS, The news that our dearly Beloved Pastor, C.T. 
Russell, has been suddenly taken from us, has filled us with 
deep emotion, which we know is shared by all who have received 
the benefit of his faithful teachings of Present 
Truth, and, although our hearts are filled with sorrow for 
our loss, yet we rejoice for him that he has gone to be 



forever with the Lord. 

We are thankful for the untiring faithfulness of his 
service for us, to build us up in the most holy Faith and 
for his example of personal purity. We realize that his 
loss will be sadly felt by the brethren left in charge of the 
work and upon whom great responsibility will fall. 

RESOLVED, That we extend to our dear brethren at the 
Bible House our heart-felt sympathy and condolences, assuring 
them that our earnest prayers will be for them, 
that they may be given the needed wisdom, courage and 
grace to continue the work which Brother Russell has left 
in their hands, until the due time comes for closing it up. 

We desire further to express our confidence that their 
service in the work will be actuated by the same loving 
spirit of self-sacrifice, which has been so beautifully expressed 
in the life and labors of our dearly Beloved Pastor 
and Brother. 

"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, that they 
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow 
them." 

BEAUMONT CLASS.-Tex. 



THUNDERBOLT THROUGH SOUL OF THE CHURCH 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

May the Lord greatly strengthen and bless the hearts of 
every one of you in this hour of great bereavement! Surely 
the Lord has sent a thunderbolt through the very soul of the 
Church! His hand is as visible in dear Brother Russell's death 
as it has been in his life. Our very nature is shaken and we 
think it will surely be blessed to the good of us all, in keeping 
with the Lord's promise. 

Be assured, dear brethren, you have our prayers, our sympathy, 
and oui' love as never before: and we shall esteem it 
our highest privilege as well as pleasure to cooperate with 
you to the fullest extent of our ability. 

May God bless you all in your loneliness! We feel 
lonely; but it must fall much heavier upon you than upon us. 
May we all be aroused by his noble example, and may we meet 
where partings are no more! 

It was not our privilege to be with you in person, but we 
were fully with you in spirit. 

On Sunday, Nov. 5th, we held a Pastor Russell Memorial 
service at Millville, N.J. The forenoon was given to praise 
and testimonies, using this subject: "The effect that Pastor 
Russell's life, and now His death, has had upon me." In the 
afternoon I addressed them upon this subject: "The Truth 
as applied to the Life and Character of Pastor Russell." We 
enjoyed blessed fellowship and hope good was done. 
O.L. SULLIVAN.-N.J. 



EXPRESS CONFIDENCE 



DEAR BRETHREN AT BROOKE YN:- 

Greetings in the name of our dear Lord and Redeemer! 
Whereas the death of our dearly Beloved Pastor has caused 
grief and sadness to come into our hearts; and realizing 
our great loss in that we are now deprived of his loving 
counsel and personal supervision over the Harvest Work, 
nevertheless we rejoice in the assurance that he is now 
with our glorified Lord and Master, and like Him. 

We desire to express to the Bethel Family, and to all of 
the Bible House associates of our dear Pastor, our loving 
sympathy and assurance of implicit confidence and hearty 
cooperation in carrying on, if such be the Father's will, the 
great work in which our Beloved Pastor so faithfully sacrificed 
his all, even unto death. 

Our prayer is that the Father of all mercies will bless 
your efforts in behalf of His cause; and that His grace 
may sustain and comfort you in this hour of sorrow, and 
be found sufficient for the added responsibility which now 
rests upon you. 

Your Brethren of the LOUISVILLE ECCLESIA.-Ky. 



UNQUALIFIED SUPPORT PROMISED 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD:- 

Needless to say, the announcement of our Pastor's passing 
beyond came to us with a measure of surprise. We are, 
nevertheless, rejoicing in the thought of his having entered 
abundantly into the reward promised to the "more than overcomers, 
and that he has received the "Well done, good and 
faithful servant." "The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh 
away; blessed be the name of the Lord." We are glad that, 
by His grace, we are enabled to bow our hearts and minds in 
humble submission to the will of God, and to wait His good 
pleasure toward us in His own time and way. "It is the Lord, 
let Him do what seemeth Him good." 

We would like to take this opportunity of expressing to 
you our earnest and willing cooperation and unqualified support 
in carrying on that which remains of the Harvest work, 
in whatever manner the Lord would seem to indicate as being 
His will for us all. Should you require at any time our services 
in Western Canada, we would esteem it a great privilege 
to assume any responsibility entrusted to our care. Our desire 
in this is to express our continued loyalty toward, and willingness 
to serve the Lord, the Truth and the Brethren. 

WINNIPEG ECCLESIA.-Man. 



ASSURANCES OF COOPERATION 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We desire to convey to you our sincere Christian love 
and sympathy in this dark hour of bereavement. Seldom 



have joy and sorrow been so sharply intermingled; for 
while we truly rejoice with you in the fact of the deliverance 
of our dear Pastor in the First Resurrection, and in 
the further evidence of the end being near, we as truly 
and sincerely share with you the natural sorrow so keenly 
felt in this trying hour. Language cannot express the 
love of our hearts for our dear Brother. 

Yet, dear Brethren, in humble and loving submission we 
say, "Thy will be done"; and as we stand beside that open 
grave, let us resolve that, come what will, we, too, will 
be found ready and willing at all times to lay down our 

R6019: page 382 

lives as meekly and as unselfishly as did he in defense 
of the Cause we all love so well. We assure you of our 
continued support and cooperation in the spreading of the 
Glad Tidings, and may we also hear the loving Father's "Well 
Done." NIAGARA FALLS, ONT. ECCLESIA. 



HEARTY DESIRE TO CONTINUE SUPPORT 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

At a special meeting called for the purpose of taking 
action on the death of our dearly Beloved Pastor, Charles 
Taze Russell, the following resolution was passed and 
unanimously adopted: 

RESOLVED, That inasmuch as it has pleased our Heavenly 
Father in His infinite wisdom to take from our midst 
"that Servant," our Beloved Pastor and Brother, we desire 
to convey to you, the dear ones of the Bethel Home and 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, a full assurance of our loyalty, our 
confidence, our love and our prayers, and a hearty desire 
to cooperate with you in the faithful continuance of the 
defense of the Truth and of the Harvest Work so nobly 
and loyally carried forward by our dear Brother Russell. 
ALBANY ECCLESIA.-N.Y. 



FAITH HAS REASSERTED ITSELF 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We were shocked and grieved to learn of our dear Pastor's 
death! For a time we were so shaken and unsettled that we 
did not know which way to turn, but that feeling has worn 
off, and faith has reasserted itself. 

We rejoice that our Beloved Pastor has gained "the Crown 
of Life," and we would not wish to have him back to endure 
pain and weariness. We have faith that the Lord of the 
Harvest, who raised him up to do such a wonderful work, 
is still able to carry forward that work, through other agencies, 
to its completion. We extend to you our love and sympathy 



R6020 : page 382 

in this hour of trial, and assure you of our fervent 

prayers in your behalf— that the Lord's will be done and His 

name glorified, no matter what new conditions may arise. 

We pledge you our hearty support in any way we can 
render it, and assure you that it is our aim to follow you, 
as you follow Christ. 

We pray that no divisions may arise to distress and separate 
the Lord's flock, but that we may all be drawn into a 
more complete oneness in Him. Above all, we pray that the 
Lord's Spirit may rest richly upon those who shall in any 
measure take the place of our dear Pastor. 

Your brethren, by grace Divine, 

SPARTANBURG CLASS. -S.C. 



RENEWED DETERMINATION TO HOLD FAST 

DEAR BETHEL FAMILY:- 

We desire to convey to you all an expression of our 
love and sympathy, as was expressed unanimously by us 
in the following resolution: 

"That we convey to the Bethel Family and those so 
closely associated in the Society's work, our sincere sympathy 
and Christian love, assuring you of our renewed 
determination to hold fast the profession of our faith to 
the end, and to be loyal to the Truth, the Brethren and the 
Society, esteeming it, as the Lord's servant, in carrying on 
the work so nobly and faithfully conducted by our dear 
Brother Russell; and that with our Heavenly Father's help 
and guidance, we will remain loyal to the memory of him 
who laid down his life on behalf of the Brethren and in 
the Lord's service." 

Yours in the best of bonds. 

WILMINGTON ECCLESIA.-Del. 



WHAT MORE CAN HE SAY? 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We decided unanimously to continue our relationship 
as in the past with the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY. By the Lord's grace we will cooperate with you 
to the best of our ability until we shall have finished our 
course, when by the power of our God through our Lord 
and Savior, we shall enter beyond the veil, where our 
labors shall cease. 

We extend our heartfelt sympathy in this hour of 
special trial which is upon you. As the dear brethren 
carried the silent form of our Beloved Pastor past us at 
the Carnegie Hall (Allegheny), yesterday, he seemed 
to say to us in hushed silence, "What more can I say than 
to you I have said?" 



We pray the Lord's continued guidance over you as 
you endeavor to finish the work. We ask an interest in your 
prayers. ECCLESIA AT SHARON.-Pa. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

The death of our dear Pastor, Charles T. Russell, created in 
us a state of gloom and sorrow that will long linger with us. 

We are unable to express our sorrow and the loss we 
feel in the death of our dear Brother Russell. 

We thank the Lord for this servant and for the message 
of Truth he has brought to us; and further do we thank 
Him that we were in that condition of heart and mind to 
receive that message. 

Dear Brethren, we desire to extend our sympathies to all 
who are engaged at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, and to express 
our appreciation of your resolution to continue in the service 
of the Glad Tidings of the Kingdom. We assure you of 
our cooperation. We will therefore continue to look to the 
Lord, to cast our cares upon Him and to pray for you, as 
we have for our Beloved Pastor. 

WILKESBARRE ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



RE V.D.M. QUESTIONS 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD:- 

We are sorry that no one here could attend, in person, the 
funeral of our dear Pastor, but we can assure you, all of us 
were with you in spirit, and remembered you continually at 
the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

We are indeed glad to know that our dear Pastor had so 
arranged the affairs of the W.T.B. & T. Society that in the 
event of his death, the work would be carried on without 
interruption. 

Our hearts indeed go out to each and every one of you, 
and we can assure you that we will cooperate with you in the 
future as we have in the past. We shall also continue to 
remember you in our prayers daily. We pray that you will 
also continue to remember us daily in your prayers. We also 
hope we may be served from time to time by the dear Pilgrim 
brethren, and that we may continue to share in the Harvest 
work under your direction. 

Last Wednesday evening the Class by unanimous vote 
decided that in the future all Elders and Deacons should answer 
the V.D.M. Questions, and their answers should be 
passed upon by the Committee appointed by Brother Russell. 

The Elders here have been slow in sending their answers 
to these questions, not because of not being in harmony with 
them, but because some have not had the time; others did 
not have the questions, and others were timid about asking 
for them, until the class expressed their wish in the matter. 
All expect to have their answers mailed to you within the 
next two weeks. HOUSTON CHURCH.-Texas. 



FINGER-BOARD AT THE CROSS-ROADS 

BELOVED BETHEL FAMILY:- 

At our prayer meeting last evening, with crushed 
hearts and tear-dimmed eyes, all gave expression as to the 
high esteem and loving appreciation for the many instructive 
and helpful truths enjoyed through our Beloved Pastor, 
now entered into his reward. He has stood as a finger-board 
at the cross-roads of confusion, pointing us the 
true way as he for many years endured the chilling blasts 
of persecution from a cold, unthinking clergy and their 
following. Thank God for his ministrations of love and 
for the privilege of being associated with him! 

To the dear Bethel family, so closely associated with 
our dear Brother in the forefront of the battle, we send 
our love, and assure you that we will always remember you 
at the Throne of Heavenly grace. 

LONACONING ECCLESIA.-Md. 



NEED TO WEEP FOR OURSELVES 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE ANOINTED :- 

Though your loss and ours as well is very painful, yet 
how we can rejoice to know our dearly beloved Pastor, "That 
Servant," has finished his course in joy and has heard that 
"Well Done." A new man has been born in Zion, and the 
Highest Himself has established him. "It is the Lord; let 
Him do what seemeth good." Questioning not the wisdom, 
the love and the power of Him with whom we have to do, 
we need not weep for the departed, but for ourselves. How 
kind and loving our Heavenly Father has been to him, by 
permitting him to pass beyond the veil ere this dark night 
grows darker, ere the fiery furnace has been heated with sevenfold 
heat! How thankful we feel! Praise His holy name! 
How much greater will be the need "for the tie that binds"! 
THE PRINCE RUPERT CHURCH.-B.C, Can. 

R6020 : page 383 

THANKFUL FOR PRIVILEGE OF COOPERATING 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

The Associated Bible Students here desire to express 
their Christian love and sympathy, especially to the dear 
Bethel Family, in this dark hour of bereavement. 

Beloved Brethren, we will, indeed, 'continue to look to 
the Lord, and be of good courage!" We are most thankful 
for the great privilege of cooperating with you as in 
the past, and assure you of our prayers, and also of "our 
resolution to continue in the service of the Glad Tidings of 
the Kingdom, by the Lord's grace, even unto death." 



We are so thankful our dear Pastor so arranged the 
affairs of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
and we have full confidence that the Lord will continue 
to direct the Harvest Work till it shall be fully completed. 
Oh, what an example we have in our dear Pastor to lay 
down our lives "in the work of the Lord"! 

MCLENNAN CHURCH.-Ont. 



WHOSE FACE WE SOON SHALL SEE 

BRETHREN THROUGHOUT THE WORLD:- 

We express our thankfulness to God for the gift of the 
help and fellowship of our beloved Brother, Charles Taze 
Russell. We thank our Father for the blessed example of 
true Christian fellowship manifested in the wise and faithful 
steward now passed beyond the veil into the eternal blessedness 
of the Heavenly courts. We thank God for the love 
of a true brother in Christ, for the spiritual and material 
aid rendered without thought of self, for the wonderful 
privilege of being enlightened to know the riches of the 
inheritance in Christ, to appreciate the hope of the High 
Calling, to gain a heart knowledge of the love of Christ 
in its lengths, breadths, heights and depths. We sorrow as 
over the passing of our best earthly friend and benefactor, but 
we rejoice with joy unspeakable as we celebrate in our hearts 
the first Heavenly birthday of our beloved Pastor Russell. 
And now to God be the glory, the honor and the praise for 
all that He hath wrought in us all through this much beloved 
one whose face we all hope soon to see, shining 
in the light of immortality. In Jesus' name. Amen. 
SCRANTON ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



PRAYERS FOR THE WORK UNTIL THE END 

DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN:- 

We wish to express to you in this dark hour of bereavement 
our sincere, heartfelt sympathy, and to assure you that 
we are praying for you and will continue until the end. 

We are very grateful for all the assistance given us and 
ask the Lord's richest blessing ever to be upon you. We will 
gladly stand by you; and if there be anything we can do in 
any way, we will thank God for the privilege of serving. 

R6021 : page 383 

We are still firm in the Faith, and our eyes wait upon the 
Lord our God.— Psalm 123:1,2. 

"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian Love." 
Push on, dear brethren; fight the good fight of Faith, and let 
nothing come between us, no matter how severe, that will 
even scratch the link that binds us together! 

LEXINGTON ECCLESIA.-Ky. 



page 383 

REALIZE NEED OF CLOSER TIES NOW 

BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST AT BETHEL HOME: 
To you we desire to make known our deep heart sympathy 
in this hour of mutual grief. We shall miss our 
Beloved Pastor greatly; nevertheless we also greatly rejoice 
on his behalf, believing that he has passed beyond 
the veil, has experienced his resurrection change, and will 
be henceforth forever with the Lord. "Precious in the sight 
of the Lord is the death of His saints." 

We realize, dear Brethren, now more than ever, the 
need of clinging closer to one another, yet leaning fully 
on our precious Redeemer. 

We assure you, not only of the great bond of sympathy, 
but our prayers shall ascend daily on your behalf, 
that our loving Father may guide and direct all those on 
whom the mantle of responsibility must necessarily fall 
the heaviest. SAN JOSE ECCLESIA.-Cal. 



WILL PRESS WITH VIGOR ON 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Last night at our Praise and Testimony meeting a resolution 
was presented to the Class and unanimously adopted, 
to the intent that we will, as in the past, cooperate with 
you in every way we possibly can in the Harvest Work 
and toward the establishment of our dear Redeemer's 
Kingdom. In spirit we are with you during your sore 
trial. It is our determination to press with vigor on, and 
we surely will remember all of God's children, especially 
those at Brooklyn, at the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

Hoping that we shall shortly be with our Lord and 
Master on the other side the veil, we remain. 

Your brethren by His grace, EASTON ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



LONG STILL MORE FOR THE KINGDOM 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

Just a line to assure you of our warmest love and sympathy. 
We did not write sooner, as we knew you must be 
overwhelmed with letters. Our hearts are sore; but we are 
determined to press on and finish the work our beloved Pastor 
so nobly began and carried on to the end of his career. 
His example is an inspiration to us; his death makes us long 
still more for the Kingdom. We trust by the Lord's grace 
to be faithful, so that we may have the privilege of meeting 
our dear Brother again, in the presence of the King. Be 



assured of our prayers and cooperation. 

J. AND L. HUTCHINSON.-Pa. 



GREATEST BIBLE SCHOLAR OF OUR DAY 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

In the death of Pastor Russell we recognize the departure 
of the greatest Bible Student of our day, the channel through 
which God is speaking to His Church and to the world. We 
recognize in his books and literature an outline of God's 
Plan of Redemption, and we are determined to stand steadfast 
in (lie faith and to bind about us more firmly than 
ever that wonderful chain of faith in God's Plan of Redemption. 
We shall go forth in the world in the confidence 
of that Plan to spread the Good Tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people— Resurrection and Restitution— and to 
do it with diligence to the end that we may make our calling 
and election sure. LINCOLN CHURCH.-Neb. 



WORK MUST BE KEPT ALIVE 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

We deeply sympathize with you in the great affliction 
which has come upon you through the death of Pastor 
Russell, a man whose noble and exalted work in the ministry 
of Christ has set a shining example to the world, 
and whose memory will be a lasting spiritual stimulus to 
his many followers. 

Pastor Russell's good work must be kept alive, and 
the Overland Monthly offers its pages to you for the publication 
of such articles as may help to this end. 

In sincere and deep sympathy with your bereavement, 
we remain 

Yours to command in our line of help, 

OVERLAND MONTHLY. 



WILL STAND SHOULDER TO SHOULDER 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We wish to give you the assurance that we will 
stand shoulder to shoulder in this dark hour, and gladly 
cooperate with you in carrying on the work to whatever 
extent it is possible for us to lend a hand. Quite a few 
of the friends have already expressed their determination 
to be more faithful and some have openly and publicly 
renewed their consecration before a huge audience in New 
York City Temple Sunday afternoon, Nov. 5. 

We therefore pray that the memory of our dear Pastor 
may never fade, and that with this in mind you may, with 
the Lord's grace and assistance, terminate the work which 



yet remains for the Church this side the Veil. 

HARRISBURG ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



WORDS FAIL TO EXPRESS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

There comes a time to some of us when we realize that 
we are utterly unable to put into words the expressions we 
desire to convey, and this is just such an occasion. 

The Providence Class desire to express to you their deep 
Christian love and hearty appreciation for the many blessings 
they have received through the ministrations of our dear, 
departed Pastor and colaborers at Brooklyn, and to further 
state that it is their desire and purpose to cooperate with you 
in every possible way in the continuance of spreading the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. 

May the Lord's richest blessing be with you as you continue 
to serve His cause and His brethren, is our prayer. 
PROVIDENCE ECCLESIA.-R.I. 



page 385 
