Responding to the ‘Macedonian Call’ in Japan
SUMMER generally means vacation trips and the great outdoors for most people. Many of Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, have had the incomparable joy of spending the summer months in a unique activity​—calling on people living in remote and isolated areas to bring them the good news of God’s Kingdom.
For several years now, the Watch Tower Society’s branch office in Japan has made a concentrated effort to reach the four million people living in such areas in that country. Early last year, a call was sent out to all the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “Step over into Macedonia and help us!” (Acts 16:9) Let us go along with some of those who accepted the invitation and experience their challenges and joys.
Why They Responded
Obviously, love for God and for neighbor was their prime motivation. But it is interesting to observe the reasons that different ones gave for their decision.
A couple who applied to serve for a month in a small village in the mountains said this: “Here we are at middle age. We have no major problems, no health problems. Our two children have grown up strong in faith, both serving as full-time workers​—in the pioneer field and at the branch office of the Society. We want to show our appreciation to Jehovah for the many blessings we have. And, too, we want to go out, just the two of us, and taste Jehovah’s help and blessing away from all our comforts.”
The father of a family of four from Saitama Prefecture related: “I could see the children growing into teenagers and facing many problems at school. They had to spend more and more time away from us, and I, being busy with my business, am limited in the time I can spend with them. I wanted to take the time with them and do something to encourage them in the truth and create the pioneer spirit.” He had his work for August transferred to September so that he and his family could spend a month in unassigned territory.
A single woman said of her efforts: “I felt it was a way I could really get close to Jehovah and show complete reliance on him to provide for my necessities.” Some young Witnesses felt the same way. Two girls just out of school applied to serve in an isolated area for three months. They felt that by fending for themselves, with only Jehovah’s help, they could prepare themselves for full-time service anywhere.
Did only families or single ones respond? By no means. Many congregations also applied. An overseer in one of these groups stated: “We felt it would be a fine way to strengthen the bonds of love and fellowship in the congregation, as well as to give the young and newer ones an opportunity to see the importance of the preaching work.” Of the 114 publishers, more than 80 were able to participate sometime during the six weeks the congregation served in unassigned territory.
Meeting the Challenges
Right from the start, ‘stepping over into Macedonia’ to preach has had its challenges. Invariably, the first one is: “Where shall we stay?” The way this problem has been met fully demonstrates the truthfulness of Jesus’ admonition: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.”​—Matthew 6:33.
Two women from Tokyo had an assignment to work an out-of-the-way village in the mountains. Ahead of time, they went to look for suitable lodging but with no success. Deciding to leave the matter in Jehovah’s hands, they went to their assignment anyway. At the end of their first day of preaching activity, they still had not found any permanent accommodations. What would they do?
“On the second day in service,” one of them related, “I came across a vacant drive-in restaurant. The owner was an elderly man who displayed a very favorable attitude. When we asked if we could rent the place, he offered to let us have it for just 10,000 yen [$45, U.S.] for the three months we had arranged to serve. This gave us a place to stay and to hold meetings. The man’s daughter and her husband accepted a set of books. Later on in the day, we met the man’s son and his wife. They, too, accepted literature and agreed to study the Bible with us. However, when they learned that we were staying at his father’s restaurant, they were amazed. Up to that time, the father had shown a very hostile attitude toward all religions. We certainly felt Jehovah’s hand in the matter.”
Prejudice, suspicion, and deeply ingrained traditions often pose special challenges, but Jehovah opens the way. Such was the experience of the middle-aged couple mentioned earlier. When they first arrived, they were greeted with suspicion by their landlady, who scrutinized their every move. This gave them an idea of the reaction they might expect in the territory and what they had to do to break down the barrier and reach the people.
“We decided we would first spend a full day cleaning and setting up housekeeping,” the husband related. “We opened all the sliding doors on the sides of the house so the neighbors could have a full view of what was going on. They could see our Bibles and Bible literature sitting on the table. They could see how we arranged everything. They could see how we lived. In effect, we were telling them, ‘Come on in if you want. Visit us. We have nothing to hide. We trust you.’
“As we went about preaching, we would introduce ourselves as people from the big city and would ask if they could teach us something about the country and their customs. We made it a point to greet everyone, even the farmers working in the fields. We shopped in the local farmers’ cooperative. All of this helped the people to see that we were sincerely interested in them and not just in ‘selling books.’ They saw that we were just ordinary people like them and they became friendly. After a while, we did not even have to introduce ourselves. It was not unusual to be greeted at the doors with remarks such as: ‘It’s hot outside. Why not come in for a cool drink?’ or, ‘We have just prepared lunch. Please eat with us.’ Our efforts succeeded in opening their minds and hearts to the message.”
Where the entire congregation participated, the challenges were multiplied. In line with Jesus’ implied advice to ‘count the cost,’ much advance planning had to be done in connection with rooming, cleaning, trucking, field service, and so on. (Luke 14:28) One congregation reported: “Although we planned to serve from the end of July to the first week of September, we went to look for housing in May. We went to the city office and told them our needs. We explained that we were family groups and young people interested in teaching the Bible in the area. They were very cooperative and suggested several possibilities.
“When we finally found a suitable place, we sent the cleaning crew one week in advance to get it ready. Maps for the territory were prepared, posters advertising our meetings were made, and handbills were printed. Since we received permission to use a new recreation center for our meetings, we had good publicity and left a fine impression.
“We knew that all work and no play would not be good when there were so many young ones with us. So each day after the preaching work was done, or on the rest day of the week when all had finished their assigned chores, we would go hiking, boating, or fishing and would be refreshed by the beautiful scenery and healthful mountain air.”
Was It Worth It?
The family of four from Saitama Prefecture gave this answer: “During our month in the territory, we placed 920 magazines, 240 books, had 13 interested persons at the public meetings we arranged, and started 4 Bible studies that continued after we left. These results alone made it worth the effort, but there is much more. Our children learned the joy of the ministry and have developed a real pioneer spirit. As a family, our unity increased as we shared chores and field experiences. We are making definite plans to go again next year.”
The middle-aged couple who tried hard to befriend the people submitted this report: “After we had covered the territory once, we spent our afternoons making return visits. We made friends with the local people and some even shed tears when we left the area. They accepted us and the good news and left us with glowing memories. Unless you experience it yourself, you just cannot know how wonderful it is. We realized that we could do anything with Jehovah’s help.”
One Witness who has been active for over 20 years stated in her report: “My 82-year-old partner and I have never felt closer to Jehovah than we do now after serving just two weeks in isolated territory. Our hearts are full to overflowing.”
A Unique Privilege
Those who have responded to the ‘Macedonian call’ in Japan fully appreciate Jesus’ words: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”​—Matthew 9:37, 38.
The joyful experiences of those responding to the call show that “the Master,” Jehovah God, is answering that prayer. Young and old alike count it a unique privilege to share in the ingathering. (Exodus 23:16) Are you doing all you can in this grand work?
[Picture on page 30]
Kingdom proclaimers joyfully share good news with others in Japan

