Ancient Buildings Display God’s Name
BY AWAKE! WRITER IN SLOVENIA
Over the centuries, churches and monasteries were erected on hilltops all across Europe. These ancient buildings range from the Romanesque style of the Middle Ages—with its typically thick walls and heavy, curved arches—to the ornate and dramatic baroque of later centuries. Interestingly, inside many of these buildings can be found the Tetragrammaton, the four Hebrew letters of God’s personal name.
For example, consider the abbey of Stična, one of the oldest Cistercian monasteries, located in Slovenia. It was built in 1135, only some 40 years after the Cistercian monastic order was founded in France. Although the abbey has been renovated a number of times, it retains its original Romanesque style, now with baroque embellishments. The interior is decorated with various paintings and statues. One side altar is decorated with the large gold letters of the Tetragrammaton framed by a ring of silver.
The town of Slovenj Gradec is first mentioned in written records as far back as the tenth century. A Gothic church-hospital was built there in 1419. An entire inside wall is devoted to a 15th-century fresco depicting 27 Biblical scenes. It begins with the resurrection of Lazarus and concludes with Pentecost. In another location in the same building, the name of God is displayed in Hebrew in black characters on a gold background.
In the northwest region of the country is the town of Radovljica. In the 1400’s, the small settlement was encompassed by walls and a moat and consisted of a castle, a church, and various other buildings. A gold plaque on one of the church altars bears the Tetragrammaton.
Near the small village of Podčetrtek stands an ancient monastery that traces its origin to the 17th century. Inside, a careful observer will find a fresco embellished with the divine name.
The Tetragrammaton can be seen in many other ancient Slovenian buildings. Hence, while admiring the craftsmanship and artistry of the past, tourists may learn that inhabitants of bygone days were familiar with the name of God.
[Picture on page 31]
Side altar of Stična monastery
[Picture on page 31]
In Sveti Duh church in Slovenj Gradec
[Credit Line]
Slovenj Gradec-Cerkev Sv. Duha, Slovenija

