Announcements
SHARE IN PASTORAL WORK DIRECTED BY THE SHEPHERD-PRINCE
It is heart-cheering to think that men of all the many different nations will be gathered into one flock. All men are of one flesh, all are one human race. (Acts 17:26, NW) How the sincere heart yearns for the time when all who live on earth will be united as one family, with justice and equality enjoyed by all, and with love binding the members together! Right soon this will be accomplished, for Jehovah God’s Shepherd-Prince, Christ Jesus, is today directing the pastoral work of gathering together all sheeplike ones. (Ezek. 34:23, 24) Jehovah’s witnesses consider it a privilege to share in the pastoral work under Christ Jesus. With joy and gladness during the month of April they will offer to men of all nations a year’s subscription for The Watchtower, at the regular rate of $1. Three booklets containing heart-cheering information from God’s Word will be given free with each new subscription. Will you share? Remember, too, that The Watchtower is available in 39 languages.
“MAKE SURE OF ALL THINGS”
By applying that wholesome counsel found at 1 Thessalonians 5:21 (NW) an earnest searcher for Bible truth will “make sure” he properly understands Bible teachings. He will then be in position to “hold fast to what is right,” as the rest of that scripture admonishes, so as to abound in God’s favor. And what does the Bible teach on subjects such as apostolic succession, baptism, confession, earth and its destiny, marriage, purgatory, resurrection, world distress, to mention only a few? To obtain authentic Scriptural information on these and 62 other basic Bible teachings we invite you to get a copy of the pocket- or purse-size, 416-page book “Make Sure of All Things” for only 75 cents. In addition to 70 main topics for study there are 287 “Subjects for Study” alphabetically listed to serve as a further aid to assist you to “make sure of all things” taught in the Bible.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of April 18: The Legal Foundations of the New World.
Week of April 25: Stability and Permanence.

