Announcements
HEALING FOR SICKNESSES OF MIND AND HEART
Many who are mentally and spiritually sick are not confined in mental institutions. Millions are held in restraint, however, in institutions of another kind, religious organizations. The methods of these institutions and their spiritual healers becloud the spiritual understanding of the sick rather than enlighten it. Consequently the hearts of those concerned are not “bound up” or strengthened in any way. By his prophet God expressed his disgust with such methods and those who practice them. He tells them their ceremonies are worthless, their prayers vain. (Isa. 1:10-18) Those who would be well spiritually must “learn to do well.” This Jehovah’s witnesses do and also delight to help others to do. During November Jehovah’s witnesses will continue to preach good tidings from house to house in accord with their God-given commission, as found at Isaiah 61:1, 2. A curative, spiritually rich Bible-study aid book will be offered to all on a contribution of only 50c. Be sure to share in the healing work.
HEALING OF THE NATIONS HAS DRAWN NEAR
The governments of the world, including the United Nations, have failed consistently to provide any healing for the nations, yet a permanent cure is near at hand. This will not be accomplished by a “moral and religious resurgence throughout the world” as one well-known evangelist recently predicted. It will be accomplished only by the kingdom of God, which Christians pray for in the Lord’s prayer. This government will not wait until the “people are at the end of their rope when, in a climactic moment, Christ will come back in person to set up his kingdom.” Already Jehovah God has taken a hand in man’s affairs and is directing the people of good will from every nation into the way to endless life in perfect health and happiness, in a world rid of all disease, suffering and death. Thousands of persons are eagerly responding and taking that way. The 32-page booklet Healing of the Nations Has Drawn Near will show you how you can join that happy throng. Send 5c for your copy, or 10c for three.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
November 17: International Praise to the One God, ¶1-23. Page 625.
November 24: International Praise to the One God, ¶24-47. Page 632.

