2 Gain Accurate Knowledge of God
“This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God.”—John 17:3.
WHAT IS THE CHALLENGE? Some say that God is not real. Others hold that God is a vast, impersonal force. Those who believe that he is a real person teach conflicting doctrines about who he is and the qualities that he displays.
HOW CAN YOU OVERCOME THE CHALLENGE? One way to gain knowledge of God is to look at the things he has made. The apostle Paul said: “[God’s] invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.” (Romans 1:20) By carefully observing the natural world, you can learn much about the wisdom and power of our Creator.—Psalm 104:24; Isaiah 40:26.
However, to gain accurate knowledge of God’s personality, each individual needs to open God’s Word, the Bible, and examine it for himself. Do not passively allow others to mold your thinking. Instead, follow the Bible’s advice: “Quit being fashioned after this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over, that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Romans 12:2) For example, consider the following facts that the Bible reveals about God.
God has a personal name. God’s personal name originally appeared thousands of times throughout the Bible. Many translations include it at Psalm 83:18, which says: “That men may know that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth.”—King James Version.
Jehovah God has feelings that are affected by the actions of humans. After Jehovah liberated the people of Israel from slavery in Egypt, they at times ignored his wise counsel. Their rebellious course made him “feel hurt.” Their actions “pained even the Holy One of Israel.”—Psalm 78:40, 41.
Jehovah cares for us as individuals. Speaking to his disciples, Jesus said: “Do not two sparrows sell for a coin of small value? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore have no fear: you are worth more than many sparrows.”—Matthew 10:29-31.
God does not favor one race or culture over another. The apostle Paul told Greeks in Athens that God “made out of one man every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth.” He also stated that God “is not far off from each one of us.” (Acts 17:26, 27) The apostle Peter said: “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.”—Acts 10:34, 35.
WHAT IS THE REWARD? Some have “a zeal for God; but not according to accurate knowledge.” (Romans 10:2) If you know what the Bible really teaches about God, you will avoid being misled and will be able to “draw close to God.”—James 4:8.
For more information, see chapter 1, “What Is the Truth About God?,” in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?a
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 6]
One way to gain knowledge of God is to look at the things he has made

