4 Face Your Doubts
“You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?”—Matthew 14:31.
WHAT IS THE CHALLENGE? Even Jesus’ disciples at times gave way to doubt. (Matthew 14:30; Luke 24:36-39; John 20:24, 25) In fact, the Bible describes lack of faith as “the sin that easily entangles us.” (Hebrews 12:1) The apostle Paul wrote: “Faith is not a possession of all people.” (2 Thessalonians 3:2) Not that some are incapable of exercising this quality. Rather, many do not work to acquire it. God will bless the efforts of those who do.
HOW CAN YOU OVERCOME THE CHALLENGE? Identify issues that cause you to doubt. For instance, the disciple Thomas doubted that Jesus was resurrected, even though other disciples said that they had seen him. Thomas wanted proof. The result? Jesus provided him with the evidence he needed to have strong faith.—John 20:24-29.
By means of the Bible, Jehovah God provides the answers we need to remove our doubts. For example, many lose faith in God because they either directly or indirectly blame him for the wars, violence, and misery that afflict mankind. What does the Bible say on this matter?
God does not rule through human governments. Jesus referred to the invisible spirit named Satan as “the ruler of the world.” (John 14:30) Satan offered Jesus authority over all the kingdoms of the earth for one act of worship, saying: “I will give you all this authority and the glory of them, because it has been delivered to me, and to whomever I wish I give it.” Jesus did not deny that Satan had such authority. Instead, He said: “It is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’” (Luke 4:5-8) It is Satan and human governments that are to blame for the world’s suffering, not God.—Revelation 12:9, 12.
Soon Jehovah God will remove all causes of suffering. He has already arranged for a Kingdom, or government, under his Son, Christ Jesus, to rule mankind. (Matthew 6:9, 10; 1 Corinthians 15:20-28) In fulfillment of Bible prophecy, the good news about this Kingdom is now being preached throughout the earth. (Matthew 24:14) Soon this Kingdom will remove all who oppose it and will eliminate the causes of human suffering.—Daniel 2:44; Matthew 25:31-33, 46; Revelation 21:3, 4.
WHAT IS THE REWARD? Those who give way to doubt are like waves that are tossed about by “every wind of teaching by means of the trickery of men.” (Ephesians 4:14; 2 Peter 2:1) In contrast, those who find satisfying answers to their questions are able to “stand firm in the faith.”—1 Corinthians 16:13.
Jehovah’s Witnesses, the publishers of this journal, would like to help you find answers to questions that may challenge your faith. They invite you to associate with them and examine their teachings for yourself. Your doing so will greatly strengthen your faith in God.
For more information, see chapter 8, “What Is God’s Kingdom?,” and chapter 11, “Why Does God Allow Suffering?,” in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach?a
[Footnote]
Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
[Picture on page 9]
Those who find satisfying answers to their questions have a solid basis for their faith

