Can You Enter “a Large Door That Leads to Activity”?
 1. What “large door that leads to activity” is open to us?
1 When “a large door that leads to activity” was opened to the apostle Paul, he eagerly took advantage of the opportunity to promote Kingdom interests despite many opposers. (1 Cor. 16:9) Today some 642,000 Kingdom publishers around the world have entered a large door of activity by becoming regular pioneers.
 2. Why is it good to evaluate our situation from time to time?
2 Circumstances Change: Although present personal circumstances may limit our activity, circumstances change. Therefore, it is good for us to evaluate our own situation from time to time and not wait for the ideal circumstances. (Eccl. 11:4) Are you a youth about to graduate from high school? Are you a parent whose children will soon begin attending school? Are you nearing retirement from your secular employment? Such changes may free up time and thus allow you to enter the regular pioneer service. A sister who had previously experienced health difficulties decided to enroll as a pioneer at the age of 89. Why? Since she had not been in the hospital in over a year, she felt that her health would allow her to pioneer.
 3. How have some made adjustments so as to regular pioneer?
3 In Paul’s case, he originally intended to visit his brothers in Corinth. Yet, he adjusted his plans for the sake of the good news. Many who are regular pioneering today had to make a number of adjustments in order to pioneer. Some have simplified their life to the point where part-time employment is all that is needed to care for their reduced living expenses. They have found delight in their privilege of service. (1 Tim. 6:6-8) Some married couples have made changes that allow them to get by on just one income, thus opening the way for the wife to pioneer.
 4. What can we do if we are unsure that we can meet the hour requirement?
4 Do not be quick to dismiss the idea of pioneering for fear that you cannot meet the hour requirement. Just a little over two hours a day is needed. If you are unsure that you can do it, try auxiliary pioneering for a month or two but with a personal goal of 70 hours. This will allow you to taste the joys of pioneering. (Ps. 34:8) Talk to those who are currently pioneering. They may have overcome challenges similar to yours. (Prov. 15:22) Ask Jehovah to bless your efforts to expand your ministry.​—1 John 5:14.
 5. Why is regular pioneering a worthwhile pursuit?
5 A Worthwhile Pursuit: Serving as a regular pioneer brings many blessings. It allows you to experience the greater happiness that comes with increased giving. (Acts 20:35) Pioneering will sharpen your ability to handle God’s Word of truth aright. (2 Tim. 2:15) It will provide increased opportunities to see Jehovah’s hand at work in your behalf. (Acts 11:21; Phil. 4:11-13) Pioneering will also help you to develop spiritual qualities, such as endurance, and will enable you to draw closer to Jehovah. (Jas. 4:8) Can you enter this large door of activity and become a regular pioneer?

