Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 11
Song 153
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the June 15 Watchtower and the June Awake!
15 min: Completely Equipped as Teachers of God’s Word. Talk based on the February 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 24-8. Some Christians hesitate to offer to study the Bible with interested ones because they do not feel qualified to conduct a study. However, Jehovah qualifies us as ministers by means of his Word, his holy spirit, and his organization. Our aim is not just to place literature. We should endeavor to teach people. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Encourage publishers to be Bible-study conscious.
20 min: Do All Things for God’s Glory. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, chapter 13.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 18
Song 217
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Do You Remember? Audience discussion based on the April 15, 2007, Watchtower, page 19.
20 min: “We Are Glad to Expend Ourselves in Jehovah’s Service!”a Invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures as time permits.
Song 82 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 25
Song 15
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the July 1 Watchtower and the July Awake!
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Can You Enter ‘a Large Door That Leads to Activity’?”b Briefly interview one or two regular pioneers. What adjustments did they make in order to regular pioneer? What blessings have they enjoyed?
Song 138 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 2
Song 208
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for June. Mention the literature offer for July, and have a presentation demonstrated.
15 min: Informal Witnessing​—An Important Method of Preaching the Good News. Audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, pages 101-2. Suggest some practical ways to witness informally. Invite audience to relate positive experiences they have had when witnessing informally.
20 min: “Keep On ‘Bearing Much Fruit.’”c When considering paragraph 4, include comments on the box “How to ‘Bear Fruit With Endurance,’” in the February 1, 2003, Watchtower, page 21.
Song 69 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

