We Are Glad to Expend Ourselves in Jehovah’s Service!
1 The apostle Paul was glad to “be completely spent” for the sake of fulfilling his Christian ministry. (2 Cor. 12:15) Similarly today, many Christians work diligently as pioneers. Others with heavy family responsibilities make room in their busy schedule to share in the ministry each week. Some with serious health problems use their limited energy to promote Kingdom interests. How encouraging it is to see Jehovah’s people, regardless of age or circumstances, expend themselves in Jehovah’s service!
2 Love of Neighbor: Doing all we can to serve Jehovah, demonstrating love for God and for neighbor, gives us a clean conscience. Because Paul imparted his soul in sharing the good news, he could happily say: “I call you to witness this very day that I am clean from the blood of all men.” (Acts 20:24, 26; 1 Thess. 2:8) Sharing in the ministry to the extent our circumstances allow will prevent us from becoming bloodguilty.​—Ezek. 3:18-21.
3 Working hard to help others brings us happiness. (Acts 20:35) One brother said: “When evening comes, and I return home after a day in Jehovah’s service, I feel tired, it is true. But I am happy, and I thank Jehovah for having given me a joy that no one can take away.”
4 Love of God: The most important reason for expending ourselves in Jehovah’s service is that it pleases our heavenly Father. Love of God moves us to observe his commands, which include preaching and making disciples. (1 John 5:3) Even when people are apathetic or opposed, we joyfully continue to work hard for Jehovah.
5 Now is no time to let up. We are living during the harvest. (Matt. 9:37) A farmer usually works long hours during a harvest because he has limited time to gather the crops before they begin to spoil. The time allowed for the spiritual harvest work also is limited. Keeping in mind the time that we are living in, may we all continue to exert ourselves vigorously in the ministry.​—Luke 13:24; 1 Cor. 7:29-31.

