Continue Offering Older Publications
1 It is always pleasant to remember things that brought us joy and resulted in personal benefit. How much more so is this true when we recall getting a new convention release, knowing it was especially provided to enhance our spirituality!​—2 Pet. 3:1, 2.
2 For many of us, the present service campaign of offering the outstanding pocket-size book releases from previous years has served as a reminder of the value of these publications. Those publishers and newly interested ones who have not read these books will certainly want to obtain personal copies. All of us can feel confident that getting these older publications into the hands of the people in our territory will do much to stimulate further interest in the Kingdom message.
PAST RELEASES WE CAN USE
3 In 1974 many of us rejoiced to receive Is This Life All There Is? How good it was to see coverage of topics such as the soul, the rich man and Lazarus, the fire of Gehenna, and the prospects for billions to be raised from the dead! Indeed, this was a valuable addition to our theocratic library.
4 Another interesting release was received at the “Joyful Workers” District Assemblies in 1977. It was entitled Our Incoming World Government​—God’s Kingdom. What a marvelous treasure this book has proved to be! As stated on the publisher’s page, the book is “dedicated to the God whose happy time has come to replace man’s disastrous rulership of himself with the righteous government for which heartsick people of all races have longed.” The theme of the Bible, God’s Kingdom, is developed throughout the book.
AT EVERY OPPORTUNITY
5 Since we consider these publications an important part of our own theocratic library, we should make a special effort to continue offering them in the field ministry during February. When presenting Is This Life All There Is? you might say: “With people everywhere facing so many problems, what is your outlook for the future? [Allow for response.] There is a solution we can count on.” Then you might read the scriptures in the current Topic for Conversation and refer to points in an appropriate chapter, such as 15, 16, 17, or 18. The book can be offered for 50¢.
6 Perhaps you will be offering Our Incoming World Government​—God’s Kingdom. If so, why not look at chapters 1 and 12 and pick out talking points appropriate for your territory? Note that chapter 1 describes the physical changes people will undergo as subjects of the Kingdom government. The location of this new government is clearly identified on pages 13 and 14. Further interesting points can be found in chapter 12.
7 You may wish to offer the pocket-size books featured during February in a combination of two or more. Be positive in your presentation.
8 Pray for Jehovah’s blessing on your efforts to help others take advantage of the fine information found in the books we will be offering during the month of February.

