Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 1
Song 118
 7 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Outline field service arrangements for the weekend and encourage all to participate.
15 min: “Continue Offering Older Publications.” Question-and-answer coverage. Have experienced publishers demonstrate points in paragraphs 5 and 6. Adapt demonstrations to use books that are available locally. Remind congregation to place the pocket-size books being featured during February and that are on hand at the literature counter or in personal literature supplies. The books are distributed for 50¢ each. At the end of February, congregations may request credit for all older books placed over the counter.
23 min: “Simplification Helps Us to ‘Make Sure of the More Important Things.’” Question-and-answer consideration of insert article. Have key paragraphs read.
Song 8 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 8
Song 221
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Read Society acknowledgment of any contributions that may appear on statements for month. Encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Suggest talking points in current magazines for use in local territory. Emphasize fact that March has five Sundays and offers a fine opportunity for auxiliary pioneering.
20 min: “Youths​—Reach Out for Worthwhile Goals.” Question-and-answer discussion of material. Encourage young ones to have spiritual goals and to work to reach them. Interview one or two regular pioneers or youths reaching out for a career in full-time service. Let them express why they chose to reach out for spiritual goals rather than a career in this world.
15 min: Benefiting From Faithful Shepherds. Encouraging talk by elder regarding shepherding visits. Emphasize that elders are there to give spiritual encouragement and to render assistance if needed. May highlight various points in article “Elders, Take Your Shepherding Responsibilities Seriously” in November 15, 1985, Watchtower.
Song 184 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 15
Song 211
 9 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Question Box. Explain how Our Kingdom Ministry is distributed locally. Ask audience to bring personal notes on circuit assembly program for review next week.
16 min: “Preparing for and Conducting Home Bible Studies.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. This information on Bible studies is supplemental to what appeared in the December 1986 and January 1987 issues of Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly mention titles of past two articles.
20 min: “Auxiliary Pioneering​—Have You Tried It?” and “Regular Pioneer Service​—An Invitation to Increased Happiness.” Consideration of two insert articles. Give number of auxiliary and regular pioneers enrolled for March and show how this compares with last March. Have applications available for those who wish to enroll as auxiliary pioneers now.
Song 162 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 22
Song 72
 5 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to have a share in magazine work Saturday. Also, encourage support of field service activity with the campaign offer on first Sunday of March.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Making Return Visits.” Questions and answers. Have a well-prepared demonstration leading into a study with “Look!” brochure when considering paragraphs 3-5. As time permits, interview a publisher who does particularly well on return visits. Cover practical suggestions that will be helpful to newer, less experienced publishers.
10 min: Appreciating Our Circuit Assemblies. Audience participation. Review the highlights of the program that developed the theme “Progressively Walk in Jehovah’s Ways.” Emphasis can be placed on questions such as the following: What counsel was given to individual family members to help all to fulfill their role theocratically? What clear direction about our Kingdom Hall conduct was given? How were youths warned about their school associates? What encouragement to resist worldly entanglements was given? Help all to make personal, practical application.
15 min: Local needs or talk by an elder who is family head on theme “Are You Conducting an Effective Family Study?” Review highlights of study articles in November 1, 1986, Watchtower. Make local application.
Song 210 and concluding prayer.

