Presenting the Good News​—By Making Return Visits
1 Experienced ministers have observed that meaningful return visits progressively stimulate and enhance growth toward becoming a believer. This feature of our ministry cannot be taken for granted. Preparation is the key to being effective. What are some practical suggestions to keep in mind? How can all of us, whether new or seasoned publishers, share in this Kingdom service?
2 Preparation for a return visit begins on the initial call. How so? Complete and accurate records must be kept of all interest shown. Take time to make a note of the name of the householder, the subject discussed, his response, and any placements made. It helps to be specific. So, before making each return visit, review your house-to-house record and give prayerful thought to what you will say.
3 For most of us, making return visits presents a challenge. However, this feature of the service need not be complicated. When return visits are purposeful, you will more effectively water the seeds of truth. (1 Cor. 3:6) When following up a magazine placement, you could point out that “Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom” is the stated purpose of The Watchtower. Ask the householder if he knows who Jehovah is, and after getting his response, take a moment to read a scripture such as Psalm 83:18. The call could be terminated after laying the groundwork for another visit, or if time permits, use the first question on page 149 of the Reasoning book on the subject “God” to continue the discussion. Or you could use the information under the subject “Jehovah” on pages 196-7. To pave the way for your next call, mention that many people have been taught to pray the Lord’s Prayer, in which we ask for God’s Kingdom to come and his will to be done. Let the householder know that when you return you would like to direct his attention to some Bible texts that clearly explain what God’s Kingdom is and what the earth will be like when God’s will is done.
4 To follow up a literature placement, show the householder a point he may enjoy. Try to build on the subject previously discussed. If you are following up the current Topic for Conversation, you might say: “When I last spoke with you, we discussed the Bible’s sure promise of peace. There is only one government that can bring earth-wide peace​—God’s Kingdom. Notice what the Bible itself says at Isaiah 9:6, 7. [Read.] Would you not enjoy life under such genuinely peaceful conditions? [Allow for response.] However, besides true peace, the Bible lists many specific blessings that God’s Kingdom will bring for mankind.” At this point you may be able to direct attention to a particular paragraph. For several visits thereafter, you could use the points under “Kingdom” on pages 225-34 of the Reasoning book.
5 Sharing in the return visit work helps us to ‘glorify our ministry.’ (Rom. 11:13) Why not set a personal goal of making at least one return visit each week? Follow the practical suggestions presented herein and seek the aid of those who are experienced in this aspect of the field service. By teaching others through well-prepared return visits, your ministry will be more meaningful, your joy will increase, and your faith will grow.

