Simplification Helps Us to “Make Sure of the More Important Things”
1 Do you agree that as Christians we have “plenty to do in the work of the Lord”? (1 Cor. 15:58) No doubt you have a full schedule of theocratic activities, including personal and family study, attendance at Christian meetings, and the preaching and teaching of the good news. Besides all of this, you may also be caring for various matters of a secular nature. Sometimes unnecessary activities can begin to take much time or drain one’s resources. Increased responsibilities may arise, requiring more efficient use of our time and assets. At such times it is wise for a family to consider what can be done to “make sure of the more important things.”​—Phil. 1:10.
2 There is a similar situation in the household of God due to our rapidly growing worldwide family of brothers and sisters. (1 Tim. 3:15) The Governing Body has found it necessary and wise to implement a simplification program. Measures are being taken so that the organization can “stretch out,” as it were, to accommodate the many new ones coming in and at the same time continue to provide all of us with vital spiritual things.​—Isa. 54:1-3; Matt. 24:45-47.
3 As you recall, the insert of the August 1986 Our Kingdom Ministry explained how a new simplified reporting arrangement for regular pioneers would begin operation in September 1986. We are happy to report that this has had a fine effect here at the Brooklyn branch office. The new arrangement has already eliminated considerable work for some of our office staff, allowing them to care for other necessary matters.
ANNUAL CIRCUIT ASSEMBLY
4 By means of a letter from the Society, all congregations have learned that, starting September 1987, each circuit will have one circuit assembly a year. This adjustment will accomplish many beneficial things. Those circuits using Assembly Halls that had full schedules will not be having a circuit assembly within just a few weeks of their assigned district convention. The Assembly Halls will have some open weeks during which necessary maintenance can be done. There will be time available between circuit assemblies for conducting the Pioneer Service School and also the Kingdom Ministry School from time to time. Circuit overseers and congregation elders will have some additional time to care for other theocratic responsibilities. It will be possible for the district overseer, after serving the circuit during the assembly week(s), to spend a week with the circuit overseer as he visits a congregation. The arrangement will be beneficial to our brothers in other countries where some have to travel long distances to circuit assemblies.
SPECIAL ASSEMBLY DAY
5 For a number of years now, about half of the circuits in this country have had opportunity to hold a special event each year, featuring a speaker from Brooklyn Bethel. On such occasions a two- or three-hour program has been presented. The Society is adjusting this arrangement so that beginning September 1987, it will be possible for each circuit or section of a circuit to have a special assembly day.
6 The circuit overseer will advise congregations in his circuit of the date scheduled by the Society for this program. This will be a time during the year that will not be too close to the date of your regular circuit assembly or the district convention. Circuits that are assigned to an Assembly Hall will be able to use these same facilities for such occasions, on either a Saturday or a Sunday. This means that, wherever possible, two different circuits or two sections of the same circuit will be able to use the Assembly Hall on one weekend.
7 Where circuits do not have an Assembly Hall available, all sections of a circuit may come together for a special assembly day if this is convenient for all the congregations and if large enough facilities are available. In some of the larger metropolitan areas where no Assembly Hall is available, two or, at the most, three circuits may meet together for this purpose.
8 The annual special assembly day will prove to be another fine occasion for spiritual upbuilding and instruction. Scriptural information that is needed for our times will be presented by assigned speakers under the direction of the Society. In many cases, it will be possible for certain qualified brothers from Brooklyn Bethel to share in the program along with local traveling overseers and other qualified elders in the circuit. Also, you will be glad to know that on these occasions arrangements will be made for a baptism. Thus, there will still be three opportunities each year for those who make a dedication to Jehovah God and who complete a review of the questions in the Our Ministry book with the elders to be baptized.
SIMPLIFIED FEEDING ARRANGEMENTS
9 We appreciate the fine labors of love that thousands of our brothers and sisters have performed over the years to provide cafeteria meals at circuit assemblies. However, in accord with the principles of ‘making sure of the more important things’ and keeping a ‘simple eye,’ it seems good to begin a simplified feeding arrangement at circuit assemblies and special assemblies, starting September 1987.​—Phil 1:10; Matt. 6:22.
10 The simplified feeding arrangement will be similar to the way things have been handled at district conventions. A simplified menu and serving procedure will eliminate the need for thousands of brothers to spend many hours making purchases of a variety of food items, preparing the food before the sessions, and then cleaning up afterward. Most of these brothers have already worked secularly during the week. Would it not be better for them if they could spend this time on the weekend concentrating on spiritual things by being in attendance to hear the program? Yes! All of us need the spiritual refreshment in order not to tire out in doing Jehovah’s will.​—Heb. 12:3; Isa. 40:29-31.
11 It is of interest that on the holy convention days during ancient Israel’s annual festivals, the people were to do no laborious work except for festival preparation, including the food for those gathered. But in this matter of food, Jehovah specifically stated: “Only what every soul needs to eat, that alone may be done for you.” (Ex. 12:16; Lev. 23:6-8; ad pp. 375, 574) The basic purpose of those ancient assemblies was the same as it is for our gatherings today, namely, to focus our attention on Jehovah God and be edified spiritually with the least amount of distraction possible. Truly these are “the more important things.” Jesus’ words addressed to Martha on a particular occasion reflect the same thought. Referring to material provisions, he said: “A few things, though, are needed, or just one.” (Luke 10:38-42) We are confident that the simplified feeding arrangement will help all of us to make sure that we accomplish the purpose of our assembling.
CAN YOU SIMPLIFY YOUR LIFE?
12 You can see from the above information that Jehovah’s organization is being streamlined for more efficient movement during this very busy time of the end. “The time left is reduced,” and hundreds of thousands are joining us in the race for everlasting life in a righteous new system of things. (1 Cor. 7:29) Just as a runner in a race strips down to the bare essentials, it behooves all of us to consider what we can do as individuals to simplify our life. Paul urges: “Let us also put off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us.” (Heb. 12:1) With respect to material things or secular pursuits, we can ask: Is this something that I need in order to keep living and serving Jehovah? Will it help me to be a better servant of Jehovah, or will it slow me down?
13 If we follow the good example of Jehovah’s organization by using our time and resources in the best way possible to advance Kingdom interests and glorify Jehovah’s name, we can confidently expect to win the race for life and share in the marvelous blessings Jehovah has in store for his servants in the immediate future and throughout eternity!​—Compare 1 Corinthians 9:24-26.

