Youths​—Reach Out for Worthwhile Goals
1 What are your goals in life? Many young people have not set any spiritual goals. But is it not good to experience the feeling that comes from setting Christian goals and then successfully achieving them?
2 Many of our youths have seen the futility of reaching for materialistic goals, including those that involve advanced secular education. They have concluded that such goals are not worth risking the potential dangers to be encountered. At best, benefits from worldly achievements can last only as long as this system, which is now hastening toward its complete end. However, theocratic goals, pursued with the enlightenment of divine education, will be personally satisfying now and lead ultimately to eternal salvation.​—Eccl. 12:1, 13.
THEOCRATIC GOALS
3 As young people today, do you search for worthwhile knowledge? At Proverbs 2:1-5 we are counseled to “find the very knowledge of God.” You can never hope to acquire knowledge of God unless you study his Word. By regular personal study you impress more deeply on your mind and heart the Scriptural material designed to draw you closer to Jehovah. You will learn more and remember more. This will help you to be better equipped to make decisions when faced with important issues. As you apply yourself, your reading ability should improve, as well as your grammar and vocabulary.
4 You cannot accomplish this all in one day. Developing spiritual maturity takes time and patience. But if you set individual goals and make steady progress, spiritual maturity can be attained.
5 Do you reach out for privileges of Christian service? Do you have a personal goal of putting a certain amount of time in the house-to-house work each week? Is it your goal to become a more capable teacher on return visits and home Bible studies? Some in school have set a yearly goal of being an auxiliary pioneer during one or more vacation months.
6 What about goals for the near future? What do you want to accomplish in the next year or so and thereafter? Is it your goal to become a regular pioneer minister, a member of the Bethel family, or perhaps a missionary?
7 If you are a young brother, are you reaching out for the privilege of serving as a ministerial servant and someday becoming an elder? By setting definite goals and diligently working toward them, you can direct your life in a more useful way.
8 Remember that some congregation elders, circuit and district overseers, missionaries, and persons in Bethel service were at one time young people in the truth. But they reached out and grew in knowledge and in ability to serve God and their brothers. Their example of zeal and accomplishment should encourage you to make good use of the time you have during your youth.
9 Goals must be practical and set according to what you are able to accomplish. Everyone is different in makeup physically, mentally, and emotionally. There are also various stages of spiritual growth. Therefore, do not expect to accomplish something just because someone else does.
10 You can be sure that you make Jehovah happy when you reach out for spiritual goals. As you work toward and attain these goals, do so with a determination to give your best. It is worth all your effort and will result in rich blessings for you now and in the years to come.​—Phil. 4:13.

