




City of Astana





LANDS AND PEOPLES
A Visit to Kazakhstan









KAZAKHS traditionally lived as nomads. To this day, some Kazakh herders move their animals to different pastures according to the season. They spend the summer in cooler highland grazing lands. Then, as the snowy winter approaches, they bring their flocks down to the warmer lowlands.
Some Kazakhs live in modern developed cities. Yet, many traditions, foods, and handicrafts reflect their ancestors’ nomadic way of life. Kazakhs enjoy a rich heritage of poetry, songs, and music played on local musical instruments.
The yurt​—the traditional portable house of nomads—​has become a symbol of man living in harmony with nature. Shepherds still favor the yurt, and urban Kazakhs often use them for special events. Yurts also serve as comfortable tourist accommodations. The interior of a yurt can be a showplace for Kazakh women’s diverse embroidering, weaving, and carpet-making skills.





Inside a yurt




Rural Kazakh families treasure their horses. There are at least 21 Kazakh words for horse, each with its own shade of meaning, and more than 30 words and expressions to describe the colors of a horse’s coat. A fine horse still makes a costly and cherished gift. In the countryside, boys learn to ride from an early age.
A traditional Kazakh meal should always include meat and is usually not spicy. Among Kazakhs’ favorite drinks are koumiss, which is made from mare’s milk and is said to provide many health benefits, and rich, slightly sour shubat, made from camel’s milk.
The branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Almaty welcomes visitors and is open for tours.





The elusive snow leopard spends summers high in Kazakhstan’s mountains







DID YOU KNOW?
At least 36 varieties of wild tulips grow in Kazakhstan, and the tulip shape is a common motif in traditional Kazakh art.
The water of Kazakhstan’s Lake Balkhash is salty in the eastern part and nearly salt-free in the western part.
Falconry with trained eagles and other birds of prey remains popular. Kazakhs excel in training golden eagles​—their favorite species.





A blinder on the eagle’s head helps eliminate the bird’s fear of humans






PRINCIPAL LANGUAGES: KAZAKH, RUSSIAN

POPULATION: 17,563,000

CAPITAL: ASTANA

CLIMATE: HOT AND DRY IN SUMMER, COLD AND SNOWY IN WINTER




