From Our Readers
The Electronic Church
I also find many faults with the Electric Church. But you are distorting the message of the Electronic Church horribly. I doubt if one, a single one, has ever offered salvation in return for a “monthly check.” Your reporting is distorted and not responsible​—it is not a good Witness! God’s salvation for us is given to us by Him alone. We cannot buy it with a monthly check. And we can’t earn it by self-denial or torture (although I do believe we are called not only as Witnesses but also to deny ourselves). For by Grace we are saved and this is only through faith. Salvation is a gift of God (not because of works) as Eph. 2:8, 9 clearly instruct us.
G. N., Illinois
We did not distort the facts. We presented the facts and then endeavored to probe beneath the surface to get the real meaning of what is taking place. We did not say that various Electronic preachers actually come right out and offer salvation in return for a monthly check. But we believe this is, in effect, what is taking place with many. We do not state that one can earn salvation by self-denial or by taking up the torture stake, but Jesus did say such was included if we were to follow him. And the disciple James wrote clearly that faith without works was dead.​—Luke 9:23; James 2:17, 26.​—ED.
Criticism of Homosexuals
I must take exception to statements made in “Watching the World” under the heading “High Price to Pay.” Your conclusion is nothing short of ridiculous. The medical studies do not suggest that people get these diseases by merely being homosexuals, but that they likely get them from being promiscuous. You seemed to have overlooked the fact that many gay people have built stable relationships. Of course, this positive side of gay life would not fit in with your slanted outlook on life in general. It certainly does nothing to promote love and understanding among mankind if you spend all your time pointing out the bad things that other religions or groups of people do. Why not try to find a common ground we can all relate to and work together on? True enlightenment includes both sides of an issue, not just the facts that support your own brand of theology!
Anonymous
We agree that heterosexual promiscuity spreads venereal diseases and exposes the participants to emotional disorders as does homosexual promiscuity. But the medical reports referred to specifically mention diseases related to homosexual activity, not merely “homosexual promiscuity.” The Bible consistently condemns all homosexual relationships. (Leviticus 18:22; 20:13; Romans 1:24, 27; 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10) And the growing evidence supports the position that such activities expose one to physical disease and emotional disorders. In pointing out what is bad, we try to encourage all men to turn to doing what is right and good, for their own benefit. We cannot find a common ground with those who want to practice what is unrighteous and unclean in God’s sight. We cannot find a common ground with works of darkness. As the apostle Paul wrote at 2 Corinthians 6:14: “What fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness?”​—ED.

