Praising Jehovah in Assemblies
1 Any opportunity to assemble with our brothers and join in giving praise to Jehovah is a joyful occasion. The month of July offers many such opportunities, some of them very special.
2 Most of us will be traveling to attend one of the “Divine Rulership” District Assemblies. Ordinarily, when a family takes a summer trip, the most talked about mementos are the souvenirs and snapshots of the places they visited. In our case, if the assembly is the primary purpose of our trip, what will dominate our conversations afterward? Won’t it be recollections of the many spiritual good things learned from the program? The assembly will surely give us much to talk about for months to come.
3 Our appreciation for the privilege of praising Jehovah in assembly with others at congregation meetings should prompt us to avoid allowing distractions of the summer months to disrupt this wholesome custom that we have maintained through the winter. In our part of the world July marks the beginning of summertime activities such as vacations and many forms of recreation. It will take advance planning and determination to make sure that “the house of our God” suffers no neglect during this period.​—Neh. 10:39.
4 There will be many opportunities for diversion, especially on the weekends. While it is certainly beneficial for the family to have refreshing recreation, isn’t it true that the greater need for spiritual refreshment ought to prompt us to avoid planning activities that prevent attendance at meetings?
5 If we go on vacation, it would be a fine thing if we could still attend meetings. Wherever we go, very likely we can locate the Kingdom Hall in that community. In most cases, the address can be found in the local phone book; otherwise, the Society can provide it.
6 Because of the rich benefits of the family study, appreciative family members will hesitate to get involved in activities that crowd out time for it. When planning what the family will do, since you already have set a time for the family study, why not arrange other affairs around it?
7 There are many sheeplike ones with whom we study who very much need the many benefits of assembly with those who have strong faith. It would show our sincere concern about them if we would make sure that we did not allow our busy schedule to cause us to cancel their weekly study. If we are away for any length of time, could we arrange for others to care for them?
8 Field service activity during July will feature the Truth book and emphasize starting studies to help still others to assemble with us in praising Jehovah. About 45 million copies of this book have been sent out all over the world! The edition now being printed will raise the total to over 50 million. Since this book became the most widely used book in our Bible study program, about 450,000 persons have been baptized! That is an average of about one new publisher for every 100 books distributed. Of course, other publications have also been widely distributed and have contributed a great deal to this increase. We have especially appreciated the Truth book because it has proved to be such a powerful instrument to awaken sincere ones to the hopelessness in associating with this old system, and also to the rich blessings they can enjoy in praising Jehovah in assembly with his people. What a pleasure it will be once again to offer this fine study aid during July.
9 Regularly assembling together to praise Jehovah “in the intimate group of upright ones” constitutes an integral and vital part of true worship. (Ps. 111:1) July offers many rewarding opportunities to meet together, and if we are determined in our efforts to attend and also help others to do so we will have much cause to rejoice.
[Blurb on page 1]
Heartily praise Jehovah in assemblies.

