Presenting the Good News​—Helping Indecisive Ones
1 The rapidly unfolding events each day prove without question that the end of this system draws perilously close and it is urgent that sheeplike ones act decisively toward the requirements of true worship. Those who prove to be indecisive and who hold back cannot expect to “receive anything from Jehovah.” (Jas. 1:6-8) As we study with such ones, what can we do to help them to appreciate the need for positive action?
2 First, a consistent effort to read and study God’s Word is essential for progress. (John 17:3) Does the student prepare for his weekly study? Impress upon him the importance of such for his advancement. Encourage him to develop good habits by reading the latest magazines, the daily text and new publications as they are received. Promote his interest in things studied at the meetings and suggest that he read the source material himself at home.
3 Second, application of Bible principles learned is likewise necessary. If one learns of his responsibility but fails to accept it, he takes a course that can only lead to disappointment. ( Jas. 1:22-25 ) Has the student been indecisive about breaking free from false religious beliefs, immoral practices or worldly involvements that disqualify him for baptism? If he has progressed to the point where it is time to do so, do not hesitate to make clear his responsibility before Jehovah. Be tactful, yet straightforward, clearly showing what he must do to please Jehovah.
4 Third, association with Jehovah’s people by attendance at meetings is a necessity if he is to grow strong spiritually. (Heb. 10:24, 25) If the student neglects his opportunities to attend, try to help him to realize what he is missing. Tell him about the vital things learned there such as information studied in the ‘Know Jehovah’ book or current issues of The Watchtower. Introduce him to others in the congregation. Use God’s Word to build up his courage if he is fearful of what his family or friends will do. Kindly offer any assistance that you can to provide transportation.
5 Fourth, knowledge of the truth should prompt a believer to share his faith with others. (Rom. 10:10 ) Are you encouraging the student to do so? You can suggest that he discuss with other family members or friends what he has learned. If you provide a few tracts or handbills, he may take the initiative to distribute them himself. A simple explanation of how the work is done may allay his fears and give him needed confidence. When you are sure he qualifies, give him a positive invitation to accompany you.
6 Are we trying to “push” people into Jehovah’s service? No, not at all. Jehovah is pleased only with voluntary obedience motivated by the heart. (Matt. 12:34) Our commission is simply to help people to see clearly the issues involved and the steps necessary to meet the requirements for God’s approval. If our sincere effort to assist them fails to prompt a reasonable response, undoubtedly our time could be used more profitably in studying with others more inclined to act.
7 We appreciate that their lives are at stake, so we have good reason to analyze our teaching methods to make sure we are reaching the heart. Because we love them and want them to enjoy the blessings of eternal life, we long to hear them say: “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.”​—Josh. 24:15.

