Small, but Powerful
1 It was in 1967, five years ago, that the first of the 25-cent, pocket-size books was released by the Society. The Evolution book has since reached a printing of 15 million in 13 languages. The Truth book followed in 1968, and has enjoyed a phenomenal printing of now over 50 million in more than 80 languages. The latest, in 1971, is the Great Teacher book with 4 million copies already printed. While small in size, these books have been powerful in their impact. The tremendous distribution attests to their effectiveness in helping people, young and old, to learn the truth.
2 During the summer months, these three books will be featured. In July, we offer the Truth book; in August, the Great Teacher book; the Evolution book during September.
3 During these months, why not carry copies of all three books when you share in the field service? Be ready to offer them to anyone. When using the Truth book during July, we will undoubtedly encounter many who already have it. Do not hesitate to offer one of the other books. Do the same when offering the other books during August and September. Of course, be alert to take advantage of any opportunity to start studies where interest is found.
4 During the summer many congregations will be working territory that is not covered so often. The distribution of many of these books in such territory would be a good thing. Where more than ordinary interest is shown, you may wish to offer more than one book, especially if it is unlikely that the territory will be worked again for some time.
5 Make your plans now for a full share. The congregation can check its supply of books to make sure that sufficient are on hand to provide adequately for the needs of publishers and pioneers associated. Take advantage of the good weather and long days to expand your field service activity. A good distribution of these small, but powerful instruments will surely do much to expose false doctrines and motivate sincere ones to acquire the “mark” necessary for survival.​—Ezek. 9:4.

