Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 9
Theme: Praise Jehovah “in the Intimate Group of Upright Ones.”​—Ps. 111:1. Song 111.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include accounts report.
 7 min: “Small, but Powerful.” Enthusiastic talk. Inform the congregation about territories that have not been worked recently and suggest that they talk to the brother who assigns territory about some they could work during the summer.
15 min: “Praising Jehovah in Assemblies.” Questions and answers.
20 min: “Family Contributions to Congregation Spirituality.” Two families visit together; activities of the congregation are the topic of conversation. The two family heads are pleased with the good effort made by their households but they feel there is more they can do to help the congregation grow stronger spiritually. They reason that congregation spirituality is actually the result of the operation of Jehovah’s spirit upon those within it, and its members can help best by simply cultivating the fruitage of that spirit in their personal lives. To the extent that each family unit can do that, the congregation will be strengthened. These brothers lead their families in lively, informal discussion of the article, encouraging each family member to express himself on ways that the suggestions can be personally applied.
This discussion prompts parents to comment about the responsibility they have to take the lead and be diligent in their oversight of spiritual matters in the home. Observation is made that each household should have a definite program to keep the family strong. Suggestion is made that all turn to the “Aid” book (page 312 par. 6) to review the fundamentals of instruction maintained in the ancient Israelite household and which proved to be successful in keeping the family united in true worship. Children join in discussion, expressing their willingness to cooperate with parents. Session concludes with comments on how the whole congregation would benefit if each family would strengthen its spirituality by this means.
10 min: Concluding remarks. Briefly relate experiences found on page 25 in the April 8, 1972, “Awake!” as time permits; also, comment on slogan appearing at the bottom of page 4. Song 99.
WEEK STARTING JULY 16
Theme: Divine Rulership Means Good News for Mankind.​—Dan. 7:13, 14. Song 84.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include the Branch Letter.
10 min: Question Box. Discuss with audience.
30 min: Review of the “Divine Rulership” District Assembly. (This program can be rescheduled according to the dates of your assembly.) To be effective, this program will require advance preparation. Capable ones should be encouraged to take notes on assigned portions of the program. Invite them to relate new things learned and counsel that has special application locally. Include outstanding experiences and notable comments made by newspapers or on TV. Ask teen-agers and children to make expression about things that impressed them.
10 min: Concluding remarks. Include appropriate Announcements from page 3. Discuss the privilege of sharing in the work of Kingdom-preaching. Song 40.
WEEK STARTING JULY 23
(Since practically every congregation will miss one service meeting due to the district assembly, one program has been eliminated. We leave it up to each congregation to reschedule the service meetings according to the dates of the assembly attended by the brothers locally.)
WEEK STARTING JULY 30
Theme: Let “the Tested Quality of Your Faith” Win Praise from God.​—1 Pet. 1:6, 7. Song 26.
 8 min: Introduction, text and comments. Include items from Theocratic News.
15 min: Offering the “Great Teacher” Book. August will mark the first time this book has been featured as the main offer; a wide distribution can accomplish much good.
There are numerous ways to offer it. Presentations that are simple and direct usually get the best response. When talking to parents, you can appeal to their natural concern about the welfare and future of their family. If you wish to use a scripture, you could refer to Proverbs 22:6 or perhaps Ephesians 6:4, emphasizing the mutual blessings to be gained by a personal interest in their children. (Some excellent talking points are found on pages 5 and 6.) The illustration on page 1 may prompt a concerned parent to think seriously about why he should imitate Jesus’ loving interest and take advantage of the help provided by this “Great Teacher.” You could mention the disturbing emotional pressures confronting young people in this chaotic society and draw attention to the vital lessons they need to learn from their parents. Various chapters in the book focus on such qualities as faith in God (chap. 3), obedience (chap. 7), forgiveness (chap. 15), truthfulness (chap. 17), love for others (chap. 19), peaceableness (chap. 32), and generosity (chap. 35). (Briefly review additional suggestions offered in the June “Kingdom Ministry,” page 2.) Demonstrate one or two brief presentations as time permits.
Encourage publishers to carry extra copies with them, being alert to offer more than one when several in the family show interest. Also, suggest the possibility of making just a simple offer of the book for 25 cents when the householder is busy. Comment on the fine opportunity available for younger publishers to share in a wide distribution.
30 min: Why Faith Is Needed. (“Aid,” pp. 561, 562) Audience discussion, using the questions here. Our entire life course as servants of Jehovah should be governed by faith. This will enable us to overcome mountainlike obstacles that would hinder our serving him. So it is good for us to consider just what faith is, why it is needed and how it can aid us to preserve a proper relationship with our heavenly Father. (a) What is faith? (“Aid,” p. 561, pars. 2-4) (b) Why is faith in Jehovah’s existence not enough to gain his approval? (Heb. 11:6; Jas. 2:19) (c) Why is it important for us to have faith in the power of prayer? (Matt. 21:21, 22; Luke 18:7, 8; Jas. 1:5-8) (d) How can the faith of others encourage us to endure affliction or persecution? (Heb. 13:7) (e) When faced with opposition from family members, what will faith enable us to do and why? (Matt. 10:34-39; Jas. 1:2-4) (f) How can one put up a hard fight for the faith when faced with temptation to commit immorality? (1 Cor. 6:18; Jude 3-7, 20, 21) (g) How will strong faith affect our view of secular work? (1 Tim. 6:7-10) (h) To withstand economic pressures, in what must we have faith? (Ps. 37:25; Heb. 13:5, 6) (i) Why will faith in Jehovah help us to avoid stumbling others or being stumbled by what imperfect humans do or say? (Ps. 119:165; Rom. 14:13-15, 21-23) (j) How can faith help young people to avoid becoming unduly involved in extracurricular activities at school? (1 Tim. 4:8; 1 John 2:15-17; 5:4)
7 min: Concluding remarks. Include brief experiences enjoyed by those who have vacation pioneered during the summer or other local experiences; invite others to consider vacation pioneering during the month of August. Song 54.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 6
Theme: Making Faith Our Possession.​—2 Thess. 3:1-3. Song 102.
12 min: Introduction, text and comments. Give a short talk on the above theme. Also, include accounts report.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News.” Questions and answers. Invite audience to relate experiences.
13 min: “Jehovah’s Witnesses Push On.” Give a talk based on the “Yearbook,” pp. 254-257, emphasizing what the governing body has done over the years to advance the preaching of the good news. Briefly review what the congregation has accomplished during the 1972 service year and the prospects for the coming year starting September 1. Emphasize that zealous participation in the field ministry demonstrates faith.
15 min: Concluding remarks. Include comments on the article: “God’s Powerful Word Transforms Lives.” (Feb. 15, 1972, “Watchtower,” page 125) Song 106.

