Part VIII—Congregation Meetings: Improving the Quality of Meetings
1 Theocratic gatherings for worship each week play a vital role in our steady development as Christians. (Heb. 10:24, 25; Col. 1:9, 10) This regular intake of strengthening spiritual nourishment fortifies and equips us to face the ever-increasing pressures of our time, while we are having an active share in the preaching work. (Acts 2:40-42) To achieve the greatest amount of good for ourselves and our brothers, each of us can contribute toward improving the quality of our meetings.—Gal. 6:9, 10.
RESPONSIBILITY OF ELDERS AND MINISTERIAL SERVANTS
2 Since elders are primarily charged with the work of teaching, they should be alert to help one another to improve in speaking and teaching ability. The success of each meeting depends on their presiding “in real earnest.” (Rom. 12:8; 1 Tim. 4:13, 16) When assignments are well-prepared and enthusiastically presented, the meetings will motivate us to greater acts of faith and loyalty. Elders responsible for arranging meeting parts should use the most qualified brothers.
3 In view of the recent adjustment in the length of some meetings, those who have assignments will want to give special attention to staying within the allotted time. Sufficient time has been allowed to cover main points and make local application to congregational needs. However, trying to cover too much material in a brief period can detract from the richness of our presentation.
INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY
4 All of us, however, can add to the instructiveness and upbuilding quality of our meetings by preparing so as to participate fully. Some families choose to prepare for meetings by reading a portion of the assigned material each day. If only a few minutes daily are used in this way, think of how much more pleasurable our weekly meetings will be!
5 When you are called upon to present an assignment in the Theocratic School or share in a demonstration, prepare well in advance and allow ample time to rehearse with those assisting you. Reports indicate that some are rehearsing school or service meeting parts for the first time on the night they are to be given. If this is being done during other parts of the program, obviously this will detract from the importance of our worship and bring little spiritual benefit to ourselves or others.
6 Real-life experiences also add much to our enjoyment of the meetings. (Prov. 15:30) The elders appreciate it when you make them aware of some interesting development in your field ministry. As these are shared with the congregation, many others can be encouraged.
7 Appreciation for our precious privilege of meeting together should impel each one of us to explore every channel available to us so that our meetings yield the richest possible dividends. Not only by our regular attendance each week, but also through our advance preparation and readiness to participate, will we make a genuine contribution to the quality of our congregational gatherings for worship.

