Progressively Teaching the Truth
1 “Each time I start to give a witness either from house to house or informally, I try to think of the person I am speaking to as a potential fellow Witness.” This expression, made by an experienced brother who has enjoyed good success in helping others to learn the truth, gives all of us something to think about. (John 3:16; Matt. 20:28) Our own frame of mind as we work in the field service has a direct bearing on how successful our ministry will be. Do we really have in mind seeing these people again and progressively teaching them the truth?
POSITIVE FROM THE START
2 A positive approach at the very first call from house to house, or as we begin to speak informally to others, is the first step in progressively teaching the truth. If we keep the desired end result in mind from the very beginning, we will be alert to keep an accurate house-to-house record and make definite plans to return as soon as possible to cultivate any interest we may have found. Publishers who are dependable in making regular visits from the beginning, answering Bible questions and conducting progressive Bible studies, not only are helping the newly interested one to gain Bible knowledge rapidly, but also are training the potential new Witness to be dependable and regular in helping others.
3 It is good to direct interested persons to the organization from the very beginning. Tell them about the congregation meetings and invite them to attend. Explain the work we do and talk about the worldwide organization of Kingdom-preachers. Show them the value of the various publications we use and be sure to build up enthusiasm for circuit assemblies and the larger yearly conventions. By introducing the newly interested persons to others in the congregation, you will help them to see that the Christian congregation is truly a brotherhood that enjoys wholesome fellowship that cannot be found elsewhere.
4 Our yeartext for 1981 affords excellent opportunities to discuss witnessing with the newly interested ones. We can encourage them to begin speaking to friends, relatives and acquaintances about Jehovah’s glorious kingship. (Ps. 145:10, 11) They can share the basic truths they are learning. When they have begun to attend meetings regularly and have brought their lives into harmony with basic Christian requirements, we can invite them to enroll in the Theocratic School and to share with us in field service.—Ps. 50:14.
ALL CAN HELP
5 When new ones attend congregation meetings, others in the congregation can influence them to make progress in the truth. How deeply impressed some people have become upon observing the godly conduct of Jehovah’s people in general! A warm and friendly atmosphere among both young and old at the Kingdom Hall, along with obvious manifestations of holy spirit, have caused many persons to recognize that ‘God is really among us.’ (1 Cor. 14:25) Congregation book study conductors should be attentive to the new ones, encouraging them to associate with the neighborhood book study group and begin to share in field service. Especially do the elders in the congregation have opportunity to give encouragement to the newly associated ones as they welcome them at the meetings and offer spiritual assistance.
6 Most of us who are in the truth today can reflect on the loving assistance we received from different brothers and sisters as we were coming into the truth. Our appreciation for the progressive training and encouragement we received over the years moves us to want to help other new ones that are coming to Jehovah’s house today. (Mic. 4:1, 2) By having a full share in progressively teaching the truth to others, we can rejoice with our part in fulfilling Jesus’ command to go and make disciples.—Matt. 28:19.

