Draw Close to God
A Creator Worthy of Our Praise
Revelation 4:11
HAVE you ever wondered, ‘What is the meaning of life?’ Those who believe that life is the result of mindless evolution grope in vain for the answer. Not so those who accept the well-established truth that Jehovah God is the Source of life. (Psalm 36:9) They know that he had a purpose in creating us. That purpose is stated at Revelation 4:11. Let us see how those words, penned by the apostle John, explain why we are here.
John presents a heavenly chorus extolling God: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.” Jehovah alone is worthy, or deserving, of such homage. Why? Because he “created all things.” What, then, should his intelligent creatures be moved to do?
Jehovah is said to be worthy to “receive” glory, honor, and power. Without question, he is the most glorious, honorable, and powerful Personage in the universe. The majority of humankind, however, do not really recognize his Creatorship. Even so, there are those who clearly see God’s “invisible qualities” through the things he has made. (Romans 1:20) With appreciative hearts, they are moved to give Jehovah glory and honor. They proclaim to all who will hear the impressive evidence that Jehovah is the one who made all things wonderfully and that he is therefore deserving of our reverential respect.—Psalm 19:1, 2; 139:14.
How, though, does Jehovah receive power from his worshippers? Of course, no creature can confer power on the almighty Creator. (Isaiah 40:25, 26) Yet, being created in God’s image, we are endowed with a measure of God’s attributes, one of which is power. (Genesis 1:27) If we truly appreciate what our Creator has done for us, we will be moved to use our power and energy to honor and glorify him. Instead of expending our energy solely on advancing our own interests, we feel that Jehovah God is worthy of receiving all our power as we serve him.—Mark 12:30.
Why, then, are we here? The last part of Revelation 4:11 answers: “Because of your will they [all created things] existed and were created.” We did not will ourselves into existence. We exist because of God’s will. For this reason, life lived solely for self-interest is empty and meaningless. To find inner peace, joy, satisfaction, and fulfillment, we need to learn what God’s will is and then bring our life into harmony with it. Only then will we find the purpose of our creation and existence.—Psalm 40:8.
[Picture Credit Line on page 31]
NASA, ESA, and A. Nota (STScI)

