VOL. XXIII. OCTOBER 1, 1902. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

Blindness Gradually Turning 
From Fleshly Israel 291 

A Minister encourages his Flock 291 

Jewish Hopes respecting Palestine 292 

The Outcome of This Age 292 

"Are there Few that be Saved?" 294 

Crossing Jordan into Canaan 296 

Poem-Judge Not 299 

Grace Sufficient; only Believe 302 

Fidelity to Earthly and Heavenly 

Bridegrooms 303 

"The Great Company" 303 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 



than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money-making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 



OUR NEW BIBLES. 

The three dollar grade is gone, except a few which we have 
agreed to hold until the end of the year. We still have a hundred 
or two of the two dollar grade, but they will not last long. 

We have a few of both grades without pictures, to permit 
their being sent by mail to foreign countries. We will hold 
these for the foreign friends until November 15th: after that 
they will be open to all, for same prices, $2 and $3 postpaid. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WE REGRET inability to supply charts promptly— except 
the 25c wall chart with metal hangers. Will fill orders for others 
as quickly as possible. Painters as well as printers in this 
vicinity are extremely busy at present. 



R3081 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



BLINDNESS GRADUALLY COMING OVER NOMINAL 
CHRISTENDOM AND GRADUALLY TURNING 
AWAY FROM FLESHLY ISRAEL. 



Is it not remarkable that as nominal Spiritual Israel 
begins to stumble into unbelief over "the stone of 
stumbling"— rejecting the ransom-sacrifice of Christ 
—the Jews, Israel after the flesh, begin to get glimpses 
of Jesus such as they have never before had? Note 
the following eulogistic expressions respecting our 
Lord, from the lips of eminent Jews of our day:— 

"I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the Jews, one 
whom all Jewish people are learning to love."— Isadore 
Singer, Editor of Jewish Encyclopedia. 

"Jesus was the gentlest and noblest rabbi of them all. 



In Jesus there is the very flowering of Judaism."— Henry 
Berkowitz, Rabbi of Rodeph Shalam Congregation, 
Pennsylvania. 

"Jesus is soul of our soul, as He is flesh of our flesh. 
Who, then, could think of excluding him from the people of 
Israel?"— Max Nordau, M.D., Paris, France. 

"Even the most conscientious Jew may, without hesitation, 
recognize in view of the immense effect and success 
of His life, that Jesus has become a figure of the highest 
order in the history of religion. The fact that Jesus was 
a Jew should, I think in our eyes, rather help than hinder 
the acknowledgment of His high significance."— N. Porges, 
Ph.D., Rabbi, Leipsig, Germany. 

"We Jews honor and revere Jesus as we do our own 
prophets who preceded him."— Jacob H. Schiff, New York 
City. 

"I am of the opinion that we should endeavor with all 
possible zeal to obtain an exact understanding of the great 
personality of Jesus, and to reclaim him for Judaism."— M. 
Lazarus, Ph.D., Professor of Philas University of Berlin. 

"If he (Jesus) has added to their spiritual bequests new 
jewels of religion, truth and spoken words, which are words 
of life, because they touch the deepest springs of the human 
heart, why should not Jews glory in him?"— Gustav Gottheil, 
Ph.D., Rabbi Emeritus of Temple Emanuel, New 
York. 

"We want our children to know that in Jesus of Nazareth, 
Judaism produced one of the most beautiful types of 
humanity, one of the world's greatest teachers."— Dr. K. 
Kohler, New York. 

A MINISTER ENCOURAGES HIS FLOCK. 



Rev. Dr. Reid, of Watertown, thus explains to 
his people the present status of the doctrine of hell, 
and meantime gives us a suggestion of how impious 
he considers his congregation of "saints" to really be 
at heart. He evidently knows "his sheep" to be downright 
hypocrites. He says, as reported, evidently by 
himself, in the public press:— 

"The age of religious barbarism is past. Science, the accentuation 
of the Fatherhood of God, man's moral nature 
and spiritual experience make the hypothesis of a material 
hell incredible. The world would cast out the preacher who 
would dare to repeat today the message of Jonathan Edwards, 
that the view of the miseries of the damned would 
double the ardor of the love and gratitude of the saints in 
heaven. 

"Yet there is a hell. Yet there are lost souls. Yet the 
guilty do go into everlasting punishment. 

"You are in hell when you cannot look your fellow creature 
in the face because of the wrong you have done him; 
in hell when you would like to wring your own neck; in 
hell when you do not have a word to say for yourself, but 



are struck dumb by the consciousness of your own meanness 
and arrogance and baseness. You are in hell when envy, 
hatred and malice hold carnival in your heart; in hell when 
you know that you are not telling the whole truth; in hell 
with all your lies, losses and perversions and distortions 
of the truth. Perhaps there is a chapter in your lives that 
you keep closed or sealed because of its iniquity or infamy. 

R3081 : page 292 

Then you are in hell now; in the hell where men skulk and 
start and fail; in the hell where the limbs tremble and the 
heart thumps and the flesh creeps and the teeth chatter and 
the blood runs cold and the hair stands on end, the heart 
stops and the cold sweat overpours the face." 

JEWISH HOPES RESPECTING PALESTINE. 



The Jewish Exponent furnishes the following information: 
The failure to secure satisfactory terms 
from the Sultan of Turkey, as noted recently in these 
columns, is felt keenly but has not discouraged the 
leaders. 

"Dr. Herzl set forth the standpoint of the Zionists, and 
formulated the conditions of Jewish settlement in a self-contained 
part of Palestine and in other parts of Asia Minor, 
on the basis of a Charter. 

"These proposals were carefully considered from the 
Turkish side. Through his representatives the Sultan declared 
his fullest sympathy for the Jewish people; but the 
concessions which His Majesty expressed himself ready to 
make for a Jewish settlement could not be considered adequate 
according to our Zionist program. The negotiations 
have thus, this time also, remained without result. Nevertheless, 
the Sultan caused Dr. Herzl to be assured of his esteem 
and sympathy. The relations have in no way been 
broken off. On the contrary, we may hope that the advantages 
which a regular and legally guaranteed settlement of 
Jews present according to our program, will be recognized 
by the Turkish Government to their full extent. 

"For that moment the Zionist organizations must be prepared; 
the agitation must be carried on incessantly, and the 
material means must be collected. The more efficient our 
movement becomes, the more speedily and surely will it 
reach its goal. 

"It is rumored that the Actions Comite of the Zionist 
movement in Vienna is now seriously considering the proposition 
to hold the next Zionist Congress in New York. 
The question will probably be decided upon at the October 
meeting of the comite. 

"Lord Salisbury is credited with having said on the 
Zionist solution: It is a question of sixty per cent; if sixty 
per cent of the Jews desire Palestine, they will get it.' It 
is, however, rumored that Lord Rothschild, impressed by 



the Alien Immigration Commission— which, when it again 
meets, will sit in Soho, the French quarter of the metropolis 
—and his conversations with Dr. Herzl will lead in a 
movement for the settlement of a large number of Russian 
Jews in lands, as Disraeli put it, 'in propinquity' to Palestine, 
and at present under the British flag. When his lordship 
will move, or whether at all, a short few months should 
tell, but from excellent sources I know that he has some such 
scheme in mind, and that the details are being investigated 
on his behalf. 

"Lord Rothschild has heretofore held outwardly a most 
impartial attitude on all solutions, and whilst steering clear 
of Zionism has let it be known that he does not view attacks 
upon the movement with favor. Hence the idea he is 
studying may prove one that will unite all parties, and with 
his name at the back of it there would be no financial 
difficulties." 

STARTLING STATEMENT IN NEW YORK PULPIT. 



New York, Sept. 7. -The Rev. Dr. R. S. MacArthur, at 
the 100th meeting in the Evangel tent today, assailed the 
doctrine of baptism. He declared that the dropping of water 
on an infant at birth was heathenism and that the idea that 
God would forever condemn an innocent but unbaptized babe 
makes Him a tyrant. 

That utterance, coming from Dr. MacArthur, had a wonderful 
effect on his hearers. They rose to their feet and 
applauded wildly. The scene was striking. 

R3082 : page 292 

"Baptism," he declared, "never saved a human soul. 
The doctrine of baptismal regeneration is both unreasonable 
and unscriptural. The superstitions that have gathered 
about infant baptism form one of the saddest chapters in 
church history. Thousands through all the ages have believed 
that a child dying without being baptized was eternally 
lost. This dark and dreary superstition has cast a 
gloom over the history of the church for centuries. 

"This doctrine is heathenism, pure and simple. The idea 
that God would forever condemn an innocent babe because 
some one had not put a few drops of water on its head and 
face makes God a tyrant. Rather than believe in such a God 
I would be an avowed infidel. 

"This doctrine of baptismal regeneration makes the 
minister of religion a worker of magic, a fakir, a performer 
of ecclesiastical miracles. Such teaching is a violation of 
all sound reason and true scriptural teaching." 

Very good! Excellent! But while this eminent 
Baptist D.D. is plucking beams out of the eyes of 
others, let him not overlook the Baptist beam in his 
own; viz., that immersion in water is the door into the 
Church of Christ. If that were true it would mean 



that all not so immersed are out of the Church of 
Christ. And according to the misunderstanding of 
Baptists and others this would mean outside of divine 
mercy; for do not Christians generally claim that 
mercy ends with this age and that this age is merely 
for the gathering of God's elect Church?— And that 
the prospect of all others is eternal torment? We 
trust that Bro. MacArthur and other Baptists will 
not stop their investigation, but proceeding learn what 
the real baptism is, and the distinction between it and 
its water-symbol; and what the true Church is and 
the distinction between it and the sects of Christendom. 
We shall be glad to help all the sincere ones in 
the solution of these problems, on receipt of postal 
card requests. 

THE OUTCOME OF THIS AGE. 



W. G. MOREHEAD, D.D., 

Professor in United Presbyterian Theological Seminary. 



There are principles at work in modern society, 
which, if left unchecked, will soon make the advent of 
the Antichrist not only possible, but certain. THE 
LAWLESS DRIFT IS ALREADY ON US, precursor of 
worse to come. Who does not perceive that the forces are already 
loose which tend to the disintegration of the whole 
social fabric! Who does not perceive that the axe is already 
aimed at the chief hoops which bind together the staves of 

R3082 : page 293 

the civil polity! The restlessness under restraint, the revolt 
against authority and law, the spread of Socialism, the 
growth of agnosticism, the prevalence of materialism, fostered, 
as it largely is, by both the science and the politics of 
our time, the enormous greed of those who have and who 
want still more, the deep, ominous growl of those who have 
not, and who want and will have all this, and much more 
than this, betokens the breaking down of the barriers, the 
overthrow of the restraining influences, and the speedy advent 
of the great adversary. The Frenchman spoke well, 
perhaps better than he knew, who lately said, "I think I hear 
the galloping of the man on horseback!" 

We have only to suppose the portentous movements of 
the times to grow and gather head until the hindrance is 
gone, the breakwater is down— and then— yes, what then? 
Then cometh "the Man of Sin," the world deceiver, whom 
the Lord shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and shall 
bring to nought by the appearing of His Coming. Then the 
kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdom of our 
Lord and of His Christ and He shall reign forever and ever. 



The above clipping is from the pen that attacks 
"Millennial Dawn" as being "the product of insanity." 
It is surely a poor blind pen, or, at least, a 
somnambulistic one, when it cannot see that the 
"Man of Sin" of prophecy flourished for over a thousand 
years as Papacy: and that since the Reformation 
movement he has been slain with the sword of the 
Spirit, the Word of God. True the wound has to 
some extent been healed; but yet a little while and 
the bright-shining of the presence (parousia) of the 
Lord shall utterly destroy him, and all other kindred 
systems of error which now counterfeit, with varying 
degrees of accuracy, the true Christ— Head and 
"body. "-2 Thess. 2:8; Rev. 13:3,12. -M. Dawn, Vol. 
II., Chapter 9. 

LOOKING FOR THE WRONG ADVENT. 

Prof. Moorehead and others of his school of 
thought tell the world generally that they set no 
time for Christ's second coming. They give the impression, 
surely, that they are in daily, yea, hourly 
expectation of seeing our Lord reappear in flesh on 
a cloud in the sky. But in the above the Professor 
tells the truth plainly; viz., that he and those who 
share his expectations are not at all looking momentarily 
for the Lord. Instead they are looking 
for "the speedy advent of the great adversary," i.e., 
"Then cometh the 'Man of Sin'." 

How is that? Why such an expectation of the 
advent of Antichrist instead of the advent of the 
true Christ? 

It is because these dear brethren are sadly blinded 
by a literal interpretation of the symbolical Book 
of Revelation, and an expectation of Christ's Kingdom 
in the flesh; whereas the Word declares: "Flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God."— 
I Cor. 15:50; John 3:3,5. 

The result is a blindness much more dense than 
that of the world on a subject of which they profess 
to be past-masters. Worldly people "can discern the 
signs of the times" far better than to suppose, as 
these self-blinded brethren do, that the trend of the 
world is toward greater veneration for fellow-mortals. 
The world well sees that the trend is in the reverse 
direction,— toward a denial of all authority and power, 
—divine as well as human. 

How strange it seems that sane minds can imagine 
that "the galloping man on horseback," a general, 
or emperor, or who not, would ever deceive the 
world— "the whole world" into thinking him greater 
than God, and doing him homage accordingly! In 
our judgment, this is just as improbable as that "the 
cow will jump over the moon." 

This man— Anti-Christ, is expected to convert 
the world and build the Jews a temple at Jerusalem,— 



all in three and a half years after he makes a start; 
and he has not yet made a start, and only "portentous 
movements of the times" are in evidence. Christ's 
advent is to be just three and a half years after the 
advent of this preposterous man. And yet these 
brethren deceive themselves into thinking that they 
are not time setters, and that they are looking for 
Christ's advent. We are sorry for them! 

In conclusion: We kindly suggest to the Professor 
that the Common Version rendering of 2 Thes. 2:8, 
"the brightness of his coming" poor as it is, is 
better than his substitution; viz., "the appearing of 
his coming." If he will look at these words in his 
Greek New Testament he will find that "coming" is 
not the proper word at all: that the Greek word here 
rendered "coming" is parousia, and that all scholars 
agree that in English it means presence (as of one who 
has already come). We suggest as a literal translation 
of the words,— "The bright-shining of the present 
one,"— the revealing or manifestation of one previously 
present, but unseen, unrevealed. 

Our position is that Anti-Christ has already fulfilled 
his part, and a wonderful and awful part it was; 
—that now according to promise the true Christ has 
come a second time, in glory, and not in flesh, to 
reign, and not to sacrifice;— that his first work is the 
sifting of his church— the separation of the tares, etc., 
and the gathering of the true "wheat" into the Kingdom 
garner— beyond the vail, as spirit beings like 
their Lord: the sleeping ones awakened to First 
Resurrection glory, honor and immortality, and 
those who are alive and remain "changed" in the 
moment of dying to the same glory conditions. Soon, 
perhaps before all the "wheat" has been garnered, 
the fire of tribulation and anarchy will break out in 
the world— "a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation"— a time when faith in God and 
man and a disbelief of the Bible will be rampant 
throughout "Christendom" nominal. In that trouble 
and its overthrow of all law and order, government 
and religion, the world will learn an everlasting lesson, 
and be prepared for the reign of righteousness. 
—The rulers of the Kingdom of Light will, however, 
be as unseen to mortal eyes as are the present rulers 
of the darkness of this world— Satan and his coadjutors; 
—the earthly representatives of the Kingdom 
being men— perfect men— the ancient worthies, approved 
of God before the call to "change" of nature 
was given.— Heb. 11:39,40. 



R3083 : page 294 

"ARE THERE FEW THAT BE SAVED?" 



EMERGING from that blackness of error called 
Calvinism (with its heaven of blessing for 
the "little flock" and its eternal torment for 
all others, as taught by good but sadly deceived men 
—John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, Charles H. Spurgeon 
and others—) into the glorious light of the goodness 
of God, shining in the face of Jesus Christ our 
Lord and revealed in the divine Plan of the Ages, the 
writer was subjected to the same attacks of Satan (the 
great Enemy of God and man) to which all others 
seem to be exposed. Coming as an angel of light, he 
seemed to welcome us into the light out of the gross 
darkness which he himself had brought upon the 
world. And while our heart trembled with joy, and 
yet with fear also, lest after all we should find some 
evidence that God would do some terrible and unjust 
thing, to some of his creatures, at least, the suggestion 
came, God will not permit any to be lost. 

At this time the word lost still had associated with 
it that unscriptural, wicked and awful meaning of 
eternal torment; for, although we had gotten rid of 
that misbelief, and saw that lost means dead, destroyed, 
the influence of that old error still gave a false coloring 
to the words formerly supposed to teach it. 
Hence the greater force in the suggestion that God 
would not permit any to be lost;— for surely no enlightened 
mind can candidly imagine the eternal misery 
of a solitary individual in all of God's universe. 

Reason and judgment swayed for a time, first 
to one side and then to the other, according to circumstances 
and moods, until we learned that our reasoning 
powers are not to be relied upon to settle such 
questions; that they are imperfect as well as liable to 
be prejudiced; and that for this cause God had given 
us his inspired Word to guide our reasoning faculties 
into proper channels. Then, appealing to the Scriptures, 
we found abundant proof that unless God therein 
trifles with his children's confidence (and as men 
would say "bluffs" them, with suggestions and threats 
which he knows he will never execute) there surely 
will be some lost as well as some saved. 

Among these Scriptures are not only those similes 
which speak of the salt which lost its value, and 
was thenceforth good for naught, but to be trodden 
under foot, and of the destruction of those servants 
which would "not have this man to rule over" them 
(Matt. 5:13; Luke 19:14,27), etc., but the following 
plain statements:— 

Some "wrest. .the Scriptures even to their 
own destruction."— 2 Pet. 3:16. 

"Pride goeth before destruction."— Prov. 16:18. 

"The Lord preserveth [saves] the souls of his 
saints. "-Psa. 97:10. 

"The Lord preserveth all them that love him, 
but all the wicked [not the ignorant] will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 



"False teachers... bring in damnable heresies, 
...and bring upon themselves swift destruction."— 
2 Pet. 2:1. 

Some are "vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." 
-Rom. 9:22. 

"Them that walk after the flesh. ..shall utterly 
perish in their own corruption."— 2 Pet. 2:10-12. 

"The destruction of the transgressors and of the 
[wilful] sinners shall be together, and they that forsake 
the Lord shall be consumed."— Isa. 1:28. 

"The Lord will "destroy them that corrupt the 
earth. "-Rev. 11:18. 

"The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: 
but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity."— 
Prov. 10:29,30; 21:15. 

Some fall into "many foolish and hurtful lusts 
[desires], which drown men in destruction."— 
I Tim. 6:9. 

"For many walk,. ..the enemies of the cross 
of Christ, whose end is destruction."— Phil. 3:18,19. 

"Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction." 
-2Thess. 1:9. 

"If any man defile the temple of God, him will 
God destroy."— I Cor. 3:17. 

"The judgment of God [is] that they who do such 
things are worthy of death."— Rom. 1:32. 

"Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left 
us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem 
to come short of it."— Heb. 4:1. 

"For it is impossible for those who were once 
enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and 
were made partakers of the holy Spirit,. ..if they 
shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; 
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God 
afresh and put him to an open shame."— Heb. 6:4-6. 

"See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if 
they escape not who refused him that spake on earth 
[Moses, the typical teacher], much more shall not we 
escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from 
heaven." 

"Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace 
of God."-Heb. 12:25,15. 

"The soul that will not hear that prophet shall be 
destroyed from among his people."— Acts 3:23. 

"By one offering he [Christ] hath perfected forever 
them that are sanctified.... Let us [therefore] 
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith. 
...Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without 
wavering,... exhorting one another, and so 
much the more as ye see the [Millennial] Day drawing 
on. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received 
the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no 
more [part for us in the] sacrifice for sins, but a certain 
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, 
which shall consume the adversaries."— 
Heb. 10:14,22-27. 



If "he who [in the typical nation] despised the 
law of Moses [the typical lawgiver] died without 
mercy, of how much sorer [more serious] punishment 
shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden under 
foot [disgraced] the Son of God, and hath counted 
the blood of the [New] Covenant, wherewith he was 
sanctified, an unholy [ordinary] thing, and hath done 
despite unto the spirit of grace?" Surely the wages 
of such conduct would be everlasting, while that in 
the type was not, but was covered by the great sacrifice 
for sins once for all. "It is a fearful thing to fall 
into the hands of the living God."-Heb. 10:28,29,31. 

"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting 
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see 

R3083 : page 295 

life; but the wrath of God abideth on him."— John 3:36; 
I John 5: 12. 

"His servants ye are to whom ye render service; 
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto 
righteousness."— Rom. 6:16. 

"The end of those things is death."— Rom. 6:21. 

"To be carnally minded is [to reap the penalty] 
death; but to be spiritually minded is [to reap the 
reward] life and peace."— Rom. 8:6. 

"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death."— 
Jas. 1:15. 

"There is a [kind of] sin unto death;. ..and 
there is a [kind of] sin not unto death."— 
I John 5:16,17. 

"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill [destroy] the soul [being]: but rather fear 
him which is able to destroy both soul and body in 
Gehenna [the second death]. "-Matt. 10:28. 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked 
turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from 
your evil ways; for why will ye die?"— Ezek. 18:32; 
33:11. 

"All the wicked will God destroy."— Psa. 145:20; 
147:6. 

What could be more explicit than this testimony 
of God's Word? And how reasonable it all is! Torment 
might properly be objected to as unjust as well 
as unmerciful; but taking away life from those who 
will not conform their lives to the just and holy and 
kind regulations of the New Covenant which God has 
opened to our race, through Christ's great atoning 
sacrifice, is reasonable, just and merciful. 

It is reasonable: why should God continue his blessings, 
of which life is the chief, to those who after 
knowing and being enabled to conform to his just requirements, 
will not do so? 

It is just: because God is under no obligation to 



man. Man is already his debtor ten thousand times; 
and if he will not render loving respect to his Creator's 
wise and good commands, Justice would demand that 
those blessings be stopped. 

It is merciful on God's part to destroy the incorrigibly 
wicked— those who, after full knowledge and 
opportunity have been enjoyed, refuse to be conformed 
to the lines of the law of God's Kingdom— 
the law of love. (1) Because all who will live ungodly 
—out of harmony with God's law of love— will 
always be like the restless sea, more or less discontented 
and unhappy. (2) Because such characters, 
be they ever so few, would mar the enjoyment of 
those who do love peace and righteousness. And to 
these God has promised that the time shall come when 
sin and its results, weeping and pain and dying, shall 
cease (Rev. 21:4), when he will destroy out of the 
earth those who corrupt it. (Rev. 11:18.) (3) Because 
God has promised that there shall yet be a clean 
world (Isa. 11:9; Rev. 21:5), in which the unholy and 
abominable and all who love and make lies shall have 
no place. (Rev. 21:8.) "Thou shalt diligently consider 
his place and it shall not be."— Psa. 37:10. 

Only such as have preferred their own wisdom to 
that of the Bible can read the foregoing words of God, 
and yet believe that all men will be everlastingly saved. 

R3084 : page 295 

Only such as are puffed up with a sense of their 
own benevolence can hold that God never would be 
satisfied or happy if one of the race perished. God 
has gotten along very well without the sinners thus 
far, and could do so forever. It was not for selfish 
reasons that he redeemed all, and is about to restore 
all who will accept his favor in Christ. 

But some attempt to evade the foregoing statements 
of Scripture with the claim that they refer to 
wickedness, and not to wicked people; that they mean 
that all wicked people will be destroyed by their conversion 
—by having their wickedness destroyed. We 
ask those who so think to read over these words of 
God again, carefully, and see that they could not, reasonably, 
be so construed. Notice that even though 
the Word mentioned nothing about the destruction of 
wicked doers, but merely mentioned the destruction 
of wickedness and wicked things, this would nevertheless 
include wicked doers; because, of all wicked 
things, intelligent, wilful evil-doers are the worst. But 
the Word does specify wicked persons; and all who 
are familiar with rules of grammar covering the 
question know that when the person is specified the 
destruction of his wickedness merely could not be 
meant. 

"The wicked shall be [re] turned [back] into 
hell [sheol] and all nations [Gentiles, people] that forget 



God." (Psa. 9:16.) "The lake of fire, which is the 
second death" (Rev. 20:14), is "prepared for the devil 
and his angels [messengers or servants]." (Matt. 25:41.) 
And all who, with Satan, serve sin are his 
servants or messengers. (Rom. 6:16.) For such, 
yes, for all such, and for such only, God has prepared 
the penalty of everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his power." And 
from Satan their chief down to the least one of his 
children who, notwithstanding knowledge and opportunity 
to the contrary, cling to evil and choose 
it rather than righteousness, this tribe will be blotted 
out to the praise of God's justice, to the joy and welfare 
of the holy and to their own real advantage. 

It will not do to judge others by ourselves, in 
all respects. The fact that God's saints do not feel 
opposition to God's will, and cannot understand how 
others can entertain such sentiments, sometimes leads 
to the false conclusion that if all others enjoyed a 
similar knowledge of God they too would delight in 
his service. That such a conclusion is false is evident, 
from the fact that Satan, who knew God thoroughly, 
"abode not in the truth," but became "the 
father of lies" and "a murderer." And, after six thousand 
years' witness of sin and its results, he is still the 
Adversary of righteousness. After nearly two thousand 
years' knowledge of the love and mercy of God 
manifested in Christ's sacrifice for sin, he is still as 
unmoved by that love as he is unmoved by pity for 
human woe. And more than this: God, who knows 
the future as well as the past, shows us, unquestionably, 
that after being restrained (bound) for a thousand 

R3084 : page 296 

years by the power of Christ's Kingdom, and 

during that time witnessing the blessings of righteousness, 

he will, when granted liberty at the close 

of the Millennium, still manifest a preference for the 

way of sin and opposition to God's arrangements. 

Surely this proves that intelligent beings, and perfect 

beings, too, can know God and yet choose a way of 

disobedience,— whether or not our minds can grasp 

the philosophy of their course. 

But the philosophy of the matter is this: A perfect 
being, angel or man, is a blank page upon which 
character must be engraved. Knowledge and a free 
will are the engravers. Pride, Selfishness and Ambition 
may be engraved, or Love, Humility and Meekness. 
The latter is the blessed or God-like character, 
the former is the sinful or devilish character. According 
to which are engraved will be the character. 
If the will decide for sin and cultivate the wicked character, 
the result will be a wicked being. If the will 
decide for righteousness and God-likeness, the result 
will be a holy being. 



The same principles in a general way apply also 
to fallen men. No matter how fallen and weak they 
may be, they have free-wills. They can will aright, 
even when they cannot do aright. And under the 
New Covenant God accepts, through Christ, the imperfect 
deeds where the wills are perfect. 

For some who are now evil doers and lovers of 
sin, our hope is, that they are such because of blinding 
of the devil (2 Cor. 4:4), which leads them to 
make a choice they would not make if they had a full, 
clear knowledge. God's guarantee to all, through 
Christ, is that all shall come to an accurate knowledge 
of the truth, and thus to a full opportunity to choose 
between righteousness and sin. We have no hope for 
any who, after coming to a clear knowledge, choose 
sin, wilfully: neither in this age nor in the next is there 
hope for such, according to God's Word. 



R3084 : page 296 

CROSSING JORDAN INTO CANAAN. 

--JOSHUA 3:9- 17. -OCTOBER 12.- 

"When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee." — Isa. 43:2. 

FOUR HUNDRED and seventy years had 
elapsed from the time God gave Canaan to 
Abraham, by promise, before his descendants 
actually crossed Jordan and began to inherit the 
land. The promise had been long of fulfilment, and 
doubtless had severely taxed the faith of the people 
to whom it belonged; yet even in this respect the 
delay was a blessing to them, as serving to stimulate 
and develop faith. Nor are we to forget that the 
original promise has not yet been fulfilled; because 
the land was promised, not only to Abraham's seed, 
but also to himself, and the noble patriarch still rests 
and waits in the sleep of death for the accomplishment 
of the divine promise, which will be fulfilled on 
a far larger scale when the people of God shall have 
passed the antitypical Jordan into the antitypical Canaan 
—the Millennial Kingdom condition. We are 
not left in doubt upon this matter. We have the 
Apostle's words in Heb. 11:13,39,40, that Abraham 
and other faithful servants of the Lord still wait 
for the fulfilment of the promise made to them, until 
first the still higher, spiritual, heavenly promises, 
made to the Gospel Church, the Christ, shall have 
been accomplished, "God having provided some better 
thing for us, that they without us should not be 
made perfect." Stephen assures us along this same 
line, saying that Abraham received not so much of 



the land as to set his foot upon, and his argument, 
based upon this fact, is Abraham's resurrection in the 
future, and the fulfilment to him personally of his 
share in the divine promise.— Acts 7:25. 

If in all this there was a lesson of patient waiting 
on the Lord and confident trust in his promise, to 
Abraham and his natural seed, there is a still larger 
and fuller lesson in it to Spiritual Israel, the spiritual 
Seed, along the same lines of faithful, patient waiting 
on the Lord for the fulfilment of the exceeding great 
and precious things he has promised us. 

Some have been inclined to question the justice 
of God's giving to Israel the land of Canaan, already 
inhabited by others;— the justice of not only permitting 
but commanding them to destroy the inhabitants 
of that land, and to take possession of it as their own. 
This transaction is held up as an illustration of the 
"land-grabbing" disposition of natural man, which 
seems to increase century by century, notwithstanding 
the increase of civilization and the general appreciation 
of justice. We are not of those who would 
defend the course of nations of modern times along 
these lines. As Christians, guided by our Master's 
example and instruction, we should seek to do good 
unto all men as we have opportunity, and to leave 
them in peaceable possession of their homes, property 
and liberties. We are to recognize a difference, 
however, between the divine law of love, placed upon 
and accepted by the Lord's consecrated people, and 
the law of selfishness, under which the mass of mankind 
—including the vast majority of nominal Christendom 
—still operates, and will continue to operate 
until the new dispensation and its new laws shall be 
ushered in by divine power. Nevertheless, seeing that 
the Church is separate from the world, in the Lord's 
plan and in his dealings, we can look with comparative 
equanimity upon the overriding of justice and 
equity by the kingdoms of this world, and may realize 
that in many instances the Lord may take advantage 
of their natural disposition toward warfare and 
conquest and empire-building, and may allow the 
wrath of man thus to work out certain features that 
will be ultimately favorable to the accomplishment 
of the divine purposes. 

Not being able to see behind the vail all the gracious 
purposes of our Heavenly Father, and not being 
wise enough to know how they can best be carried 
out, the Lord's people occupy largely the position 
of spectators in respect to the course of this 

R3085 : page 297 

world,— its politics, conquests, etc. Were we to take 
a hand in the world's affairs on either side of such 
questions we might, for aught we know, be working 
contrary to the divine will and program. While, 



therefore, we seek to be separate from the world and 
its affairs, and to give our thought and attention, 
sympathy and interest, to the affairs of the heavenly 
Kingdom, and while our voices, if ever raised at all on 
such questions, should be raised on behalf of justice, 
mercy and peace, nevertheless, we can view with great 
composure whatever changes may take place in the 
world, knowing that our heavenly Father has all 
power to overrule these matters differently if he 
chooses. 

We say to ourselves, "All the good purposes 
which he hath purposed in himself shall be accomplished;" 
and he knoweth how to accomplish these 
in the manner that will be most to his praise and 
most for the good of his cause, as it shall ultimately 
be developed, and we remember the Master's words, 
"Ye are not of this world, even as I am not of this 
world. I have chosen you out of the world, that ye 
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit 
should remain"— fruit unto eternal life. Our work is 
the work of him that sent us; we are ambassadors 
for God; and present work is the calling, upbuilding, 
instructing and general preparation of the Church to 
be the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and our mission is to 
co-operate in her call and to make ready. Later on 
will come our share in the ruling and judging of the 
world, as kings and priests of the divine order, in the 
divine time, and backed by the divine power to success 
and the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

"The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof." 
He, therefore, had the right to give Canaan to the 
descendants of Abraham without giving a reason why 
to any creature. He had a right to give it when and 
how and to whom he pleased. He does, however, 
condescend to inform us that in blotting out these 
many little nations of Palestine, descendants of Noah's 
grandson Canaan, he did so not along arbitrary lines, 
but along lines of justice. These Canaanites (also 
known as Hittites, and by various other tribal names, 
Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Jebusites and Amorites) 
were not ignorant savages, but quite civilized 
peoples who, after the manner of the Sodomites, had 
gone into great excesses of licentious idolatry. In 
Abraham's time God foresaw where their course 
would lead them, but he delayed to bring the promised 
seed of Abraham into their land for a time, because 
as we read, "the iniquity of the Amorites was 
not yet come to the full."— Gen. 15:16. 

These people were to be destroyed by the Israelites 
for two reasons; first, to have permitted them to 
live and to become incorporated with the Israelites 
in the land, by intermarriage, etc., would have been 
injurious to the seed of Abraham which God intended 
to develop, and of which he designed to make types 
of spiritual Israel. Furthermore, in the type which 
the Lord was making on a large scale, these Canaanites 



or Amorites represented the weaknesses and imperfections 

of the fallen nature. They symbolized 

sin; and their destruction by the Israelites prefigured 

the destruction of sin, the blotting out of the blemishes 

of sin, and the gradual uplifting of God's people 

in the antitype of Canaan— in the Millennial Kingdom. 

The chief difficulty in most minds, in connection 
with this slaughtering of the inhabitants of Canaan 
lies in the unscriptural thought, brought into Christian 
creeds during the dark ages, that the apparent 
death of an individual is really his entrance into more 
abundant life, either under pleasurable or tormenting 
conditions. And since these Canaanites were declared 
to be disapproved of God, the general thought 
respecting them is that while the Israelites killed 
them and took possession of their property, they, 
without further opportunity, were thrown at once under 
the control of devils and into an eternity of flaming 
torture. There is nothing of this kind connected 
with the Bible narrative. It is all the addition of 
human imagination, built upon numerous fantastic 
speculations of the dark ages. According to the 
Scriptures, death is really death, and these Canaanites, 
when slain by the sword of Israel, became unconscious, 
and will remain so until the Lord's time 
shall come for their awakening from the sleep of 
death. They shall come forth in the Millennial morning, 
as our Lord's word indicates— "All that are in 
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, 
and shall come forth."— John 5:28,29. 

They will not come forth as saints to the resurrection 
of life, the First Resurrection; but as members 
of the world in general, redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ, they will come forth to the judgment-resurrection; 
that is, to the gradual raising up that 
will be instituted during the Millennial age, a raising 
up of all who will be obedient to the judgments, the 
disciplines, the corrections in righteousness, which 
will be then brought to bear upon the whole world 
of mankind by the great Judge, our Lord Jesus, and 
by the Royal Priesthood, the Church, his assistant 
judges, of whom the Apostle says, "Know ye not that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— I Cor. 6:2,3. 

In view of this, then, we can readily see that no 
injustice was done to the Canaanites by the Lord's 
decree, and that so far as they were concerned they 
suffered no more than, if as much as if some pestilence 
or famine or other common disaster had come upon 
them. They suffered the death-penalty, as all the 
human family suffer it, and our confident hope respecting 
them and all mankind is built upon the fact 
that God so loved the world that he gave his only 
begotten Son to redeem all from the curse or sentence 
of death which came upon all through father 
Adam's disobedience;— and that he who redeemed 
the world is shortly to bless all the families of the 



earth with a gracious opportunity to come back into 
harmony with God, back to human perfection. And 
when we realize that the call of the church in the present 
time is for association in this work, it gives a 
meaning to the trials and difficulties which constitute 
part of our instructions in that great work; and it 
also gives the Royal Priesthood a hope toward God 
which overbalances all the trials of the present time. 

R3085 : page 298 

The Land of Promise, Canaan, is frequently described 
in the Scriptures as a goodly land, "a land 
flowing with milk and honey," a figurative expression 
representing its general prosperity and productiveness. 
That the inhabitants were wealthy is attested 
by recently unearthed Egyptian histories of about 
that time. Geike says:— 

"The records of Rameses II show the condition of Palestine 
and adjacent countries, in the age of Moses itself 
[prior to the exodus of Israel]. The Egyptian king brought 
back from them, he tells us, gold, glass, gum, cattle, slaves, 
ivory, ebony, boats, horses, chariots inwrought with gold and 
silver or painted, iron, steel, dates, oil, wine, asses, cedar, 
suits of armor, fragrant wood, war galleys, incense, gold 
dishes with handles, ornaments of lapis lazuli, silver dishes, 
precious stones, honey, lead, spears of brass, colors— the 
plunder, in fact, of a rich and civilized country. The meadows 
of Palestine, its fortresses, its groves and its orchards, 
are mentioned showing that prosperity of every kind 
abounded." 

The Israelites needed to be encouraged for so 
great an undertaking, and hence the various tribes of 
Canaanites were mentioned by Joshua, that they 
might know that they were all included in the Lord's 
bequest; and that they might know that he had taken 
cognizance of the whole situation. It was much to 
Israel's advantage that these various tribes of Canaanites 
were distinctly separate, and did not cooperate 
to any particular degree. Moreover, they 
evidently felt secure in that the River Jordan separated 
between the hosts of Israel and their land, and 
being quite a swift river, it would be very difficult 
for a multitude to cross without boats or bridges, and 
many of them. The crossing took place when the 
Jordan was overflowing its banks, and was therefore 
much wider than usual; and we may presume that the 
Canaanites would feel so much the more secure, and 
less vigilant in any attempt to repel an invasion, supposing 
the river to be specially impassable at this particular 
season. Had the crossing been undertaken 
when the river was low, the Canaanites would have, 
undoubtedly, disputed the way; and Israel would have 
had a severe battle with poor weapons against a probably 



well equipped enemy. Besides, the miracle God 
intended to work would have seemed much less forcible 
at any other season of the year. Israel needed 
this further miracle and evidence of divine power and 
intervention on their behalf to give them courage for 
the work before them. 

A man from each of the twelve tribes was selected; 
each one was to carry a stone from the midst 
of the Jordan to the shore, and these twelve large 
stones were to be set up as a memorial, a reminder 
to Israelites for coming generations of how the Lord 
had brought them over Jordan. (Josh. 4:2,9.) The 
priests bearing the ark were separated from the remainder 
of the Israelites by about three-quarters of 
a mile (two thousand cubits). They went upstream 
this distance, and were thus prominent before the 
eyes of Israel in what they did. As soon as the feet 
of the priests before the ark touched the waters of 
Jordan the waters began to subside, and as the waters 
subsided they took another step and another and 
another until they were able to walk on firm ground 
to the center of the river-bed, where they stood 
firmly until all the hosts of Israel— in all about two 
millions— had passed over. Still in no haste, they 
waited until twelve stones were placed where they had stood, 
and then the priests with the ark of the Lord passed over. 

We are not to question the power of God in respect 
to this miracle, in whatever manner it was accomplished; 
but in looking for the manner we are to 
presume, as far as possible, that the Lord used some 
natural means in connection with it. If we were to 
suppose that the river rose up like a wall at the right 
hand of the priests, as tho it had been cut by a knife, 
it would seem unreasonable, and the downflowing 
waters would rise higher and higher, until it would 
overflow the banks on either side more and more, 

R3086 : page 298 

and the water of even a small river, at this flood time, 
would amount to a considerable quantity and flood 
a considerable space. It is preferable, therefore, that 
we understand the words of the record, as implied in 
the Revised Version, to mean that the banking up of 
the waters was "a great way off, at Adam, the city 
that is beside Zeretan." In other words, we are not 
to understand that the dammed up wall of waters was 
close by the priests, but about twenty miles further 
up the river, near the town of Adam, where the river 
passes through a comparatively narrow gorge. How 
they were banked up there we are not informed by 
the record; no matter in what manner, it was a miracle 
—no less a miracle if we understood the method 
pursued by the Lord in its accomplishment. It may 
have been that an earthquake temporarily elevated 
the channel at this narrow place, and thus gorged 



the water for a time; and it is said that there are evidences 
at that point that some such physical disturbances 
did once occur. Or a slip in a hillside might 
have carried a large body of soil into the valley, and 
thus have choked the stream, which even down at 
Jericho is normally only ninety feet wide and thirteen 
feet deep. As an illustration of how this may have 
occurred we quote the following from Canon Tristram:-- 

M. Ganneau has drawn attention to the fact, mentioned 
in the history of Sultan Buybars, that in A.D. 1267, whilst 
the bridge at Gier Damich (or Adam) was being repaired a 
landslip some miles above dammed up the Jordan for several 
hours and the bed of the river below was left dry, the 
water being drained off to the Dead Sea. What occurred 650 
years ago, by what we call natural causes, may well have occurred 
3,000 years before, timed by divine interposition." 

In our previous studies we noticed that these 
things were written aforetime for our admonition— 
that they were examples or types of matters respecting 
God's dealings in the future: now the question 
arises, What did this passing of Jordan by the typical 
people symbolize? and, especially, what did the 
bearing of the ark by the priests have to do with it? 
We have already indicated that for various reasons 
we cannot accept the view of Jordan and of Canaan 
so long held by many Christians, which represents Jordan 
as being death and Canaan as being heaven, as 
expressed by the familiar lines of the poet: 

R3086 : page 299 

"On Jordan's stormy banks I stand, 

And cast a wishful eye 
To Canaan's fair and happy land, 

Where my possessions lie. 
No chilling winds nor boisterous breath 

Can reach that healthful shore; 
Sickness and sorrow, pain and death, 

Are felt and feared no more." 

The very fact that the Israelites did have trials 
and pains and sorrows and battles, after they entered 
into Canaan, seems to contradict the thought that it 
represented heaven itself. As we have already intimated, 
our understanding is that Canaan typified the 
new earth condition, under the administration of the 
Millennial Kingdom. What, then, does the River 
Jordan signify? We answer, that it would seem to 
stand for, represent, the divine condemnation, the 
curse, the sentence against our race which has for 
six thousand years hindered mankind from entering 
into the blessed Kingdom conditions and opportunities 
and blessings which shall ultimately prevail for 
all. In this sense of the word death, Jordan, would 



stand for it well— the death sentence. This seems 
rather to be implied in the name of the river, which 
is derived from the names of the two main springs 
by which it is formed; viz., jor, signifying "down," 
and dan, which signifies "judge." The word Jordan 
would thus have the significance of "judged down," 
that is, condemned, and as a type it would stand for 
the divine condemnation which hindered even those 
who desired to be the servants of God from entering 
into peace and rest and blessing and favor with God. 

In this view of the matter, we see how appropriate 
it was that the Ark of God's covenant, representing 
the Lord himself, his grace, his goodness, his 
promises, should stand in the midst of Jordan— effecting 
a cancellation of the sentence of death— in order 
that the Millennial blessings might be attained by all 
under the lead of Joshua's antitype. That the Ark 
of God was borne by the high-priest and the under-priests, 
and that these first passed into Jordan, is also 
significant: it represented how our great High-Priest 
and the Royal Priesthood, his Church, must first pass 
into Jordan before any of the people could pass over. 
And the fact that the high-priest and the under-priests 
stood in the midst of Jordan while the people all 
crossed over, illustrates how the passing over, free 
from divine condemnation, will be effected by the 
work of the great High-Priest, and his associated 
"brethren." He gave himself for our sins; he became 
a curse for us; he, as the man Christ Jesus, stopped 
in the midst of Jordan, that the world might pass over; 
the Royal Priesthood are following him in this sacrifice, 
and they too are stopping in the midst of Jordan; 
they also, as joint-heirs with their Lord, lay down 
their lives on behalf of the brethren,— to the intent 
that the whole world of mankind, or as many as will, 
may enter into the glorious Kingdom privileges, according 
to the divine arrangement. 

It was not necessary that the priests should remain 
in Jordan, and die there, on behalf of the delivered 
Israelites, in order to complete the type, for instead, 
by the Lord's direction, twelve stones were 
placed where they stood, representing the twelve 
tribes of Israel— representing the 144,000 out of all 
the twelve tribes (Rev. 7:1-8) who constitute the Royal 
Priesthood, and who become dead with Christ, according 
to the flesh, that they may live with him as 
new creatures, partakers of the divine nature, and participators 
with him in the great work of blessing all 
the families of the earth. 

JUDGE NOT BY OUTWARD APPEARANCE 

Judge not; the workings of the brain 

And of the heart thou can'st not see; 
What looks to thy dim eye a stain, 

In God's pure light may only be 



A scar, brought from some well-won field, 
Where thou would'st only faint and yield. 

The look, the air, that frets thy sight, 

May be a token that below 
The soul had closed in deadly fight 

With some internal, fiery foe, 
Whose glance would scorch thy smiling grace, 
And cast thee, shuddering, on thy face. 

The fall thou darest to despise: 

May be the angel's slackened hand 

Has suffered it that he may rise 
And take a firmer, surer stand; 

Or, trusting less to earthly things, 

May henceforth learn to use his wings. 

And judge none lost; but wait and see, 

With hopeful pity, not disdain; 
The depth of the abyss may be 

The measure of the height of pain 
And love and glory that may raise 
This soul to God in after days.— Selected. 



R3086 : page 299 

GRACE SUFFICIENT; ONLY BELIEVE. 

-JOSHUA 6:12-20.-OCTOBER 19.- 

"By faith the walls of Jericho fell down."— Heb. 11:30. 

AFTER ENTERING Canaan the covenant of 
circumcision was renewed by the Israelites. 
Evidently their long journeying in the wilderness, 
because of unreadiness to enter into Canaan 
at the first, was to be understood by the Israelites as 
a period of partial disfavor with the Lord; hence both 
the circumcision of their children and the annual commemoration 
of the passover ceased during that period. 
The renewal of both when they had entered Canaan 
marked the return of divine favor and evidenced their 
more acceptable condition of faith toward God. Another 
change occurred: the manna, the bread from 
heaven on which they had fed for thirty-nine years, 
ceased after they had gotten into Canaan and had 
eaten their first passover there. 
They were now ready to take possession of the 

R3086 : page 300 

land which God had given them, and were encamped 
near the city of Jericho, which occupies a sort of key 
position to Canaan from the direction of their approach. 



Joshua, the new leader, evidently had in 
mind the necessity of prompt action against Jericho, 
and was, no doubt, considering the fact that his army 
had no implements suitable for attacking such a 
walled city defended by well armed men, even though 
the latter were comparatively few in number. It was 
while on this reconnoitering expedition that he met 
an angel of the Lord with drawn sword in hand, who, 
in answer to his question, informed him that he was 
the Captain of the Lord's hosts. Joshua, after doing 
reverence to him, received instructions how he should 
proceed for the capture of Jericho, and our lesson details 
the manner in which those instructions were followed 
out, and the great victory resulting.— Joshua 6. 

We have already seen that the land of Canaan 
prefigures the Millennial Kingdom with its rich blessings 
which may be secured by all who, under the command 
of the greater Joshua— Jesus and his glorified 
Royal Priesthood, desire to be the Lord's people. 
The renewal of circumcision on entering the land, 
would thus signify that one of the first institutions of 
the Millennial Age will be a consecration to the Lord 
—to put away sin, to live separate from sin as the 
Lord's assisting grace will enable. The renewal of the 
passover would symbolize that in the Millennial dispensation 
the important work of redemption by the 
precious blood will again be brought prominently to 
the attention of all who desire to be God's people, 
and that they can only be his people by a full recognition 

R3087 : page 300 

of the Lamb that was slain, and by an eating of 

his flesh— partaking of the mercies and blessings flowing 

from his sacrifice. The ceasing of the manna, 

and the eating, instead, of the fruits and grains of Canaan, 

may be understood to signify that the new dispensation 

will have spiritual food and sustenance of 

its own, and that in great variety and abundance; and 

that mankind will no longer be dependent upon the 

divine revelation contained in the Scriptures— upon 

the Word of God through ancient prophets and apostles. 

Good and necessary as these are under present 

conditions, they cannot be to the world all that the 

more direct teachings and blessings and instructions 

and guidance of the Millennial Kingdom will be, and will, 

therefore, not be needed under the new conditions. 

Now, the Word of God is a lamp for the feet of his 

saints, and some of its light shines beyond his saints 

to others in this night time; but by and by, when the 

Sun of righteousness shall arise and the whole earth 

be flooded with the glorious light of truth and knowledge, 

the lamp which at present we cannot prize too 

highly, will cease to occupy its present exalted and 

indispensable position, although it will always be appreciated 

and reverenced. 



Another thought respecting Canaan: we have already 
noted that the Royal Priesthood may in some 
sense of the word be said to be already in the land of 
Canaan throughout this Gospel age— by faith— already 
in the place or condition which Israel after the 
flesh and the mass of mankind "entered not into because 
of unbelief." (Heb. 4:3,6,10.) To this class, 
Jordan would fitly represent consecration unto death; 
and Canaan would represent our present newness of 
life while still in the flesh. To these, the circumcision 
represents, as the Apostle explains, circumcision of 
the heart and putting away of sin from the wills; to 
these the passover signifies not only the acceptance 
of the merit of Christ's atonement on our behalf, but 
also a communion and participation with him in his 
sacrifice. These, as justified persons, having been fed 
with the manna from heaven, have been strengthened 
and brought across Jordan; and now as new creatures 
they live "by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God"— they live upon the divine promises 
—"Thy words were found and I did eat them." 
(Jer. 15:16.) To these the capture of Jericho and all 
the battlings with the Canaanites represent victories 
of the "new creature" over the flesh; not accomplished 
by their own strength, but accomplished for them by 
the Lord in recognition of their faith and trust in him. 

The capture of Jericho was accomplished in a 
peculiar manner; the methods which, by the Lord's 
command, Joshua adopted, would certainly appear 
foolish. For six days the armed men of Israel were to 
pass around the city, one time each day, followed by 
priests bearing the ark of the covenant and by other 
priests tooting with rams' horns, keeping time as they 
marched. The program on the seventh day was the 
same except that the armed men and the priests bearing 
the ark and others with the trumpets passed 
around the city seven times, and that when they had 
passed around it the last time the priests with the 
rams' horns ceased their tooting and gave a long 
blast upon the horns which was the signal for all the 
people of Israel to give a shout as they had previously 
been directed by Joshua according to the Lord's instructions. 
It required faith on the part of Joshua to 
issue such instructions; it required faith on the part of 
the armed men of Israel and of the priests to carry 
out their part of the program which seemed so senseless, 
so little likely to effect anything against the city 
which was to be captured; it required faith on the 
part of all the people to expect that when these procedures 
had been accomplished and the final long 
blast on the trumpet had come (v. 5), that the walls 
of Jericho would fall down flat. No doubt it was part 
of the divine program thus to develop and test and 
strengthen the faith of Israel, and to teach them that 
the victories they were about to gain would not be 
in their own strength or might, but by the Lord's 



power. 

Just how this would apply during the Millennial 
age we may not yet clearly discern; but we are sure 
that in some manner the lesson will be given to all 
who then desire to come into harmony with God, that 
the power of sin, its fortresses and entrenchments in 
the fallen race, cannot be overcome without divine assistance, 
and that reliance upon God and obedience 
to the great Captain of the Lord's hosts will be essential 
to every victory. The royal priesthood who 
have already entered, by faith, into the favors or privileges 
of the Millennial Kingdom (forgiveness of sins 
and harmony with the Father and blessings as new 
creatures), already realize the lesson, that sin is so 

R3087 : page 301 

thoroughly entrenched in their fallen human nature 

that it can be overcome only by divine power. All 

through the present time the royal priesthood sound 

the trumpets of warning against sin, and declare 

themselves as "new creatures" opposed to it, and announce 

that ultimately it must completely fall; and 

during the Millennial age this same priestly class, 

glorified, will still sound the trumpet note of obedience 

to God and opposition to sin, and in harmony 

with their instructions they shall finally sound a great 

blast, and all who are on the Lord's side will join in, 

and by the Lord's grace the power of sin will be utterly 

overthrown, its walls will fall down flat, and no 

longer constitute opposition, and every one who is on 

the Lord's side will be energetic in the complete destruction 

of sin not only as relates to his own person, 

but as respects the utter extermination of sin in every 

form and in every phase. 

The people were told in advance that the entire 
city was condemned of God; that he had taken the 
matter in charge and that they were merely to execute 
the divine decree against that city in its utter destruction 
and the extermination of every living thing 
therein, all of which combinedly symbolized evil. The 
only things that were not to be destroyed either with 
fire or sword, were the metals, such as gold, silver, 
etc.; and these were not to be appropriated by the Israelites, 
but were to be considered the Lord's. Special 
caution was given, and the warning that any violation 
of these terms would bring a corresponding curse upon 
the person or persons offending and upon the 
whole camp of the Israelites wherever the condemned 
things should be found. 

Thus during the Millennial age the general lesson 
will be that sin must be exterminated utterly, and 
whoever shall seek to hold on to any portion of it will 
thereby bring a corresponding curse upon himself as 
did Achan in this instance for securing to himself a 
"wedge of gold", and "a goodly Babylonish garment." 



The lesson to the royal priesthood now, as well 
as to the world in the Millennial age, is that the Lord 
requires not merely an outward conformity to his 
Word, but a heart loyalty to him, which will enter 
fully into sympathy with righteousness and into hatred 
of iniquity— otherwise the penalty will be the 
Second Death, as symbolized in the destruction of Achan. 

In respect to the slaughter of the people of Jericho, 
we must remind our readers of the points in our 
previous lesson in which we showed that the people 
thus put to death were not cast into an eternity of 
torture, but that they merely died with probably as 
little, or less, pain than if they had been smitten with 
some lingering disease; and that they have a share 
in the divine mercy and a provision in the great 
atonement which the Lord Jesus, our great High 
Priest, is accomplishing for the sins of the whole 
world, and which will shortly be finished and permit 
the blessing of all the families of the earth through 
their Redeemer. 

Just a word respecting the miracle of the overthrow 
of the walls of Jericho. It was a miracle, however 
it was to be accounted for, as is demonstrated by 
the connecting facts, the order of the procedure and 
the particular time, shout, etc. Doubtless God, in 
the accomplishing of this miracle, used some natural 
means as in other instances. Possibly an earthquake 
may have been caused at that particular spot, so as 
to affect the walls without affecting or alarming the 
people of Israel but a short distance outside of the 
city. Another suggestion offered is that there is a dynamic 
force in certain chords of sound which as yet 
is but slightly understood, and that it is possible that 
the Lord operated along the line of this law but little 
understood by us, for the accomplishment of the overthrow 
of this wall, using the sound-chord of the long 
blast, and of the voices of the people, in conjunction 
with the marching. This does not seem to us a very 
reasonable view of the matter, nevertheless we give 
some curious incidents cited, as rather confirmatory, 
by those who favor such a view. These illustrations follow:— 

"All structures, large or small, simple or complex, have 
a definite rate of vibration, depending on their material, 
size and shape, as fixed as the fundamental note of a musical 
chord. When the bridge at Colebrooke Dale (the first iron 
bridge in the world) was building, a fiddler came along and 
said he could fiddle it down. The workmen laughed in 
scorn, and told him to fiddle away to his heart's content. He 
played until he struck the keynote of the bridge, and it 
swayed so violently that the astonished workmen commanded 
him to stop. At one time considerable annoyance 
was experienced in one of the mills in Lowell. Some days 
the building was so shaken that a pail of water would be 
nearly emptied, while on other days all was quiet. Experiment 
proved it was only when the machinery was running at 



a certain rate that the building was disturbed. The simple 
remedy was in running it slower or faster so as to put 
it out of time with the building. We have here the reason 
of the rule observed by marching armies when they 

R3088 : page 301 

cross a bridge, viz., Stop the music, break step, and open 
column, lest the measured cadence of a condensed mass of 
men should urge the bridge to vibrate beyond its sphere of 
cohesion. Neglect of this has led to fearful accidents. The 
celebrated engineer, Stephenson, has said that there is not 
so much danger to a bridge when crowded with men and 
cattle, as when men go in marching order. The Broughton 
bridge near Manchester, gave way beneath the tread of only 
sixty men. A terrible disaster befell a battalion of French 
infantry while crossing the suspension bridge at Angiers, in 
France. Repeated orders were given the troops to break 
into sections, but in the hurry of the moment and in the 
rain they disregarded the order, and the bridge fell.'— Professor 
Lovering, of Cambridge. Tyndall tells us that 'while 
away up amid the Alpine solitudes of Switzerland a few 
years ago, I noticed the muleteers tie up the bells of their 
mules, and was told that the protracted combined tinkling 
would start an avalanche.'"— Harper's Young People. 

The sum and essence of our lesson is expressed in 
the words of the Apostle, "I can do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth me." (Phil. 4:13.) Faith 
is an essential; but we must have crossed the Jordan; 
we must have been justified; must have partaken 
of the antitypical passover; must have been sanctified 
before we could have of the Lord either a promise 
of victory over our Jericho, or before we could exercise 

R3088 : page 302 

such a faith as would result in that victory. If 
in the type faith could bring the fall of the strong 
walls of a city, how great must be the value of faith 
in the antitype! "This is the victory which overcometh 
the world, even your faith," but only so long as 
we trust in the Lord and seek to do those things 
pleasing to him, can we exercise this overcoming 
faith. 



R3088 : page 302 

"YE WERE BOUGHT WITH A PRICE." 

Question.— In considering the subject of the ransom 
in the light of a commercial transaction, as expressed 
by the Apostle in the words, "Ye are not your 
own; ye are bought with a price" (I Cor. 7:23), will 



you kindly state in as few words as possible what was 
the price paid? by whom was the purchase made? 
when was it bought? to whom was the price paid? 
when will that which was purchased be delivered? 

Answer.— The Scriptures most distinctly declare 
that the whole human family was "sold under sin," 
by the first Adam. The price paid him was the fruits 
of disobedience to God, which eventually proved to be 
very bitter rewards. The race thus sold under sin 
became subject to sin's wages; viz., death, by divine 
sentence. This sentence was irrevocable, and, hence, 
would have meant everlasting death, everlasting destruction, 
had not the Almighty graciously provided 
for us a ransom. The word "ransom" (Greek, antilutron), 
signifying corresponding price (Matt. 20:28; 
I Tim. 2:6), indicates to us the method by which God 
proposed to assist our race without compromising 
his own justice and its sentence of death. In order to 
be our ransom price it was necessary that our Lord 
Jesus should become "the man Christ Jesus," yet 
without sin, without taint, without blemish. This condition 
was attained through his miraculous birth,— 
and this purity and freedom from the death sentence 
upon the rest of mankind was maintained, to the end 
of his life, in that "he was holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate" from the sinner-race. In this condition he 
was ready, prepared thus to become our ransom-price, 
and this he did become by sacrificing himself, laying 
down his life on our behalf. 

As the condemnation upon the entire race came 
through one man's disobedience, so the voluntary 
sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus who was without 
sin, was a complete offset to the crime and condemnation 
of the first man, Adam; and as the race of Adam 
partook of his penalty, so also his race partakes in 
his redemption; and thus, as by one man's disobedience 
the many became sinners, so by the obedience 
of one the many were justified to life— freed from the 
condemnation of death. 

Here we see Adam and his race lost under the 
sentence of death, needing to be purchased or redeemed. 
Here we see the man Christ Jesus, the Redeemer, 
and perceive that he gave the corresponding 
price for all. Here we see God, the Judge, who sentenced 
Adam, accepting the man Christ Jesus in his 
stead, as his substitute, a ransom, or corresponding 
price. We have additionally the words of the Apostle, 
assuring us that Christ "through the eternal spirit 
offered himself without spot to God"— a sacrifice well -pleasing. 
(Heb. 9:14). We have besides, his testimony 
that our Lord Jesus took upon himself our human 
nature, that "he by the grace of God should taste 
death for every man." We have, also, the testimony 
that this plan was such an arrangement as to preserve 
the honor and dignity of divine justice, and yet 
to bring mercy and forgiveness to the human culprit, 



in the words, "That he might be just, and the justifier 

of him that believeth in Jesus." Without the 

payment of Adam's penalty for him, God could not 

have justly released the sinner from his sentence;— 

to have done so would have been an injustice— a violation 

of justice— as surely as the original sentence 

was a just one. 

As already indicated, the payment of this penalty 
began when our Lord reached perfect manhood and 
made his consecration to death at Jordan, symbolizing 
it in baptism. It was finished on Calvary. As 
the ransom, the man Christ Jesus must stay dead; 
but in harmony with the previous proposition of the 
Father he was granted life on a higher plane, as a 
partaker of the divine nature, in reward for his obedience 
unto death, even the death of the cross. When 
he ascended up on high and appeared in the presence 
of God, he presented before him the sacrifice which 
he had made in the flesh, appropriating a part of it at 
once to those who had already believed on him— the 
apostles and other faithful ones of that time— and to 
all those who would believe on him through their 
word throughout this Gospel age. In evidence that 
this was accepted of the Father and accounted sufficient 
to cancel our sins, note the fact that the Redeemer 
was at once granted the privilege of pouring 
out at Pentecost upon his faithful disciples the holy 
spirit of adoption, as evidencing to them the full forgiveness 
of their sins; and thus indirectly testifying 
not only that Jesus had arisen from the dead and 
ascended up on high, but, also, that his sacrifice for 
sins was full, sufficient and acceptable to justice. 

As to when the thing purchased will be delivered, 
we reply, that in the case of the Church there is a 
reckoned deliverance granted at once, when we believe. 
We are counted free from sin— justified by 
faith, justified by his blood, by the grace of God; and 
this justification becomes to believers the ground or 
foundation of their consecration to the Father, as 
joint-sacrificers with Christ in the sufferings of this 
present time, and the foundation of their hope of being 
joint-participators with him in the glories to follow. 
In the case of the world in general, practically no 
benefit from the death of Christ comes in the present 
time. The world must wait until the Church of 
Christ, admitted by divine grace to a share in his 
sufferings, shall have filled up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ (Col. 1:2,4), and shall have 
been glorified with him. Then these, as the glorified 
sons of God, shall shine forth in Millennial grandeur, 

R3088 : page 303 

for the blessing of the world, by the rolling away of 
the clouds of ignorance, superstition, prejudice, etc., 
and by lifting up so many as will, out of present slavery 



to sin and death into the liberty of the sons of 

God. That Millennial day, then, will be the great day 

of delivering that which Christ purchased with his 

precious blood— delivering mankind in general (so 

many as shall heartily accept divine favor on the original 

terms proffered to Adam; viz., thorough 

obedience). 



R3088 : page 303 

FIDELITY TO EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY BRIDEGROOMS. 

Dear Mr. Russell: 

Since appreciating the light of present truth and endeavoring 
to walk in it I have been much restrained in my 
reading, and have several times been forbidden to attend 
any meetings held, or to hold any communications with 
any of the dear brethren. 

For a while I quietly submitted and never had any reading 
matter around, except the Bible, when my husband came 
home. Then I grew bolder, and began to leave a tract about 
again. But each attack was worse, and finally my husband 
said: "If I see any more of those books or tracts about 
I'll burn them." My son has a Leeser, a Diaglott, etc.; they 
as well as the "Dawns," were all taken care of by my oldest 
son who is not in the truth. 

I find I must read the "Dawns"; they are more to me 
than my daily food, yet when I surreptitiously get one and 
am reading, I tremble and hide it if I hear a footfall. I am 
not happy, especially since it was shown to me that we 
should obey God, rather than man. Ought I to obey my husband 

R3089 : page 303 

in this, seeing that Christ is my Head? I feel like a 
coward in this. 

OUR REPLY. 

Dear Sister: 

Your favor of the 22nd is before me. I am glad that 
you have expressed yourself freely, and am glad to note that 
you have the spirit of a sound mind on this important subject. 
Your husband, probably a strong-minded man, has 
not fully recognized to what extent his attitude toward you 
on this subject is unreasonable and tyrannical. We are 
fully in sympathy with the Scriptural injunction that wives 
should obey their husbands; but this does not, as you have 
perceived, imply that the wife should obey her husband in 
matters contrary to the admonitions of the heavenly 
Bridegroom. No reasonable earthly husband will make 
such requirements, and we will trust that yours will consider 
the matter differently ere long. He will be helped, however, 
in seeing the right way by your kind and loving treatment of 



him, and your earnest endeavor to please him in all legitimate 
and proper ways, but by your positiveness, your firm 
decision and resolute conduct in the matters which appertain 
to your proper liberties of conscience. I would readily 
agree to keep my books and papers out of sight during my 
husband's presence in the home; but I would neither agree 
not to think nor to read, nor would I agree to absent myself 
from the meetings of those of like precious faith. 

I would tell my husband plainly that it is our duty to 
obey the heavenly Bridegroom first, and that when he says 
"Forget not the assembling of yourselves together," I considered 
it duty to follow that admonition at any cost; that I 
hoped this would appeal to him as a reasonable and correct 
course; that I had no thought of neglecting legitimate, 
proper, home obligations and duties toward him, and the 
other members of my family, but would be as faithful or 
more faithful, than if under the influence of any other than 
my present convictions. I would tell him that this much 
liberty at least was thoroughly understood by me when 
entering the marriage relationship; that if in his marriage 
vows he did not intend to accord liberties of conscience he 
had misled and deceived me, and that in any event I would 
not submit to that kind of bondage, and that the quicker 
the matter was decided the better; that under no circumstances 
or conditions would I move one iota from this position, 
so long as I considered that my position was according 
to the will of the Lord; that if this led to any breach between 
us the fault and the change were certainly on his 
side, as I had never given away my liberty of conscience and 
never intended to do so, and would not ask him to violate 
his; that I believed that my view of this would not only 
stand the test of the Scriptures but also of all men and women 
possessed of sound common sense. 

In harmony with this I would assure my husband that 
the truth, so far from making me less careful of his interests 
and my obligations as a wife, should make me more careful; 
and that I believed that if he took a right view and stand 
upon the subject, as I was determined to do, it would mean 
an increase of blessing to us both and to the household. 

If after a reasonable season of patient, loving remonstrance 
against such attempts to fetter my conscience there 
was no change for the better, I would consider that I had 
been deserted by my husband;— that he had ceased to be a 
husband and become an oppressor and was not treating me 
as even a slave might hope to be treated in respect to his 
or her conscientious convictions. Taking the matter to the 
Lord I should look for relief— for the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free. Not liberty to remarry, however; indeed 
even aside from the divine law making marriage perpetual 
(except upon one condition— Matt. 19:9) such an experience 
should be sufficient for anybody. 

I will remember you at the throne of grace, that the 
Lord will guide in your affairs. 

"THE GREAT COMPANY." 



Question.— When and how did the class that fails 
to keep its consecration get "before the throne"? I 
understand that this class is to pass through the tribulation 
and "wash its robes and make them white in 
the blood of the lamb." 

Answer.— This class seems to be located most 
particularly at the present time— altho there may have 
been some throughout this age, who, because of failure 
voluntarily to suffer, have been forced to suffer either 
with Christ in tribulation experiences, or to deny him 
and thus be condemned to the Second Death. In the 
tribulation time which will follow the Church's glorification 
we anticipate crucial tests upon all the Lord's 
true people, and faithfulness then will mean "great 
tribulation" ending in death, which to these will signify 
change to spiritual conditions. On the other hand 
failure to meet the trials devotedly will mean full, intelligent 
rejection of Christ, and will bring the full 
penalty of such a course; viz., Second Death. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 