A Smooth Transition
1 Nearly a year has passed since the elder arrangement went into effect and many have been the blessings resulting from it. Appreciative elders have taken their responsibilities very seriously and have looked well to the spiritual condition of the congregations.
2 In September there will be a rotation of the elders, with each one moving to the position of oversight that he will be holding during the coming year. The one currently serving will do well to help the new overseer to learn his responsibilities. His spiritual responsibilities he should understand, but help may be needed with the correspondence, records and business affairs of the congregation. For example, the presiding overseer can acquaint his replacement with the material in the congregation files. He should discuss with him the financial situation of the congregation and aid him to know what debts, if any, the congregation has, either to the Society or to individuals. Any correspondence that needs to be handled in regard to such situations or other matters should be discussed so that these may be properly looked after. This is also true of disciplinary problems currently being handled. It is helpful, too, to give a reminder always clearly to identify the congregation when corresponding with the Society.
3 In other departments, there should be a smooth transition if there will be a change in the one handling the literature, territory or other responsibilities. Whether there will be a change is up to the local elders to decide. (See the Organization book, page 68, paragraph 4.) The Cost List, with its excellent information on ordering magazines and other literature, can be considered together, along with any other appropriate material, such as that on the handling of subscriptions. The one formerly doing the work should kindly make himself available to explain matters later on in case assistance is required.
4 We know, too, that all in the congregation will benefit as they cooperate with the elders and are helpful to them so that they in turn may look well to spiritual interests. (Heb. 13:17) Many of the elders have been called upon to conduct at least one, and sometimes two, congregation book studies each week, and so, here again, wholehearted cooperation and assistance from the publishers in those groups, supporting the meetings as well as the field service arrangements, can lighten the load of the elders.
5 As these “older men” and ministerial servants take up their new responsibilities in the congregation, we look forward to receiving added blessings as each contributes his gifts and talents to the congregation in his new position.

