A Theocratic Summer
1 The summer months for many bring very happy times. There are vacation periods, longer daylight hours, pleasant weather and, in general, more opportunities to do things one enjoys. At the same time, we do not want to forget that “the time left is reduced . . . for the scene of this world is changing.” (1 Cor. 7:29-31) We are living in momentous times, times of change, in fact, the time of the end for this system of things.
2 Obviously, then, even our “free time” should be used wisely and purposefully. And, as you think back over previous summers and vacation periods, what has there been that you enjoyed the most? Many will think about theocratic activities such as working territory that had not been worked often, either isolated or in the congregation’s own territory, temporary pioneering, visiting congregations while on vacation, attending conventions, meeting new brothers, getting Bible studies started, etc.
3 Would it not be good to plan ahead to use wisely and in the best interests of the family the time we have available? For example, summer can be a fine time to study even more together as a family. You may find that having mealtime reports of a few minutes on interesting subjects read in the Society’s publications will be of spiritual benefit. Each member of the family may wish to set a goal to read a certain amount each day in the Bible or the Society’s publications, and then the points learned could be discussed together. Surely this would deepen spiritual thinking with a view to becoming better representatives of your congregation.
4 How good it is, too, when a family can work together in the field ministry. Could a member of your family be a temporary pioneer? If so, then other members of the family could arrange to work with the temporary pioneer from time to time, enjoying companionship in the service. Many who are today regular pioneers, missionaries or in Bethel service came from families where the parents gave the field ministry a high priority in their lives and encouraged their children to do likewise.
5 With the children free from school for a few months, perhaps parents could help them to plan a few worthwhile projects at home, such as learning to cook or sew or helping to repaint, and repair the home. These, too, can be fine occasions for a father and son or a mother and daughter to get to know and understand each other better.
6 Wholesome recreation is also an important part of summer family life. Picnics, games, swimming and other occasions for family fun are most enjoyable. Visiting educational places of interest may also be worked into the family agenda. These occasions, too, can be balanced with the time spent in reading the Bible or studying The Watchtower together as a family. Too, if you are taking a trip, the Society can inform you of the time and place of meetings at the city you will be visiting.
7 As Ecclesiastes 3:1 says, “For everything there is an appointed time,” and certainly summer is a good time for the whole family to come closer to Jehovah by activities designed to build up and strengthen our faith. You will find that they bring the greatest happiness as well.

