Branch Letter
Dear Publishers:
We were thrilled to hear announced at the Bethel table that 454,779 persons, moved by love for Jehovah, had shared in the field ministry in this country during April. That is our third consecutive peak, 8,468 more publishers than the all-time peak in March, and 23,600 more than last April!
And not only were there more workers in the field, but the report showed that those sharing in the work were exerting themselves. As a result, 8,237,205 hours were devoted to preaching the good news​—the highest figure ever for any one month! It was fine, too, to see that 27,866 publishers put forth the added effort to share in the temporary pioneer service during the month; only once before did we have as many. And a marvelous witness was given by means of magazine distribution. There was a record placement of 11,239,822 copies​—412,121 more than our previous peak two years ago!
The outstanding event in April, of course, was the celebration of the Lord’s Evening Meal. How many attended? For the first time, over a million persons in the United States were present​—1,046,346 in all, which is 70,113 more than last year. It is fine to see so many who show some appreciation for Jehovah’s loving provisions. But, of course, attending that meeting is not all that is required, is it? The majority of those who were there need further help to take their stand firmly on Jehovah’s side while there is still the opportunity to do so. Will you offer them your help?
One way that you can do so is by conducting Bible studies. During April the total number of studies dropped somewhat. Why was that? Well, no doubt one reason is that some with whom we were studying got baptized. By April, 29,557 persons had already been baptized during the service year. That’s wonderful! Also, we have probably discontinued a number of studies because of their failure to make progress, and that is a wise thing to do. It gives us more time to search for persons who are really hungry for the truth. And we may find that some who have begun to attend our meetings are not yet having a personal study. Let’s offer them our help.
Not long ago here at Bethel we also enjoyed a report from Brother Knorr about his two-week trip to the Orient via Alaska this spring. In Fairbanks he spoke to 497. In Japan with 677 in attendance he dedicated their new printery and Bethel home, and spoke to 12,396 at two other meetings in Tokyo and Osaka. In the Philippines he dedicated another new factory and Bethel home, and spoke to a crowd of 18,638 in Manila. Expansion is taking place, and the brothers are enthusiastic about it! On his way back to New York, Brother Knorr addressed an audience of 4,622 in Hawaii. The brothers are looking forward to meeting many delegates from abroad at the international assemblies.
During the next few months there will be hundreds of thousands of our brothers attending the “Divine Victory” International Assemblies. What a grand witness will result as people of all nationalities thus unitedly worship Jehovah at his temple! By all means, put forth every effort to be among them.
Be assured of our warm love and our prayers on your behalf.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

