Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 15
10 min: Song 2. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Can You Make Yourself Available? To be handled by talk using material in “Organization” book, pages 141-145, on special pioneer and missionary service. Highlight willingness needed for such work, serving wherever assigned and sticking to assignment. Special pioneers or former missionaries in congregation could be interviewed to show how they have appreciated their assignment.
15 min: “‘Come, You People,’ to Jehovah’s House!” Discuss with audience, eliciting from them practical suggestions on how they have placed the “Truth” book and started studies with others.
 3 min: Accounts report.
17 min: Concluding comments. Include “Question Box.” Use opportunity to discuss the implanting of Bible principles in the hearts of those with whom we study, building durable Christian qualities into the student. (1 Cor. 3:10-15) Song 62.
WEEK STARTING JULY 22
10 min: Song 48. Introduction, text and comments. Could handle text by discussion with audience.
15 min: “A Theocratic Summer.” Family head discusses with family applicable points from article. Father can show need of studying “Watchtower” and “Awake!” articles such as those about drug abuse to protect youngsters against what they must face on returning to school in fall. Use material applying to local situations or problems. Include thoughts in paragraphs 5 and 6.
20 min: Letting the Magazines Help You to Teach. Important to follow up on subscription placements and on others who regularly take the magazines to stimulate interest and encourage Bible study. Be prepared to discuss article of interest with subscriber, highlighting key scriptures, if article is a Scriptural one, to encourage persons to read the magazines he is receiving. When you read an article that you think would be helpful to someone you have met, make a note to call on the person and discuss it with him. Demonstrate such calls: Using a few points from the article “Why You Can Believe in Resurrection” (April 15, 1973, “Watchtower,” page 247), show how material might be used to encourage person who had a death in the family. Another demonstration could use article from May 8, 1973, “Awake!”, page 27, “Is it Right to Eat Blood?” to show Bible student who had difficulty understanding this matter that early Christians took same view. (Choose articles appropriate to local situations.)
15 min: Concluding comments. Discuss Branch Letter with audience. Enthusiastically encourage weekend field service activity. Points from article “The Apostle Paul​—Zealous for Righteousness” in May 1, 1973, “Watchtower” may also be used. Song 55.
WEEK STARTING JULY 29
13 min: Song 49. Introduction, text and comments, along with Theocratic News items.
12 min: “Organization” book, page 145, paragraph 2, through page 147. Elder discusses material with two brothers, one who is in a position to apply for Bethel and another whose family responsibilities will not allow him presently to serve thus.
15 min: Using the “Great Teacher” Book. Discuss with audience how “Great Teacher” book may be used in August. Demonstrate brief scenes of using different chapters. For example, in talking to a parent one could use Chapter 23, “The Blessing of Work,” showing that the attitude of many young people today is to get something for nothing. Jesus worked and taught his disciples to be workers. Another might demonstrate placing the book by using Chapter 32, “Happy Are the Peaceable,” to show how youngsters can be taught to avoid becoming involved in violence.
Make part practical, applying to local circumstances and situations. May wish to have audience relate presentations they have found practical in placing “Great Teacher” book.
20 min: Enthusiastic talk reflecting on new things learned at the “Divine Victory” International Assembly that the elders feel would be of particular benefit to the congregation. Also concluding comments. Song 66.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 5
10 min: Song 82. Introduction, text and comments.
15 min: Talk on “Will You Make the Effort to Be Honest?” covering material in the May 15, 1973, “Watchtower.”
10 min: “A Smooth Transition.” Might have an elder discuss the information in the article and what can be done locally to see that the work is carried on efficiently, not only by them, but also by any ministerial servants who may be taking on new positions in September.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Question-and-answer coverage, with emphasis on how the material can be applied in a practical way in the congregation’s territory.
10 min: Concluding comments. Some items from Announcements. Song 68.

