“Come, You People,” to Jehovah’s House!
1 A frequent question these days is, “How many are attending the meetings at your Kingdom Hall?” In many congregations, large and small, the joyful answer seems to be the same, “Huge crowds!” It is not unusual now to hear of congregations with 100 publishers having 150 or more in attendance at their meetings. From all nationalities a growing crowd of worshipers is flocking to the “mountain of the house of Jehovah,” causing the meeting places to bulge at the seams.​—Isa. 2:2, 3.
2 Are these new ones only attending the meetings? No, to the contrary, the figures show that over 680,000 persons were baptized in the past five years. This means that every four minutes around the clock a new person was baptized. To what extent the “unnumbered” great crowd will grow in the future remains to be seen.​—Rev. 7:9.
3 Should we continue with urgency to preach the good news and to look for sheeplike ones? Yes, our search goes on for others who are depressed because of this system of things and who are looking for a real hope that is in harmony with Jehovah’s righteous standards. Jehovah, who always provides abundantly, has given us the right instrument to use to help those of all nationalities. In July we will be especially featuring the Truth book in our field ministry. Over 59 million copies of this book in 84 languages have already been produced. Next to the Bible it is the most widely distributed book in the Western world.
4 We all appreciate the good results that have already been attained from using the Truth book, so with enthusiasm we can make use of it in the field ministry. While any of the other 25c books may be carried along and placed, it would be good to start out by offering the Truth book, along with the opportunity to study the Bible.
5 Some will be doing their house-to-house work in territory that is seldom worked. If you are privileged to work such territory and you place a Truth book, try to arrange a study that you can conduct while in the territory and then keep in contact later through personal return visits or correspondence to see the progress the individual makes. You can also encourage them to study on their own. A sister calling from house to house in isolated territory was greeted by a kindly older woman with the words that she did not believe in a “burning hell.” Why? Because, the summer before, she had obtained the Truth book and on her own had come to the realization that what she was reading was the truth. She wanted to serve Jehovah too.
6 In whatever territory you work you will likely find many who have the Truth book. Has someone studied it with them? If not, then make every effort to get a Bible study going. In most instances this will be preferable to placing another book. Too, you will be cultivating that which has already been planted, rather than only sowing more in the same spot.
7 In the starting of studies some pioneers report that they have had excellent success using Chapter Ten to begin their study, helping the interested ones to see right from the outset that God’s kingdom is a vital force in the lives of people today. They emphasize the rulership of Christ Jesus, showing how this is an expression of divine rulership. Of course, people and situations are different, so whichever subject may appeal to the interested person may be the best one in which to start, and then, in the following six months, cover all of the material in the book.
8 As Jehovah continues to speed up the growth, we who are now associated have the precious privilege of helping these new ones to progress. As they develop their spiritual abilities they can in turn help others. In this way “many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come,’” to more who will bring praise and honor to Jehovah.​—Isa. 2:2, 3; 60:22.
[Blurb on page 1]
Helping All Nationalities to Worship at God’s Temple.

