





What Does the Bible Say About Giving?



The Bible’s answer

The Bible encourages giving that is done voluntarily and with the right motive. It shows that such giving benefits not only the recipient but also the giver. (Proverbs 11:25; Luke 6:​38) Jesus said: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”​—Acts 20:35.
When is giving beneficial?

When is giving improper?

Bible verses about giving





When is giving beneficial?

Giving is beneficial when it is done voluntarily. “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart,” says the Bible, “not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.”​—2 Corinthians 9:7, footnote.
Heartfelt giving is part of “the form of religion” that God approves. (James 1:​27, footnote) A person who generously helps those in need works hand in hand with God, who views such generosity as a loan made to him. (Proverbs 19:17) The Bible teaches that God himself will repay the giver.​—Luke 14:12-​14.



When is giving improper?

If it is done with ulterior motives. Examples include:
  To impress people.​—Matthew 6:2.

  To receive something in return.​—Luke 14:12-14.

  To try to buy salvation.​—Psalm 49:6, 7.


If it supports activities or attitudes that God condemns. For example, it would be wrong to give someone money to gamble or to misuse drugs or alcohol. (1 Corinthians 6:​9, 10; 2 Corinthians 7:1) Likewise, it is not proper to give to someone who is able to support himself financially but refuses to do so.​—2 Thessalonians 3:​10.
If it interferes with a person’s God-given responsibilities. The Bible teaches that family heads must provide for the needs of their household. (1 Timothy 5:8) It would not be right for a family head to give so much to others that he jeopardizes his own household. Similarly, Jesus condemned those who refused to provide for their elderly parents by claiming that all their assets were “a gift dedicated to God.”​—Mark 7:​9-​13.



Bible verses about giving
Proverbs 11:25: “The generous person will prosper, and whoever refreshes others will himself be refreshed.”
Meaning: Giving benefits not only the recipient but also the giver.
Proverbs 19:17: “The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, and He will repay him for what he does.”
Meaning: God considers himself to be indebted to those who help the needy, and he promises to repay such generosity.
Matthew 6:2: “When you make gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, as the hypocrites do . . . so that they may be glorified by men.”
Meaning: We should not give just to attract attention to ourselves.
Acts 20:35: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”
Meaning: Heartfelt generosity brings happiness.
2 Corinthians 9:7: “Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.”
Meaning: Giving that is done voluntarily pleases God.


