





What Does the Bible Say About Homosexuality?



The Bible’s answer

God created humans to engage in sex only within the arrangement of marriage between a male and a female. (Genesis 1:​27, 28; Leviticus 18:22; Proverbs 5:​18, 19) The Bible condemns sexual activity that is not between a husband and wife, whether it is homosexual or heterosexual conduct. (1 Corinthians 6:​18) This includes intercourse, fondling another person’s genitals, and engaging in oral or anal sex.
While the Bible disapproves of homosexual acts, it does not condone hatred of homosexuals or homophobia. Instead, Christians are directed to “respect everyone.”​—1 Peter 2:​17, Good News Translation.
Can a person be born homosexual?
 The Bible doesn’t comment directly on the biology of homosexual desires, though it acknowledges that we are all born with a tendency to go against what God commands. (Romans 7:​21-​25) Rather than focus on the cause of homosexual desires, however, the Bible prohibits homosexual acts.
How to please God despite having same-sex urges.
 The Bible says: “Don’t be controlled by your body. Kill every desire for the wrong kind of sex.” (Colossians 3:5, Contemporary English Version) To kill wrong desires, which lead to wrong actions, you need to control your thinking. If you regularly fill your mind with wholesome thoughts, you can more readily dismiss wrong desires. (Philippians 4:8; James 1:​14, 15) While you may struggle greatly at first, it can become easier. God promises to help you to “be made new in the force actuating your mind.”​—Ephesians 4:​22-​24.
The same struggle is faced by millions with heterosexual desires who wish to conform to the Bible’s standards. For example, those who are single with little prospect of marriage or who are married to a partner who is unable to function sexually choose to control their sexual urges despite any temptations they might face. They are able to live happily, and those with same-sex urges can do so as well if they truly want to please God.​—Deuteronomy 30:19.




