VOL. XXIII. JULY 15, 1902. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Higher Criticism in Scotland 211 

The Negro Not a Beast 213 

Miscegenation not Scripturally 

a Crime 213 

How Shall we account for 

Racial Differences 215 

Obligations Toward Fellow-Men— 

In the Decalogue 217 

Poem— "These Many Years" 220 

Worshipping the Golden Calf 220 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 



to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 
R3040 : page 210 

MORE VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 

The friends are displaying great energy this year in the 
distribution of literature near Christian meeting places. We 
bid you all God-speed in this very effective preaching of the 
Gospel. Our first order for the special issues of our journal used 
this year was for 1,000,000 copies. Over one half of this quantity 
has already gone out to fill large requisitions and nearly 
200,000 are on back orders waiting for the papers as fast as the 
printers can supply them. We hope to get caught up very soon 
now, and request that those who have sent us small orders for 
mail shipment exercise just a little more patience. "Let 
patience have her perfect work." We have just issued 400,000 
more of these issues, so as to be ready for your later orders. 

Meantime let those who have not been engaged in this 
branch of the service enquire of themselves whether or not they 
can afford to miss so grand an opportunity for showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light. Do you know of and are you using a better 
method of preaching the truth? "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages [joy and peace and blessing in the present life even] 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life." 



R3040 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE "HIGHER CRITICISM" IN SCOTLAND. 
SCATHING PRESS COMMENTS. 



A SCOTTISH READER of Zion's Watch Tower 
writes:— The month of May annually witnesses 
the great ecclesiastical meetings known 
as the General Assemblies of the Presbyterian 
Churches in Scotland. This year the Assemblies of 
the Established Church and of the Free Church (the 
latter consisting of those who did not enter the union 
between the former Free Church and the former 
United Presbyterian Church, now called in union the 
United Free Church) met in Edinburgh, the historic 
capital of the country, while the Assembly of the 
United Free Church was held in Glasgow. To 
readers of Dawn the principal interest in the voluminous 
discussions, extending over some ten days, 
will be in respect to the question of the "Higher 
Criticism" in connection with which there was a 
great debate in the U.F. Assembly at Glasgow 



on Friday, 23rd May. The matter arose 
in this way: Certain memorialists had called 
attention to the teachings of Professor George 
Adam Smith (one of the Professors of the Church) 
in a volume of lectures recently published by him, in 
which, they contended, views are set forth wholly 
subversive of the divine authority and authenticity of 
the Scriptures. The memorial had been remitted to 
the College Committee for consideration, and this 
committee, after deliberating, resolved unanimously 
to recommend that the Assembly should not take any 
action against Professor Smith. When this recommendation 
came before the Assembly for disposal 
extraordinary interest was taken in the proceedings, 
and the large St. Andrew's Hall was crowded all day. 
Rev. Dr. Kidd, Glasgow, submitted the report. Principal 
Rainy moved that the Assembly adopt the 
recommendation of the report to the effect "that it 
was not the duty of the Church to institute any 
process against Professor Smith in connection with 
his lectures recently published; but at the same time 
declared that they were not to be held as accepting 
or authorizing the critical theories therein set forth." 
The motion also called upon ministers and professors 
to take care that reverence for Holy Scripture should 
be conspicuously manifest in their writings. 
In a long speech in support of the motion, 
Principal Rainy contended that the present was 
not a fitting time to enter into the large question 
that had been raised, and that a Committee of the 
Church could not satisfactorily deal with the matter. 
Neither he nor those associated with him had any 
desire to make things uncomfortable for Professor 
Smith. The Bible would live triumphantly through 
all facts established as facts, and all the consequences 
following from them. Professor Orr seconded. Dr. 
John Smith, Edinburgh, moved a long amendment, 
setting forth that the recommendation of the College 
Committee did not deal with the most serious matter 
raised by the memorialists, and that, in view of the 
manifest danger to the peace and prosperity of the 

R3041 : page 211 

Church arising directly from the intrusion of this 
critical controversy in its present form, the Assembly 
appoint a large and representative Committee to take 
account of the whole situation with a view to arriving 
at such conclusions as shall dispel anxiety and clear 
the testimony of the Church before the world. Dr. 
John McEwan, Edinburgh, seconded. Dr. Wells 
moved that the Assembly resolve to appoint a Committee 
to confer with Dr. George Adam Smith in the 
hope that the perplexities be removed. Lord Overtoun 
seconded. Considerable discussion followed. 
Professor George Adam Smith addressed the 



House, complaining that he had been misrepresented. 
Amid loud applause he declared— 
"From the bottom of my heart I believe in the Bible 
as the revelation of God to sinful man— a thing which 
found me long before I found it." On a division, Dr. 
Smith's amendment was defeated by that of Dr. 
Wells; and on a further division, the report of the 
College Committee was approved by 534 to 263 given 
for Dr. Wells' amendment. This decision, together 

R3041 : page 212 

with the whole attitude in which the Churches stand 
towards the Higher Criticism in view of their creeds 
and standards, such as the "Confession of Faith," has 
been extensively commented upon by the press of 
the country. There have, of course, been various 
opinions expressed; but the following extracts will 
be found as instructive and suggestive of the real 
state of matters in Scotland as they are undoubtedly 
plain and incisive in terms. They are both from the 
Edinburgh Evening News, an ably edited and influential 
daily of the Scottish capital. The first extract, a 
leading article, deals with the general question:— 

Some of the influential among the clergy are 
getting alarmed about the Higher Criticism. This 
feeling found expression yesterday in the Established 
Church Assembly. Speaking on the indifference of 
the masses, Dr. Mair attributed it largely to the 
Higher Criticism. His words are worth reproduction: 
"The lapsing class cared nothing at all about 
creeds, but they did care about their squabbling. 
They said, 'When you have made up your own minds 
then we may hear you.' The prime cause was the 
change in the way of regarding Scripture that had 
arisen largely from scientific naturalism and from 
the Higher Criticism acting upon an age which worshiped 
progress and seemed to think that the newest 
was always best. He condemned reckless unscientific 
criticism, which only and always did mischief, and 
it was remarkable that these things percolated down 
into the lowest classes even. Had the Churches 
changed in their way of regarding the Word of God?" 
Dr. Mair has hit the nail on the head. Why should 
the working classes attend church? In the days of 
orthodoxy, when the Bible was believed to be an 
authoritative revelation, preacher and hearer held 
definite relations to each other. Sheltered behind a 
"Thus saith the Lord," the preacher could unfold 
before his hearers, after the style of Jonathan Edwards, 
a scheme of Redemption, which in essence was 
a philosophy of history. Man's creation, his fall, the 
progressive upward movements under supernatural 
guidance, as exhibited in the call of Abraham, the 
selection of the children of Israel, the wilderness 
legislation, sacrificial and ritualistic, typical of the 



New Testament revelation— these things formed the 

staple of orthodox preaching, and gave to human 

life an organic unity. To the anxious inquirer, with 

his "What must I do to be saved?" the old divines had 

a ready and intelligent answer. They could point 

him to the Cross upon which the Second Person in 

the Trinity died as an expiation for human guilt. If 

questioned as to the authority for all this, the orthodox 

divine could appeal to the Bible as an inspired and 

infallible record. He could show the organic unity 

between the Old and New Testaments, and without 

difficulty could prove from the wilderness legislation 

and prophetic predictions the transcendent greatness 

of Christ and the sacrificial nature of his death. 

What has the Higher Critic to say to the anxious 

inquirer with his cry, "What must I do to be saved?" 

The Higher Critic can no longer point to Christ, the 

Second Person in the Trinity, as the Saviour of sinners. 

According to the "Encyclopedia Biblica," there 

was nothing specially supernatural about Christ. The 

miraculous birth is explained away or ignored, the 

miracles are attributed to misunderstandings or 

exaggerations, the supernatural, in short, is reduced 

to a minimum. Then Professor George Adam Smith 

has torn to tatters the old Redemption drama, which 

charmed the heart of John Calvin, Jonathan Edwards, 

John Knox, Luther, and our own Candlish and Cunningham. 

According to the Higher Critics, there was 

no fall, no call of Abraham, no special legislation in 

the wilderness, no sacrificial symbols of the great 

sacrifice on Calvary, no predictions of Christ. In a 

word, the Bible is a collection of mythical stories, 

from which a preacher may extract a few 

grains of ethical teaching just as a skillful moralist 

may extract a few grains of ethical teaching from 

"Aesop's Fables." The working classes are not fools. 

They will not attend church to listen to men who 

themselves are living in a mental fog, men who, if 

they were honest, would prefer breaking stones on the 

highway to saturating their souls with hypocrisy for 

the sake of the loaves and fishes. 

[We are quoting the above not endorsing it all. 
The editor would be very interested in seeing Bible 
proofs about the "Trinity." He is sure that neither 
the thought, nor the word Trinity is Scriptural. It 
is such careless use of the Bible that has given Higher 
Critics the foothold they have obtained.] 

The second— also a leading article— appeared on 
the day following the decision in the Professor Smith 
case:— 

There is no use mincing matters. The Protestant 
Church is an organized hypocrisy, and its leaders 
arrant humbugs. It is actually come to this that if 
the author of the "Age of Reason" were alive today 
he would not be spoken of derisively as Tom Paine, 
the infidel, but the Rev. Thomas Paine, D.D., Professor 



of Hebrew and Old Testament Exegesis, U.F. 
College, Glasgow. He would have no difficulty in 
preaching from a Protestant pulpit. That means that 
while professing to pin its faith on the Bible as an 
authoritative, supernatural revelation, the Protestant 
Church is now willing to tolerate in its pulpits and 
its professorial chairs men who hold the views of the 
famous Paine. What were the conclusions reached 
by Paine? Pretty much the conclusions reached by 
the Higher Critics who today fill the highest positions 
in Protestant Churches. In order to justify this 
assertion it will be necessary to examine the views 
of the Higher Critics in detail. Let us begin with 
the first book in the Bible, Genesis. What do the 
Higher Critics say about that book? For answer let 
us turn to the article on Genesis by Professor G. F. 
Moore in the second volume of the "Encyclopedia 
Biblica." According to Professor Moore, Genesis 
was written about the eighth century B.C. Consequently, 
Moses could not be the author. As to its 
historical value, the Professor shows what he thinks 
of it by talking of "the legends of Abraham, and 
especially of Isaac." In a similar strain writes Professor 
Adam Smith, whose case was before the U.F. 
Assembly yesterday. Paine in his book gives ground 
also for believing that Genesis could not be the work 

R3041 : page 213 

of Moses, and that it was a collection of traditions, 
stories and fables. Thus both the theological professors 
and Paine reach substantially the same 
conclusion. The close agreement between the 
Higher Critics of today and Paine is still further seen 
in the article on Historical Literature, also by 
Professor Moore, who remarks that "the stories of 
the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, Israel, and his sons, 
are told with a wealth of circumstance and a vividness 
of color which show that we have entered the realm 
of pure legend." Let us turn to the article "Elijah," 
and what do we find? At the opening of the article 
we find the author, the Rev. W. E. Addis, Manchester, 
writing as follows: "We shall be better able to 
appreciate his (Elijah's) position when we have examined 
the legendary narratives in which his history is 
enshrined." It is the same with Elisha. Mr. Addis 
here also complains of the difficulty of reaching 
historic fact on account of the legendary nature of the 
Biblical account. This is very much the position of 
Professor Smith. Here, too, is substantial agreement 
with Paine, who, instead of using the word "legendary," 
uses the word "romancing." Take a crucial 
instance, the famous prediction in Isaiah about the 
Messiah. Here is what Professor Smith says: 
"Isaiah meant no more than that some one should be 
born whose character and hopes should be proof that 



God was with his people. Whether the promised 
unborn was an individual or a future generation of 
Israel it is difficult to make out; but probably the 
latter is what Isaiah intends." Professor Smith 
further knocks the feet from the famous prediction 
by stating that the word "virgin" should be really 
translated "marriageable woman." That is rather a 
severe blow at the incarnation as detailed by Matthew. 
The notable feature is that this is precisely the theory 
of Paine, who, if alive today, instead of being persecuted 
as a base infidel, would be drawing a handsome 
salary as a professor of theology in the U.F. Church. 
Dr. Rainy justifies this kind of tomfoolery on the 
plea that the question about the authenticity of the 
Bible is under grave discussion, and that we had 
better wait for light. That is to say, the Church is 
no longer the witness of God upon earth, but a huge 
debating society, in which large salaries are paid to 
those who set themselves to destroy the creed to 
which they have subscribed. The proceedings of 
yesterday confirm us in our old opinion, that the 
Church has become a colossal sham, and the clergy 
a band of sleek-faced Jesuitical trimmers, whose 
moral obliquity is only equalled by their intellectual 
dishonesty. 



R3042 : page 213 

THE NEGRO NOT A BEAST. 



A BROTHER sends us with the following 
questions, a book now having an extensive 
sale in the South, and calculated to stir up 
strife with its teaching that the negro is not human, 
but a beast. Our answers review the statements of 
said book. 

(1) Question.— Are there any grounds for the 
belief of some that the negro is one of the lower animals, 
in the Scriptures called a "beast" and created, 
like the other beasts, prior to the creation of Adam, 
who was the first that was called a man? 

Answer.— Of course whoever advances such a 
theory must at least fancy that he has proofs to support 
it, and frequently the wish to find such proofs 
misleads the judgment and causes the individual to 
accept as proofs, matters which would not be proofs 
if regarded in an unprejudiced manner. In our opinion 
there are no such proofs, but strong testimony of 
the Scriptures to the contrary. Science has proven 
that somehow the Creator has fixed boundaries and 
limitations which hinder the different species from intermingling 
Even where the species closely resemble 



each other in many respects, as for instance, the 
horse and donkey, the dog and the cat, a cross-breed 
with powers of propagation cannot be secured. This 
law, which it is well known obtains throughout the 
animal kingdom, should in all reason be applicable to 
mankind; and hence, if whites and negroes were of 
different species they could not, by commingling, produce 
offspring capable of propagation. Briefly stated, 
this is the scientific side of the question, which cannot 
be set aside by any amount of sophistry or theorizing. 
It will stand as a fact after the theorizing is dead. 
From the Scriptural standpoint the answer is equally 
specific. Note the Apostle's words, "God that made 
the world and all things therein. ..hath made 
of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the 
face of the earth,"-Acts 17:24-28. 

MISCEGENATION NOT SCRIPTURALLY A CRIME. 

(2) Question.— Those who take the view I mention, 
claim that Cain's sin consisted in marrying a negress, 
and that it was for this reason that God would 
not accept his sacrifice. It claims also that the crime 
of all nations, leading to their degeneracy and divine 
disfavor, has in every instance been the commingling 
of the white "man" and the black "beast"; and that 
the different colored races, yellow, red, brown, are 
the result of these admixtures, and that hence heathendom 
prevails amongst the various colored races, 
while Christianity prevails amongst the whites. What 
answer would you make to this proposition? 

Answer.— The proposition is wholly illogical. It 
is not true that divine favor has gone with the whites 
exclusively, and against the blacks and other colored 
races; civilizing the whites and barbarizing the others. 
If civilization and barbarity are to be the tests entirely, 
we have only to take in a wide scope of history to see 
the fallacy of the view presented. Eighteen centuries 
ago the white peoples of Europe, with their straight 
silky hair, were savages, idolaters, barbarians— far 
more degraded than were the millions of India and 
the millions of China at the same time. This disproves 
this theory at a glance. 

Furthermore, the Children of Israel, who for 
eighteen centuries before that had been the favored 
people of God, and respecting whom it was written, 
"You only have I known (recognized) of all the 
families of the earth," are not a fair skinned and 
straight and silky haired people. Their hair is quite 

R3042 : page 214 

kinky, and their skin is quite swarthy, altho they also 
are a part of the Caucasian race. Furthermore, we 
notice in the case of that nation that whereas they 
were subjects of divine favor for eighteen hundred 



years, and then became objects of divine disfavor for 
a similar period, it was not because of their having 
intermarried with blacks, but for a very different reason 
—because of their rejection of Messiah. This 
proves that alienation from God which constitutes the 
heathen "strangers, aliens and foreigners," was not 
because of intermarriage with the blacks. 

If those who favor this theory should persist in 
saying that all who are strangers from God and from 
the commonwealth of Israel, were rejected and utterly 
cast off because of impurity of blood through negro 
admixture, let us reflect further that these Gentile nations 
include our own forefathers, the barbarians of 
Europe. And let us further reflect that however cast 
off they were, and from whatever reason they were 
cast off, their debt, their penalty, was paid by the 
great ransom sacrifice which our Lord Jesus gave— 
not for the Jews only, but for the Gentiles also, by 
which we, who were once aliens and strangers and 
foreigners, have been brought nigh to God, and 
granted the privilege of becoming his sons. 

But the entire argument is fallacious. Their conjecture 
respecting Cain's transgression is trumped up 
based upon a slight imperfection in the translation of 
our common version Bibles, which read, "If thou doest 
well shalt thou not be accepted? And if thou doest 
not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall 
be his desire and thou shalt rule over him." (Gen. 4:7.) 
This latter statement is still further twisted out 
of shape to prove the point by making it read, "Unto 
thee shall her desire be, and thou shalt rule over her," 
and making the "her" apply to the negress, whom 
Cain is supposed to have accepted as a wife. On the 
contrary, the Scriptural account shows that Cain had 
no wife at the time of this injunction. It was subsequent 
to this that Cain went and dwelt in the land of 
Nod, on the east of Eden, and knew his wife, and she 
conceived. (Verses 16,17.) Cain's wife was undoubtedly 
one of his sisters, for such was the custom 
of early times, nor was it necessary to bar by law intermarriage 
between blood relations. The necessity 
for this at the present time lies in the fact that the race 
has greatly degenerated, and that the idiosyncrasies 
of one family need to be offset by different peculiarities 
of another— and sound advice is that all mating 
should be between those of dissimilar temperaments. 
In the present run-down mental and physical condition 
of the human family in-breeding tends to produce 
insanity and physical degeneracy, while interbreeding 
gives better results, by scattering and offsetting 
the weaknesses of each tribe or family. 

There is nothing said respecting any sin on Cain's 
part up to the time he became jealous of his brother, 
and his murderer. He did entirely right to bring 
to the Lord the offering which he did bring of the 
fruits of the ground; nor was the Lord displeased with 



this. The fact that Abel's offering was accepted while 

Cain's was rejected, should have been understood by 

him as indicating the kind of sacrifice which would 

be best pleasing to the Lord, and straightway he 

should have procured and presented animal sacrifices: 

then, undoubtedly, his would have been as truly acceptable 

as Abel's. The Lord from the very first 

wished to teach his creatures that the only reconciliation 

for sin would be through the shedding of 

blood; thus he foreshadowed to them the great sacrifice 

for sin— the blood of Christ. "Without shedding 

of blood there is no remission." 

Cain should, therefore, have congratulated his 
brother Abel, and have been thankful for this clear 
manifestation of what kind of a sacrifice would be 
pleasing to his Creator; but instead we are told that 
he was wroth, angry. It was for this anger that the 
Lord reproved him as the context clearly shows. The 
Lord said to Cain in substance: Why are you angry? 
Do you wish to bring me a sacrifice? Are you angry 
because I have shown you the kind of sacrifice which 
I wished to receive? Are you jealous because this 
manifestation of my wishes came to you through your 
brother? Evidently you are in a wrong condition. 
If you would do the acceptable thing, would you not 
be accepted as well as Abel, and your sacrifice as well 
as his? And if now that you know what would please 
me you do not do so, would it not prove that sin lies 
at the door, that your heart is not right? Then follows 
the twisted statement which we here give from 
Leeser's translation— "If thou doest not well (now 
that you know what my will is) sin lieth at the door, 
and unto thee is its desire, but thou canst rule over 
it;"— you can get the victory over this wrong attitude 
of mind if you but so desire. But instead of getting 
the victory over his jealousy, Cain permitted it 
to grow; and getting into an altercation with his 
brother the envious, murderous feelings of his heart 
gave vent to the blow which made him the first 
murderer. 

The Scriptural evidences are wholly against the 
theory mentioned in the question. Take, for instance, 
the fact that Moses married a negress, and had children 
by her. According to the theory we are criticising 
this would have been an unpardonable sin in 
God's sight, a carnal union between a man and a beast. 
According to this theory Moses would have been rejected 
utterly from divine favor. But what do we 
find? Quite to the contrary. It was after this marriage 
that God chose Moses to be his representative 
and the leader of his people out of Egyptian bondage. 
Moreover, it was when Moses' brother Aaron and his 
sister Miriam, especially the latter, upbraided him for 
his marriage to a negress, that the Lord defended him 
in the matter, and smote Miriam with the plague of 
leprosy as a punishment for her improper conduct 



and language respecting this subject. (See the account, 

Num. 12.) Zipporah was an Ethiopian, described 

in the Hebrew text as a Cushite. Ebed melech, 

also an Ethiopian, was one of King Zedekiah's household, 

and be it noted that he was both thoughtful and 

zealous for the Lord's prophet, Jeremiah, and was the 

commander of the thirty men who delivered him from 

prison (Jer. 38:7-12.) Hence the argument of those 

who claim that the negro is devoid of organizing intelligence 

or ability, except as he may have an admixture 

of white blood, is shown to be fallacious. 

We have already quoted from the Apostle Paul 
that all nations are mentioned as of one blood; and 
this again borne out by his statement that those who 

R3043 : page 215 

accept Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, barbarian or 
Scythian, bond or free, are "all one in Christ Jesus." 
--Gal. 3:28; Col. 3:11. 

The Ethiopian eunuch to whom Philip was sent 
with the messages of salvation was unquestionably a 
black man— "Can the Ethiopian change his skin?" 
(Jer. 13:23; Acts 8:27.) We find no suggestion on 
Philip's part that this Ethiopian was not a man, but 
a beast; but quite to the contrary, he was ready to 
preach the Gospel to him and to accept him as a 
brother in Christ upon his confession of faith. 

The Queen of Sheba who visited Solomon in the 
height of his glory is presumed to have been a negress: 
the present Emperor of Abyssinia claims to be 
a descendant of Solomon by this Queen— he is a black 
man, and an able warrior and general, as the Italian 
army, attempting to invade his country a few years 
ago, learned to its cost— its serious defeat. Solomon 
is presumed, by some, to have referred to the Queen 
of Sheba in his Songs or Canticles 1:5,6. 

HOW SHALL WE ACCOUNT FOR RACIAL DIFFERENCES? 

(3) Question.— If the foregoing is not the solution 
of the racial distinctions amongst men, what 
would you suggest as a reasonable explanation? 

Answer.— From the Scriptural standpoint we 
must and do recognize all of the human family as 
one race, of which father Adam was the original head; 
a later head being Noah. Accepting as we do the 
Bible narrative of the flood (and it is confirmed by 
similar, though less explicit, narratives amongst all 
ancient peoples) we need not go back of Noah and 
his family in seeking a cause for the differences. Taking 
Mt. Ararat as the central joint from which post-diluvian 
humanity spread itself over the earth, we may 
reasonably suppose that his three sons and their posterity 
went in different directions, the one northward, 
the other southward, and the third eastward. There is 



a general concensus of opinion that it was Ham who 
went southward, and whose posterity afterward peopled 
Africa; that it was Shem who remained near the 
Mediterranean and became the millions of Armenia, 
Persia, Assyria, Egypt and India; and that Japheth 
went northward and eastward, and that his posterity 
is represented in the Turks, Russians, Chinese, etc. 

In attempting to account for the wide differences 
between whites and blacks, and the lesser differences 
between these and the yellow, brown, and red, we 
are treading upon uncertain ground,— as all ground 
must be in which our imperfect knowledge and imperfect 
reasoning powers have not inspired direction 
from the Lord's Word. Hence it should be understood 
at the outstart that all that we or others can do 
is to guess on this subject— respecting the differences 
in shape of head, color of skin, shape of eyes, peculiarities 
of hair, the nose, lips, etc. Undoubtedly, the 
climate and the soil have much to do with these differences, 
just as they have much to do with changes 
in vegetation. For instance, the apple which reaches 
so great a degree of perfection in a cold climate, if 
transferred, even gradually, to a warm one will do 
poorly, and if it does not die out entirely will at least 
undergo a transformation, in harmony with the 
change of soil and climate. The same is noticeable 
in the quince, the plum and the grape, the orange, 
etc. Is there more difference between the different 
races of human species than between the different 
kinds of grapes— some sweet, some sour; some larger, 
some smaller; some round, some oblong, some pear-shaped; 
some white, some green, some reddish, some 
purple; some with solid meat, some half full of juice, 
some with seeds and some without? Yet it is not 
questioned that all grapes are of one family. 

Again, consider the dog species. Some are sleek 
and some are rough; some are very woolly and some 
are without hair; some white, some brown, some tan; 
some large, some small, etc. Does any one dispute 
that all dogs are of one species? Appropriately we 
find that locality and climate and the kind of food subsisted 
upon had much to do with these differences. 
True, we see dogs in various countries of different 
breeds, now, yet we recognize each breed as having 
had originally a distinctive home: as for instance, the 
St. Bernard of the Alps, the Spitz of the Artie regions, 
the Scotch terrier, the Collie and the Newfoundland 
—each had its own place, and was developed 
under peculiar conditions, which for the time kept it 
separate from others. We are to remember that for 
long centuries neither dogs nor their masters roamed 
the world over as at present, but were content with 
their own home country, which, with its peculiar conditions, 
and customs, gradually fixed certain characteristics 
of thought, manner, language and outer 
appearance. As a consequence, an experienced eye 



will know a Scotchman fresh from his native heath 
as quickly as he would recognize his dog. And the 
same with other peoples. 

When we find that Europe, which was settled 
much more recently by its present inhabitants, has 
in so short a time divided itself into so many different 
nations, and when we remember that Europeans 
have stirred and commingled with each other far more 
than the peoples of other parts of the earth, it helps us 
to see how gradually, through many centuries, other 
peoples have undergone still greater changes. 

In considering this matter we are not to forget 
the strong pre-natal influence of the mother's mind 
upon her offspring,— co-operating with the influences 
of climate and soil. To illustrate: Suppose a missionary 
and his wife removed to China; not only 
would the influence of the climate and soil be manifested 
upon themselves, but the same would be still 
more manifested in their children. Whoever will give 
careful attention to this matter will notice that each 
succeeding child born in that foreign country will 
have increasingly more resemblance to the Chinese— 
the hair, the skin, the shape of the eyes, and in general 
all features will bear closer resemblance with 
each succeeding child. We can readily suppose that 
if so much change occurs in a few years, ten or 
twenty centuries under similar conditions would turn 
any white people into regular Chinese, even supposing 
there were no intermarrying. The mother, while 
carrying her unborn child, has continually before her 
the Chinese type of countenance— eyes, hair, color, 
etc., and the continual impress of these upon her mind 
could not fail, according to the law of our being, to influence 
her offspring in the manner noted. 

R3043 : page 216 

Indeed a traveler, a scientist, has lately reported 
to the civilized world that he found in China a district 
where there were ruins of a very ancient Hebrew 
temple, and tablets in Hebrew. The people of the 
district informed him that they had a tradition that 
their fathers once spoke and understood the language 
of the tablets (Hebrew), had emigrated thither many 
centuries before, adopting the Chinese customs and 
language and, gradually, their appearance also. 

The effect would be similar in India. Undoubtedly 
the stronger contrast between the white and the 
black would require a longer time to be brought about; 
but we should expect that neither of these extremes 
fairly represented the original, if we may judge of 
Adam, Noah and Abraham by the only nation whose 
ancestors can be traced unblemished back to these 
heads of the race,— the Jews. We may suppose that 
they were neither as white as some of us, nor as 
black as the negro, but of a swarthy, tawny color. If 



this be true, the extreme whiteness of some peoples is 
not to be considered the original standard, but a 
deflection on the one side, as the negro and others are 
deflections on the other side. We are not to forget, 
either, that Africa is inhabited by various tribes or 
nations of negroes— some more and some less degraded 
than the average. Those brought to America 
as slaves were of various tribes;— from among whom 
we doubt not the Lord is making choice of some for 
the prospective "Royal Priesthood." 

While it is true that the white race exhibits some 
qualities of superiority over any other, we are to remember 
that there are wide differences in the same 
Caucasian (Semitic and Aryan) family; and also we 
should remember that some of the qualities which 
have given this branch of the human family its preeminence 
in the world are not such as can be pointed 
to as in all respects admirable. Indeed we can not 
but wonder whether if the Gospel had been sent into 
Asia instead of into Europe it might not have found 
amongst the people of India a soil much more naturally 
adapted to the development of the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. However, that the Gospel 
was divinely directed into Europe is most manifest 
(Acts 16:6,9), and sooner or later we shall see the full 
meaning of this divine providence. Perhaps the Lord 
intends to show that as typical Israel was a stiff-necked 
generation, so also spiritual Israel will be 
taken from amongst similar classes; and all the more 
show forth the power of the truth, by taking the elect 
Church chiefly from amongst the most quarrelsome, 
aggressive, selfish and dominating of humanity, and 
transforming these through the power of the truth 
into exemplifications of patience, humility, love and 
peace. The secret of the greater intelligence and aptitude 
of the Caucasian undoubtedly in great measure is 
to be attributed to the commingling of blood amongst 
its various branches; and this was evidently forced 
in large measure by circumstances under divine control. 
It remains to be proven that the similar commingling 
of the various tribes of Chinese for several 
centuries would not equally brighten their intellects; 
and the same with the peoples of India and Africa. 

NOAH'S CHARACTER AND HIS "CURSE" UPON HAM. 

(4) Question.— Those who hold that the negro is 
a beast deny that he is the offspring of Noah's sons, 
and claim that the curse of Noah was not upon Ham, 
but upon one of Ham's sons, Canaan. They belittle 
Noah's curse, by saying that it was the senseless babbling 

R3044 : page 216 

of a drunken sot. What say you on this point? 
Answer.— Those who use such language evidently 



are not familiar with the subject sufficiently to discuss 
it at all. The word "curse" is used by Noah after 
the same manner that God is said to have cursed the 
earth, and cursed mankind; from which curse man 
was redeemed by our Lord. The word "curse" here 
is used in the sense of penalty, retribution, and not in 
the sense of an imprecation or a profane denunciation. 
God declared man to be under the sentence of his 
divine law,— a death-sentence "curse" or penalty. 
Noah declared, prophetically, that Ham's characteristics 
which had led him to unseemly conduct disrespectful 
to his father, would be found cropping out 
later, inherited by his son,— and prophetically he foretold 
that this degeneracy would mark the posterity of 
Canaan, degrading him, making him servile. We are 
not able to determine to a certainty that the sons 
of Ham and Canaan are the negroes; but we consider 
that general view as probable as any other. 
Respecting Noah: It is a great mistake to 
charge him with being a drunken sot, and thus slanderously 
to set forth in a disreputable light one whom 
the Lord esteemed. (See Ezek. 14:14,20.) The fact 
is that the conditions after the flood were so different 
from those which preceded it that Noah was probably 
ignorant of the fact that the changed atmospheric 
conditions produced a ferment in the grape 
juice, giving to the liquor alcoholic and intoxicating 
qualities. We have not the space here to consider 
the wonderful change in climate, etc., which occurred 
at the time of the flood; but everything connected with 
the narrative supports our conclusion that Noah 
drank of the fruit of his vineyard in ignorance of its 
stupefying qualities. See our issue of Nov. 15, 1899. 

OTHER INCONSISTENCIES IN THE ARGUMENTS REVIEWED. 

(5) Question.— When Jude says, "Woe unto 
them ! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran 
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and 
perished in the gainsaying of Core" (Jude 1 1), has it 
any bearing on this negro question? 

Answer.— It has no bearing upon this question 
in the interest of the theory which we are opposing; 
but it has decided force in opposition to it. The 
Apostle Jude (Thaddeus— Matt. 10:3) mentions Cain, 
Balaam, and Core. The sin of Cain was hatred of his 
brother— murder; the error of Balaam was love of 
reward, so that he was willing to do evil to obtain it; 
the gainsaying of Core was his rebellion against divinely 
instituted arrangements. The Lord's people 
are to note all of these wrong courses and to avoid 
them all. 

We trust that we have answered the questions 
satisfactorily, and have thoroughly disproven the theory 
under examination. We will, however, notice 
a few other points made in the pamphlet: for instance, 



the negro is blamed with being peaceable and submissive, 

and his white brother is credited with being of 

a higher order, because he is unsubmissive and warlike. 

R3044 : page 217 

Is it not a fact that in these particulars, if true, 
the colored man resembles Abel, and the white man 
Cain?— that the colored man resembles Jesus, and the 
white man Nero?— that the colored man resembles 
Moses, and the white man Pharaoh? If the negro is 
more peaceable by nature, he is that much by nature 
nearer to the standard which the Christian, as a new 
creature, is to copy. But we dispute the proposition 
entirely. 

It is argued further that in Jonah 3:8, the word 
"beast" refers to the negro because it says that both 
"man and beast" were commanded to wear sackcloth 
as the sign of humiliation before God, and that it 
would be inappropriate for cattle and sheep. But this 
argument loses any little force it at first seemed to 
have, when we read in the preceding verse that "herds 
and flocks" were to participate in this fast before 
God. 

The argument drawn from Exodus 19:13, that the 
beasts referred to had hands is easily answered by 
showing that the Hebrews used the word hand 
for beasts as well as for man. The Hebrew word 
rendered hand in the citation is yad; and the same 
word is used in I Sam. 17:37, where it is rendered 
"paw"— "The paw of the lion and the paw of the 
bear." 

The writer makes a point of the use of the word 
"beast" in contradiction to the word "cattle." But if 
we refer to Young's Concordance under the head of 
"beast" we find the word behemah, which, while the 
general word for cattle, is rendered beast more frequently 
than cattle. The distinctive word for beast, 
not rendered cattle, is (Hebrew) chai, and its signification 
is "living creature." Chai is used in Ps. 104:20, 
and the description of verses 21,22, shows that it 
refers, not to man-eating negroes, but to lions, and 
such wild beasts. The lack of candor on the part of 
the author of the pamphlet criticized, is shown by the 
fact that in one place he accuses the negro of being too 
peaceable, while in another place, to suit his theory, 
he makes of him the man-eating wild beast of the Old 
Testament. 



R3044 : page 217 

OBLIGATIONS TOWARD FELLOW -MEN-IN THE DECALOGUE. 
-EX. 20:12-17.-JULY 20.- 



"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Mat. 19:9. 

AS THE FIRST four commands of the Decalogue 
note man's first obligation and responsibility 
to his Creator, so the remaining six 

mark out his responsibilities toward his fellow-creatures. 
We can, undoubtedly, gain some valuable lessons 
in the study of these commands given to Israel at 
Mount Sinai, constituting the basis of the Law Covenant: 
nevertheless, it is proper, especially in view of 
the gross misunderstanding prevalent upon the subject, 
that in considering these commands Christians 
should remember that they were not given to them, 
but to the Jews; that as we have a New Covenant so 
we have a new law as the basis of that Covenant, as 
well as a new Mediator. Old things have passed 
away and all things have become new to the new 
creature in Christ Jesus, whether Jew or Gentile. The 
profitable lessons we may learn through the study of 
these commands given to others, are of the same kind 
as the lessons we learn in studying the various types 
and ceremonies of that Jewish Covenant, which the 
Apostle assures us were but shadows of good things 
coming after them. (Heb. 10:1.) We have the good 
things, the spiritual things, the higher things; nevertheless, 
we learned to appreciate these higher things 
the more by noticing their types and shadows and 
by contrasting them with the higher things. For instance, 
altho we study the things written in the law 
concerning the typical day of atonement, and its sacrificial 
ceremonies, etc., we do not do so with a view 
to repeating those sacrifices of bulls and of goats 
which can never take away sin; but with a view to 
seeing the more clearly the full force and meaning of 
the better sacrifices, the anti-typical, which do take 
away the sin of the world. So with the Ten Commandments. 
God would not address these to 
any member of the house of sons, adopted into his 
family and begotten of his spirit, because they would 
be inappropriate to such, and really be a denial on 
God's part that they had become sons or that they 
had his spirit; for "If any man have not the spirit of 
Christ he is none of his," and certainly the man begotten 
of the holy spirit, possessed of the mind of Christ, 
would no more need to be told that he should do no 
murder, that he should not steal, etc., than that he 
should not take God's name profanely. None of these 
things would anyone begotten of the spirit of God be 
disposed to do; and, hence, it would not have been appropriate 
in God to have made that Jewish Law the 
basis of the Covenant into which he has invited the 
Church to enter, as children, heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that they 
suffer with him. 
The first of these commandments taught the Jew 



the sacredness of the family relationship— that the 
children should honor the parents, which implies that 
the parents should not only so instruct their children, 
but that, so far as possible, they should strive to live 
before them such lives as would reasonably call forth 
such respect, obedience, honor. A promise of long life 
is attached to this commandment. We may esteem on 
general principles that children obedient to their parents 
would be the more inclined to be obedient to the 
laws of their country and to the laws of their 
Creator, and that such obedience would be favorable 
to old age. But we are not certain that 
there was not more than this intended. The words, 
"That thy days may be long upon the land which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee," would seem to connect 
this promise with Israel's possession of the land of 
promise. And if we have reasoned logically that obedience 
to parents would lead to obedience to God, we 
may reason reversely that Israel's disobedience to 
God which resulted in their various captivities, taking 
them out of the land of promise, and finally in their 

R3045 : page 218 

complete banishment from that land, means that this 
lesson of obedience to parents was not well learned, 
and that this reward of continuing in their own land 
was therefore taken from them. 

If we would seek a higher meaning for this commandment, 
under the law of love, its first meaning to 
the Lord's people would be that they should honor 
their Father in heaven, and the Abrahamic Covenant 
under which they have been begotten to the new nature. 
(Gal. 4:22-31); and such honor to God and such 
respect for their covenant with him are certainly the 
terms upon which they may hope for a share in the 
heavenly Canaan with its eternal life. And in proportion 
as God's people reverence him and honor him in 
word and in deed the influence of such lives upon their 
children should be weighty, and should call forth their 
respect. They should seek to rule their own homes 
in love, remembering, nevertheless, the Lord's admonition, 
"A man's foes shall be they of his own 
household." They need not be surprised if, despite 
their every effort to do good and properly to inculcate 
duty, the influences of the world and its false 
views of matters, should make their homes very different 
from what they would prefer. 

"Thou shalt do no murder"— the Revised Version 
rendering— is much to be preferred to the Common 
Version, "Thou shalt not kill." Murder is always 
wrong; killing is sometimes right, sometimes duty. 
The life of the lower animals was given to man according 
to his necessities (Gen. 9:3), but we deprecate 
that which is misnamed sport— the destruction of 
birds and beasts and fishes wantonly— for no good 



purpose, but merely to gratify a savage desire to take 
life. That this command was not intended to prohibit 
the taking of human life under certain circumstances 
is evident from the fact that the same law 
made provision for the killing of murderers. 

To the Church, the new creatures in Christ, a still 
higher law governs on this subject. Our law of Love, 
the New Command, covers it completely. He who 
loves his neighbor will surely not murder him. But 
our Teacher gave a still higher thought respecting 
this feature of the law, and the way in which we, his 
followers, should view it, when he declared that for 
one brother to have hatred toward another was to 
have the murder spirit— the spirit which, under certain 
conditions, might lead to murder. According to 
this definition the person who angrily wishes that another 
were dead commits murder in his heart. On the 
contrary, the spirit of love wishes well to the neighbor 
—yea, even tho he be an enemy, desires that he 
may come into harmony with the Lord, and ultimately 
attain life everlasting, and so desires these things 
as to seek by word and act to render him any assistance 
possible. 

The third of these commands, "Thou shalt not 
commit adultery," was greatly magnified by our 
Lord's declaration to the effect that evil desires, tho 
not accomplished for lack of opportunity, were as 
really violations of this commandment as tho the act 
had been committed. How the magnifying glass of 
the Law of Love enlarges and intensifies the words, 
the acts, the thoughts, of life! There is in this a lesson 
of purity of thought which should be profitable to 
all the Lord's people; for altho we are not in the flesh 
but in the spirit, as new creatures, and in our trial or 
judgment, nevertheless, the new mind deals with and 
operates through the mortal body, and must continually 
strive to bring it into the fullest subjection possible. 
Hence, it is valuable for us to know just how 
the Lord esteems such matters, that we may put the 
greater guard upon the very thoughts and intentions 
of our hearts. We may be sure that it was not of accident 
that the Apostle wrote respecting the wisdom 
from above, "first pure." Our own purity, in the 
sense of our justification by faith, comes before we 
can have any standing or relationship with the Lord 
or be begotten into his family; and this same purity 
which is made the foundation of the new life, and 
given to us reckonedly, must be appreciated by us 
and lived up to as closely as possible. And the clearer 
view we get as to what constitutes impurity in the 
Lord's sight, the better will we be able so to regulate 
and govern our mortal bodies, our acts, our words, 
our very thoughts, as to bring them into as close conformity 
to the will of God as possible. 

Another thought in connection with this command, 
is given to us as new creatures. We have been 



betrothed to our Lord, and to him as our Bridegroom 
we owe full allegiance— whether we regard this from 
the standpoint of the Church as a whole, or from the 
standpoint of each individual united with the Lord. 
From this standpoint, as the Lord's betrothed we are 
to be uncontaminated, unadulterated— separate from 
the world. "Ye are not of the world, even as I am not 
of the world;" "I have chosen you out of the world." 

The fourth of these commands, "Thou shalt not 
steal," is of much greater depth and breadth than 
many are inclined to suppose. In the light of the New 
Covenant and its law of love, stealing may properly 
be understood to apply to the defrauding of a neighbor, 
friend or enemy, in any manner— depriving him 
of his rights or liberties as well as of his money or 
property. It would apply also to the stealing of a 
good name from another, as Shakespeare has pointed 
out. This command would be infracted, in the light 
of the Law of Love, by any transaction in which a 
neighbor would be worsted in a bargain, provided 
anything had been secreted or any deception calculated 
to warp his judgment in the making of the bargain 
had been practiced. From this standpoint there 
is a great deal of "respectable" stealing done today;— 
not only by misrepresentation of the goods by shopkeepers 
and by untruthful advertisements, but also 
amongst dealers of stock exchanges who, directly 
or indirectly, throw out wrong information to mislead, 
and by others in fraudulent organizations whose 
financial standing, etc., is often grossly misrepresented 
to enable the organizers to steal from those 
who become the purchasers of the stock at more than 
its real value. 

The Law of Love is very difficult to apply to business 
under present conditions; but it always insists 
upon absolute fairness and truthfulness in respect to 
all statements made. It is not incumbent upon us, 
however, after making known the facts in any matter, 

R3045 : page 219 

to either directly or indirectly force upon others 
our opinions or judgment in respect to the value of 
the facts explained. We may safely allow other men 
to use their judgment, while we use ours, when we 
have told them frankly the truth in regard to any 
matter. 

The fifth of these commands, altho it does not directly 
prohibit false statements, does necessarily prohibit 
any statement which would mislead a neighbor 
to his injury, and herein we see a superior wisdom in 
the light of this command. I might make a declaration 
that at a certain hour I will do a certain thing. 
I am at full liberty to change my mind and not to do 
that thing, provided my conduct in this shall not injure 
my neighbor in any sense or degree. To whatever 



extent our testimony on any subject would be inclined 
to lead friends or neighbors or anyone to take any 
course which would be injurious to themselves or 
others, and which they would not otherwise have 
taken, to that extent we are bound under the Law 
of Love. We may do all the good we please to a 
neighbor, but we may do him no injury. This is the 
spirit of the Apostle's injunction that we say, "If the 
Lord will" we will do thus and so. We are to consider 
the Lord's will in all we undertake, and his will 
in brief, is that we honor him and do good, not evil to 
fellow men. 

False witness applies to the telling of lies, but it 
goes deeper than this and applies to any misrepresentation, 
whether it be by direct statement or indirectly 
by such a statement as would permit a wrong 
inference to be drawn. Indeed, amongst refined people 
this subterfuge, by which they palliate their consciences, 
and at the same time gratify their spiteful 
hearts, is very common. One may even bear false 
witness by the nod of his head, by the shrugging of 
his shoulder, or by silence— if a misstatement be 
made in such a connection that silence might be understood 
to mean consent. If a Jew, a member of the 
house of servants under Moses, the Mediator of the 
Law Covenant, was required to be particular upon 
this point, how much more particular should all be 
who essay to be members of the house of sons, under 
the New Covenant and the New Mediator! Does not 
the New Covenant Law of Love go still deeper on this 
point? It surely does. It prohibits in specific terms, 
not only the speaking of untruths in respect to a 
neighbor, but the speaking of anything concerning 
him that would be to his discredit, even tho it were 
true— unless under certain circumstances which Love 
could fully endorse— if the testimony were required 
by a court of law, or if the testimony were necessary 
for the protection of another from injury. And even 
in such cases as little of derogatory truth as possible 
should be uttered, and it only in love. The Apostle's 
word on this subject is, "Speak evil of no man." 

There is no point, or feature, of the entire Law of 
Love, as it bears upon our relationship to fellow-creatures, 
that needs more of our attention than this 
point. It seems difficult for Christians to learn thoroughly 
the Master's lessons, that, if they have anything 
unpleasant to say respecting a brother or sister, 
any criticism of the private life or affairs to offer, it 
should be offered to him or her alone and not to 
others. 

Perhaps on no other score does the Adversary 
succeed so well in doing mischief amongst the Lord's 
people— in planting roots of bitterness, producing 
misunderstanding, anger, malice, hatred, strife and 
other works of the devil. Let us permit love to do 
her perfect work in this relationship to our fellows. 



A difference is to be observed in respect to criticisms 
of doctrines publicly uttered. The criticism of 
an error should be as publicly made as the error was 
publicly set forth, if it be of importance. The thing 
then to determine would be our liberties and responsibilities, 
and we might have neither. But if we 
possessed both our criticisms should be only in love, not 
in boastfulness but in humility; desiring only to serve 
the truth and the brethren. Humility will suggest, 
too, that we be sure we are right before proceeding to 
criticize. Even then some points of truth can generally 
be approved while the points of error are being 
criticized. 

The sixth of these commandments, and the last of 
the whole, deals with covetousness. As the last it 
stands in an important place, and when fully appreciated 

R3046 : page 219 

is seen to have a bearing upon all the other 
commandments. Covetousness implies discontent. 
It, therefore, generally lies at the bottom of slander, 
false witness, theft, adultery, murder, and disobedience 
to parents. Indeed, in some respects we may 
suppose that it lies at the bottom of any disloyalty 
to God also. Was it not covetousness on the part 
of Satan which first led him to disloyalty and sin? 

In becoming new creatures in Christ we are supposed 
to eradicate from our hearts everything that 
could in any sense of the word develop into covetousness 
—by the consecration of our wills, our hearts, 
to the Lord, by the acceptance of his will as instead 
of our own. From this standpoint, as the Apostle 
declares, "Godliness with contentment [absence of 
covetousness] is great gain." Indeed, viewed from 
the proper standpoint of the new creature, we have 
nothing to covet, because in becoming the Lord's we 
have become joint-heirs with our Redeemer to all the 
riches of divine grace, so that the Apostle could say, 
"All things are yours. ..and ye are Christ's, 
and Christ is God's." 

But let us as new creatures, remember that covetousness 
can come into a heart otherwise pure, and 
defile the whole, as we see illustrated in the case of 
Satan, so that of all the things which we need to 
guard against most carefully this is one of the chief. 
All the graces of the spirit are opposed to covetousness 
—meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, love, 
all forbid that we should covet the things of our 
brethren or the things of the world. Rather, thankfulness 
should so fill our hearts— gratitude for the 
manifold mercies and blessings already received, that 
there will be no room for a covetous thought. True, 
the Apostle, in our Common Version, is made to say, 
"Covert earnestly the best gifts" (I Cor. 12:31), but it 
would be a great mistake to suppose that the Apostle 



taught that the Lord's people were to covet positions 
of influence in the Church. We are indeed to desire 

R3046 : page 220 

to have, to enjoy and to use in the Lord's service, as 
many talents and gifts as possible, but we find the 
very reverse of the Apostle's thought and teaching 
that we should covet the honors or possessions of one 
another. This seems to be a danger point with many, 
and when we remember that it has proven to be the 
wreck -rock for many, it behooves us to be extremely 
careful to covet merely the Lord's favor and the gifts 
and talents by which we can best serve one another 
and not ourselves. 

THESE MANY YEARS. 

--DEUT. 8:2.- 

"These many years! What lessons they unfold 
Of grace and guidance through the wilderness, 

From the same God that Israel of old 
In the Shekinah glory did possess. 

How faithful he, through all my griefs and fears 

And constant murmurings, these many years! 

"God of the Covenant! From first to last, 

From when I stood within that sprinkled door 

And o'er my guilt the avenging angel passed, 
Thy better angel has gone on before; 

And naught but goodness all the way appears, 

Unmerited and free, these many years ! 

"Thy presence wrought a pathway through the sea; 

Thy presence made the bitter water sweet; 
And daily have thy hands prepared for me 

Sweet, precious morsels— lying at my feet. 
'Twas but to stoop and taste the grace that cheers, 
And start refreshed, through all these many years! 

"What time I thirsted and earth's streams were dry, 
What time I wandered and my hope was gone, 

Thy hand has brought a pure and full supply, 
And, by a loving pressure, lured me on. 

How oft that hand hath wiped away my tears 

And written 'Pardoned!' all these many years! 

"And what of discipline thy love ordained 
Fell ever gently on this heart of mine; 

Around its briers was my spirit trained 

To bring forth fruits of righteousness divine; 

Wisdom in every check, and love appears 

In every stroke throughout these many years! 

"Lord, what I might have been my spirit knows— 



Rebellious, petulant, and apt to stray: 
Lord, what I am, in spite of flesh and foes, 

I owe to grace that kept me in the way. 
Thine be the glory! Merit disappears 
As back I look upon these many years. 

"Thine be the glory! Thou shalt have the praise 
For all thy dealings, to my latest breath; 

A daily Ebenezer will I raise, 

And sing Salvation through the vale of death— 

To where the palm, the golden harp appears, 

There to rehearse thy love through endless years. 



R3046 : page 220 

WORSHIPPING THE GOLDEN CALF. 

-EX. 32:1-6, 30-35. -JULY 27.- 

"Thou shalt have no other Gods before me."— Ex. 20:3. 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS became the 
foundation, or basis, of the Law Covenant 
between God and Israel— Moses being the 
Mediator. These commandments were written on 
parchment, and added to them were about seventy 
enactments, or explanations in accord with them, 
based upon them, and these all, recorded in Exodus 20-23, 
constituted what was termed the Book of the 
Covenant. After the people had assented to the 
Law and the Covenant based upon it, Moses killed 
an animal, which represented himself, the Mediator 
of that Covenant, and he sprinkled the blood of the 
animal upon the Book of the Covenant, which represented 
the Lord and his faithfulness to all of his 
promises; and he sprinkled of the blood also upon 
the people— probably not upon the two millions, but 
upon representatives of the whole, the heads or chiefs 
of the tribes. Thus in type, or symbol, Moses stood 
pledged to God on behalf of the people, and to the 
people on behalf of God that the provisions on both 
sides should be carried out. 

It was after this solemn and significant ceremony, 
that by the Lord's direction Moses went up into the 
mountain as the people's representative— for communion 
with the Lord, and to receive from him the 
Decalogue written on tables of stone, which the Jews 
traditionally claim were of sapphire. His mission 
lasted forty days. 

This absence of their leader, in whom they reposed 
great confidence, might have resulted in great 
blessing to the Israelites had they been in a proper 
condition of heart. Altho, under the circumstances, 
forty days— nearly six weeks— would seem to be quite 



a considerable absence, without communication, it 
might have had the effect of impressing upon the 
minds of the people the fact that, after all, not Moses 
but God was their leader, and that he had merely used 
Moses thus far as his servant, and that if anything had 
befallen this servant the Lord, who had begun the 
good work of their deliverance, in fulfilment of the 
promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, was 
abundantly able to provide them another leader, and 
that nothing could have happened to Moses aside 
from divine foreknowledge and ability to prevent. 
This would have been a great lesson of faith and 
patience, beneficial to them for the remainder of 
life. But, instead, they had "an evil heart of unbelief," 
which quickly forgot the Lord's deliverance 
from the Egyptians, his leading through the Red 
Sea, the destruction of the hosts of Pharaoh in 
pursuit of them, the Covenant promise which he had 
just executed with them, and the manna which they 
were gathering daily; all these mercies of God were 
evidently underestimated— not fully and rightly appreciated, 
and their measurable unthankfulness and 
ingratitude became the basis of their fall into sin and 
idolatry, in gross violation of the covenant they had 
just made. 

Ingratitude toward God would naturally mean 
ingratitude toward the servant whom he had used for 
their deliverance; hence the disrespectful language in 
which they referred to their great deliverer as "this 

R3046 : page 221 

Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land 
of Egypt"— the man who was to lead us into the 
land of promise, and who now has gotten lost himself 
in the mountain. The wide difference between the 
character and disposition of Moses and that of the 
majority of the Israelites is shown by the fact that 
at this very time, while they were thus speaking 
lightly of him, Moses was importuning the Lord for 
them. The Lord made known to Moses in the 
mountain that Israel had gotten into serious sin, and 
by way of testing his fidelity as their appointed 
mediator, whose blood had typically sprinkled the 
people and thus pledged itself on their behalf, the 
Lord proposed to him the blotting out of the entire 
nation of Israel, and the taking of Moses as the 
seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the head of 
a new nation. But faithfully Moses had plead for 
those whom he represented. He thus showed himself 
a worthy type of the great Mediator of the New 
Covenant, Christ Jesus our Lord, who has made 
mediation for the sins of the people— reconciliation 
through his blood. 

The conduct of the Israelites in this matter shows 
up the weaknesses of the fallen human nature. They 



wanted to worship, and they desired to gratify this 
natural inclination in connection with fallen tendencies. 
They would worship God, but they would 
have an outward emblem or sign representing him— 
additionally, no doubt, they craved some gratification 
of lewdness and licentiousness, which were marked 
elements of the idolatrous worship of Egypt, with 
which for a long time they had been in contact. They 
appealed to Aaron, Moses' brother, as second in 
command of the host— telling him of their religious 
sentiments, their desires for worship, their need of 
some external sign or representation of God, and 
that this was the more necessary in view of the long 
absence of Moses and the possibility that he would 
never return to the leadership, and that the people 
must have something upon which to center their 
attention, either a living man representing God, or 
an idol, an image, representing him, etc., etc. The 
weakness of Aaron, in contrast with the strength of 
his brother Moses, is very markedly shown in this 
incident, and clearly exemplifies the wisdom of God 
in the choice of Moses to be the leader of the people, 
even tho at the outset the latter in meekness ignored 
his own abilities and suggested to the Lord his 
brother Aaron for the leader. 

Whether Aaron really entered into the spirit of 
the people, and concluded with the leaders who appealed 
to him that it would be the wisest thing to 
make the image, or whether he did it as an expedient 
to hold the people in check until Moses' return, by 
conceding the demands which he really did not 
approve, we are unable to determine. It is possible 
that his course in calling for the earrings, etc., was 
first of all with a view to dissuading the people from 
the course suggested, by making it cost them considerable 
sacrifice in the way of their personal 
adornments. It may be, too, that he trusted that 
during the time necessary to the engraving of the 
moulds, the melting of the jewels, and the moulding 
of the calf, Moses would appear and re-assume the 
leadership and command the people. However, whatever 
were his thoughts and motives, he displayed a 
weakness of character far from commendable, one 

R3047 : page 221 

which should teach all who providentially come into 
places of influence and power amongst God's people, 
that there is but one right way to do; namely, not 
to participate in sin— not to become a participator in 
wrong, but meekly yet firmly to stand up for principle, 
for righteousness, at any cost— leaving the results 
with the Lord without fear, knowing that he is the 
real Leader of the people, and that attempts to compromise 
with wrong would be at the expense of divine 
approval, and therefore too costly to be considered 



for a moment. 

The golden calf having been made, the next thing 
in order, of course, would be an altar for sacrificing 
to it, which accordingly was made, and then the 
program of a "feast to Jehovah." This shows that 
the idolatry here started was not different from the 
kind practiced today in Christian churches, where 
images, pictures, crucifixes, etc., are worshiped. 
Those who use these assure us that they do not 
worship the crucifixes, statues, etc., but merely use 
these as symbols or emblems of the Lord, and that 
their worship is to him. So evidently the Israelites 
were not worshiping the golden calf as being their 
god, but as merely to represent God; for the program 
which drew them together to the worship distinctly 
specified that it was a feast unto Jehovah— altho 
Jehovah did not acknowledge their feast nor accept 
the worship connected therewith, because it was in 
violation of the principles and regulations which he 
had enjoined. 

Full of religious fervor, the people arose early on 
the morning of the feast, offering to the Lord burnt 
offerings which he could not accept, and peace offerings 
under conditions upon which he could not be 
at peace. The burnt offerings were entirely consumed, 
but the peace offerings were eaten by the 
people, and constituted their feast. The day was 
given up to revelry; they sat down to eat and to 
drink, and rose up to play— dances and supposedly 
lewd conduct, after the manner of heathen,— professedly 
to the honor of God. It was at this juncture, at 
the close of the forty days, that Moses reappeared 
in their midst, and soon caused consternation by his 
proper and emphatic denunciation of the proceedings 
and of all who were instrumental in their inauguration. 
As he came down from the mountain he heard 
the shouts of the people, but discerned that they did 
not indicate either victory or dispute in warfare, but 
rather that they were voices of singing and revelry, 
and as he came in sight of the golden calf and the 
idolatrous worship, and realized how quickly and 
grossly the people had violated the divine command 
on the subject, he dashed the tables of the Law 
upon the rocks and broke them in fragments— 
symbolically thus intimating an illustration of the 
failure of Israel to keep the Law, and ultimately the 
complete failure of the Law Covenant, as we know 
it did fail in respect to Israel in general at our Lord's 
first advent. 

The revelers were disquieted by the appearance 
of the great commander and his indignant rebuke of 

R3047 : page 222 

their irreligious fervor. Aaron came in for his share 
of this, but promptly acknowledged his error, pleading 



as an excuse the demands of the people, his own 
weakness in the matter being too evident to require 
pleading. The one man stood up against a nation of 
two millions of people, denounced their sin, announced 
himself as being on the side of the Lord and 
thoroughly opposed to such infractions of his Law, 
and called upon such of the people as were on the 
Lord's side to desist from sin and come to his side 
in opposition to it. Altho overmastered and cowed 
in the presence of their God-appointed leader, the 
chief men of all the tribes except one seem to have 
resented Moses' reproofs. That one tribe was the 
tribe of Levi, typical of the household of faith from 
which the royal priesthood is now being selected. 
This tribe, altho to some extent led astray with the 
rest, and to some extent leaders, through Aaron, in 
the wrong course, was at heart on the Lord's side; 
and when the rebuke came and the Lord's will and 
way were clearly set before them through the 
Mediator, they promptly came to the side of the Lord 
on the question. The leaders of the other tribes were 
not ready to admit that their course was a wrong one, 
not willing to submit themselves promptly, and the 
result was the destruction of about three thousand of 
the leaders in the wrong way, and the full return of 
the remainder of Israel into harmony with the Lord 
and with acknowledgement of their transgression. 
On the next day after this punishment of the leaders 
Moses more fully explained to the people the enormity 
of their sin, and went up again into the mountain, 
for them, as their representative, to make an 
atonement for them with the Lord. 

This incident well illustrates the general tendency, 
more or less, of fallen man to substitute something 
of his own creation, either as instead of the Lord or 
in addition to the Lord, as an object of worship. 
The worship of the golden calf symbolizes or pictures 
in a general and very forceful way the worship of 
the mammon of wealth, of earthly riches, honor, 
influence, etc. At our Lord's first advent he found 
Israel nominally worshiping Jehovah, nominally very 
zealous of his worship, but really worshipers of 
mammon, worshipers of riches and honor of men, of 
dignities and titles, of place and position. The 
Pharisees, who were confessedly as well as professedly 
the most religious class of Jews at that time, the 
holiness people, our Lord accused of "covetousness— 
which is idolatry"— and in the Emphatic Diaglott 
translation this statement, "for they were covetous," 
is rendered, "for they were money-lovers." (Luke 16:14; 
Col. 3:5.) It was to the whole nation in general, 
and to the Pharisees in particular, that our Lord 
declared, "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon"— thus 
implying that they were worshipers of the Mammon 
of wealth in its various forms. Referring to one form 
of Mammon he again said to them, "How can ye 



believe who receive honor one of another, and seek 
not that honor which cometh from God only?" He 
referred to another form of mammon-worship, and 
the prevalent but erroneous thought that it was 
compatible with the worship of God, when he said, 
"Ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make 
long prayers," and he denounced such religion and 
mammon-worship as hypocrisy. The antitypical 
Mediator, who fulfilled the Law on behalf of true 
Israelites, and who declared that, so far as that people 
were concerned, the tables of the Law and the 
Covenant based upon them were broken,— dashed 
to pieces,— fully explained that their difficulty consisted 
in worshiping the golden calf, worshiping 
mammon, bowing down to the opinions of men, 
traditions of the elders; their love of the praise of men 
and titles, and honor of man, and their love of wealth, 
had to do largely with their reprehensible course in 
the sight of the Lord and their inharmony with their 
Mediator when he appeared. As Moses, the typical 
mediator, called for those who were on the Lord's 
side to come to him, so Christ called for all the 
"Israelites indeed," the household of faith, the Royal 
Priesthood, to come to him; and as there was in the 
type a destruction of the leaders of the remainder, 
so there came a time of trouble upon the remainder 
of the house of Israel which resulted in the complete 
overthrow of their national polity, the destruction of 
their city, etc. And as the typical mediator then went 
up into the mountain to make reconciliation for their 
sins, so Christ as the High Priest ascended to make 
atonement for the sins of the people. 

We may draw another lesson still closer to ourselves 
and in full harmony with the foregoing. We 
may remember that natural Israel and the first advent 
of our Lord were patterns of spiritual Israel and the 
second advent of Christ; that as he came to his own 
professed Israelites, yet found them unready to receive 
him, so at his second coming professed 
spiritual Israel, styled Christendom, will be equally 
unready to receive him; and that as he found only a 
remnant of the whole of natural Israel ready for the 
higher plane of the Gospel age, so in the end of this 
age he will find only a little flock in all ready for 
the higher plane of the Kingdom— ready for the 
change to glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
with himself and participation in the Kingdom work. 
As this class was the stone of stumbling and rock of 
offense to literal Israel, that was but the foreshadowing 
of how the same class would be a stone of 
stumbling and rock of offense to spiritual Israel; as 
it is written, "He shall be for a stone of stumbling 
and rock of offense, to both the house of Israel." As 
the natural Israelites stumbled because they and their 
leaders were outwardly loyal to the Lord and his 
purposes, yet really were selfish and self-willed, and 



therefore not ready to receive him and to fall in line 
with his reproofs and corrections in righteousness, so 
likewise it will be with the leaders and the masses of 
nominal spiritual Israel at the second advent of the 
Lord; so that now, as with Israel, only a remnant will 
be found, only the Levites— on the side of the Lord; 
and the time of trouble which came upon natural 
Israel for its overthrow was typical of the great overthrow 
and great time of trouble, "such as was not 
since there was a nation," about to come on nominal 
Christendom for its complete overthrow as a social 
financial, political and religious institution. But following 
this trouble the antitype of Moses will have 
the full command, and will, indeed, lead the people 
through the wilderness, and altho during the Millennial 
age of their leading they will experience 

R3048 : page 223 

chastisements for their wrong-doing, these chastisements 

will be corrective rather than destructive, to 

the intent that they may learn well the lesson of our 

Golden Text, "Thou shalt have no other gods before 

me." 

We have seen that one of the principal difficulties 
in the way of Israel at the first advent was the fact 
that they were mammon worshipers. Is this also illustrative 
of the condition of nominal spiritual Israel 
at the present time? Is it, or is it not, true that nominal 
Israel of to-day blends the worship of God and the 
worship of Mammon? Is it, or is it not, true that 
while nominally worshiping Jehovah the vast majority 
are bowing down to the golden calf of wealth, honor 
of men, dignity, titles, etc., etc.? We fear that it is 
only too true that there never was a time when 
money, influence, power, and honors of men were 
more exalted or worshiped or more striven for than 
at present. We are not making wholesale condemnations, 
nor suggesting that no excuse or allowance 
should be made in this matter. On the contrary, we 
would claim that it is true of many to-day, as it was 
true of Aaron, that they are led, yea, almost forced, 
into the positions which they occupy in respect to the 
worship of Mammon, in respect to their obedience 
and servility to the popular sentiment— to the general 
craze for the worship of the golden calf; the worship 
of great human institutions; the worship of wealth; 
the worship of titles and influence, and the tendency 
to be identified with these and in some measure to 
share in the glory, both by contributing to and by participation 
in their revels. 

It is nearly nineteen centuries since the New Covenant 
was sealed with the precious blood of our Mediator, 
and he left his people and ascended up on high,— 
going up into the mountain, into the presence of God. 
His absence was longer protracted than had been expected, 



and meantime many of those who had trusted 
in him and waited for him and expected his coming 
again to lead his people into the land of promise, have 
ceased to expect him, and are claiming that he will not 
come again to lead and deliver them— are claiming 
that it is necessary that other leaders should take 
charge and deliver the people. The heads of the various 
parties in conference have decided, not that 
Mammon shall be to them instead of God, but that 
Mammon shall be the representative of God, to lead 
the people to success; that Mammon shall convert 
and civilize the world; that Mammon shall bring in 
for the groaning creation, in a natural way, the various 
blessings craved, and cause the earth to blossom 
as the rose. Meantime the leader whom God had 
appointed to bring the deliverance returns, is present. 
He is justly wroth and indignant at present conditions. 
He has set up his standard of truth and righteousness, 
and is even now standing at the gate of the 
camp, and is calling, as did Moses in the type, "Who 
is on the Lord's side? Let him come unto me! And 
all the sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him." 
(Exod. 32:26.) Let all who are truly the Lord's, however 
much they may have been entangled with the 
popular fallacies of our day, with its love of money 
and titles, its selfishness, love of honor of men, etc., 
—let all of the true-hearted be prompt to take their 
places on the Lord's side. Shortly the great time of 
trouble is to begin, which will mean the complete 
overthrow of all who uphold the worship of Mammon, 
however much they claim that it is really the 
worship and service of Jehovah. 

Moses as a Mediator showed himself grandly as a 
man, and beautifully typified the faithfulness of our 
Lord and Redeemer. How pathetic is Moses' plea— 
"If thou wilt forgive their sins—." He left the sentence 
incomplete, as tho it were beyond thinking that 
God could permit such an infraction of the Covenant 
he had just made. But Moses proceeds and expresses 
to the Lord his willingness, his preference, that if 
Israel's sin cannot be forgiven he also may be blotted 
out of the book of life. We exclaim, Noble man! 
Pure patriot! And we take to ourselves a lesson of 
unselfish devotion to others. But when we look from 
Moses the type, to Jesus the antitype we see the same 
lesson brought out in a still more pronounced form. 
The Mediator of the New Covenant realizing that it 
is impossible for God to forgive sin, to blot out sin, 
gave his own life as the redemption price for sinners. 
He actually did what Moses proffered to do and 
meant, for he gave not merely a prospect of life and a 
temporary existence such as Moses possessed, but he 
gave his all, with his rights to eternal life as a man, on 
our behalf. But tho the Father was pleased with his 
devotion— indeed, had foreseen it, and had made this 
arrangement for the cancelation of man's guilt and 



sentence of death, yet he purposed that the great 
Mediator of the Covenant, through whose blood- 
death— it was sealed, should not suffer everlasting extinction, 
but that on the contrary he would reward 
him for his nobility and devotion, both to men and to 
God's Law, by raising him from the dead to a still 
higher plane of life— to glory, honor and immortality. 
-Phil. 2:5-11. 

And as the Lord said to Moses, "Go now; and lead 
the people unto the place" designated, so he has appointed 
that our Mediator who has actually given his 
life for us and has received the new life with superior 
power and glory, should be the leader and the commander 
of the people, and bring whosoever of them 
wills back into full accord with God, back to the 
Edenic conditions, the land of promise. But as the 
Lord said to Moses in respect to the people and their 
sin, so it will be with mankind; viz., "Their sins shall 
be visited upon them." They will receive stripes or 
chastisements in proportion as they participated willingly 
or knowingly in a course of sin. So it will be 
during the Millennial age; altho the Lord will forgive 
the original sin, and remit its penalty of death, nevertheless, 
to whatever extent men have sinned wilfully, 
on their own account, against light and knowledge 
and opportunity, in that same proportion they 
are personally responsible, and will be obliged to suffer 
stripes of chastisements even while being brought 
by the Redeemer back from the plane of death to the 
plane of perfection, harmony with God and everlasting 
life. And those who will not profit by the lessons, 
who will not obey that great Teacher and Leader, the 
antitype of Moses, shall be "cut off from amongst the 
people," as the Lord has declared.— Acts 3:23. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL.XX111. AUGUST 1, 1902. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

Laws of Nature vs. Laws of God 228 

Without Religion Man is Lost 229 

Higher Criticism Infidelity 

Reaching the Sunday School 230 

Who is He that Condemneth? 230 

The Desire of All Nations 

Shall Come 233 

Poem— "He Careth For You" 235 

Israel's Typical Tabernacle 235 

Nadab and Abihu Cut Off 237 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



FAVORABLE METHODS OF SERVICE. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 



cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

MORE VOLUNTEER AMMUNITION. 

The friends are displaying great energy this year in the 
distribution of literature near Christian meeting places. We 
bid you all God-speed in this very effective preaching of the 
Gospel. Our first order for the special issues of our journal used 
this year was for 1,000,000 copies. Over one half of this quantity 
has already gone out to fill large requisitions and nearly 
200,000 are on back orders waiting for the papers as fast as the 
printers can supply them. We hope to get caught up very soon 
now, and request that those who have sent us small orders for 
mail shipment exercise just a little more patience. "Let 
patience have her perfect work." We have just issued 400,000 
more of these issues, so as to be ready for your later orders. 

Meantime let those who have not been engaged in this 
branch of the service enquire of themselves whether or not they 
can afford to miss so grand an opportunity for showing forth 
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvellous light. Do you know of and are you using a better 
method of preaching the truth? "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages [joy and peace and blessing in the present life even] 
and gathereth fruit unto everlasting life. 



R3048 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

TROUBLE AMONGST METHODISTS. 

FOR MANY YEARS Rev. Agar Beet, D.D., 
has been theological tutor of Richmond College, 
England. Of him a prominent English 
journal says: "Dr. Beet occupies a unique position 
in Methodism. He is the only Methodist theologian 
today who has won a very great reputation outside 
his own denomination. His writings, particularly on 
the question of eschatology, have won a very wide 
circulation and have produced a profound effect in 
many quarters." Dr. Beet, it seems, got to studying 
the Bible and found in it nothing to support the common 
supposition that God has so constituted man 
that he can never cease to be. He has found it to 
teach, on the contrary, that everlasting life is God's 
gift through Christ to our dying race, and that a refusal 
of that gift would signify death— not life, in torment 
or otherwise: that "the wages of sin is death;" 
that "the soul that sinneth it shall die;" that "he that 
hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son 



hath not life, but the wrath of God [the curse— the 
sentence of death] abideth on him." 

Dr. Beet's crime consisted in teaching these Bible 
truths with which Methodist doctrines, like those of 
so many other "traditions of the ancients," conflict. 
To teach along these Biblical lines would quickly extinguish 
all the "fires of hell" which Methodists have 
poked so industriously for a century; it would relieve 
God of the charges of injustice and lovelessness 
and devilishness hurled against him by some of 
his fallen creatures who, nevertheless, know well 
that they are not so depraved as either to plan or 
work out such diabolical tortures; it would show up 
Methodism as well as other "isms" as slanderers of 
God in these respects, and would undermine confidence 
in the infallibility of their teachings, and send 
the people for instruction to the Bible instead of to 
creeds and catechisms of the dark ages and to other 
blind guides. 

The "Wesleyan Institution Committee" concluded 
that the foregoing grounds were quite sufficient for 
dropping Dr. Beet from the college faculty. There 
is plenty of room for Higher Criticism Infidelity and 
for anti-Scriptural evolution theories in all such institutions, 
but no room for the truth— the Bible 
must not be heard, for it, being the great antagonist 
of error, would speedily make havoc of the multitudinous 
errors developed in medieval times and duly 
labeled "Orthodoxy." In a defense of his position, 
published in The Methodist Times (London), Dr. 
Beet says: 

"During the last century Methodist opinion about the 
doom of the lost has completely changed. Very few Wesleyan 
ministers can now read Wesley's sermons on 'Hell' 
and on 'Eternity,' Nos. 73 and 54, without repudiating 
much of their teaching with indignation. Evidently the 
writer accepted on these topics current phraseology without 
duly weighing its meaning. But I notice that, when 
selecting fifty-three sermons as an embodiment of his distinctive 
teaching, Wesley did not include these sermons; 
and that, in the sermon on The Great Assize,' which he 
did include, there is very little which contradicts the 
teaching of my book. 

"This change of opinion has been carefully ignored. 
Many scholarly and godly ministers have nursed their 
doubts in silence, some under a sense of guilt for concealing 
their opinions, until the need for concealment has become 
to them a humiliating and intolerable bondage. In 
some cases, men have not dared even to think, lest the 
thoughts they dared not utter should make them the more 
conscious of their bondage. This doubt and fear are very 
widespread. There has been a retreat from the position 
held by our fathers, along the whole line; for the more 
part in darkness and solitude. Of all this, I have abundant 
and pathetic proof, some of which I am able to produce." 

A reviewer writing in one of the leading London 



dailies says on this subject:— 

"For my own part I have no quarrel with Dr. Beet on 
this matter. I presume that few men of intelligence and 
culture accept today the old dogma of eternal suffering 
which was preached with so much fervour forty or fifty 
years ago. Even the Wesley an Conference itself has expunged 
from its catechism the definite statements that 
once found so lurid an expression. I remember very well 

R3049 : page 228 

in the days of my childhood being asked the questions and 
giving the answers, both of which I had learnt from the 
catechism. 'What sort of place is hell?' Answer: 'Hell is 
a dark and bottomless pit full of fire and brimstone.' 
Question: 'How will the wicked be punished there?' Answer: 
'The wicked will be punished in hell by having their 
bodies tormented by fire, and their souls by a sense of the 
wrath of God.' Question: 'How long will those torments 
last?' Answer: 'The torments of hell will last for ever 
and ever.' These questions and answers were in a 
catechism designed, as was said on its title page, for 
children of tender years. I presume, therefore, that the 
Methodist Conference has changed its views on these particular 
questions, or these questions and answers would not 
have been expunged from their catechism. 

"In theory, however, there has been no change in 
Methodist doctrines or dogmas. The standards are the 
same today as at the beginning. Wesley's 'Fifty-three 
Sermons,' with his 'Notes on the New Testament,' remain 
the ultimate court of appeal. At the Synods Wesleyan 
ministers are still asked the old questions, and are expected 
to give an affirmative answer. Though there has 
been no change in Methodist dogmas or standards, there 
has been an unmistakable change in the character of 
Methodist preaching, and that change has been noticed, 
not so much in what has been said as in what has been left 
unsaid. Questions on which forty years ago, or even 
twenty years ago, Methodist ministers were emphatic, today 
they are very largely silent on, and this silence is not 
always because the ministers themselves feel in any doubt 
or uncertainty on the questions, but because it is not considered 
wise or prudent to stir up any kind of religious 
controversy. The gospel of expediency is very popular in 
most religious communions. 

"Dr. Beet, in his manifesto, says: This change of opinion 
has been carefully ignored. Many scholarly and godly 
ministers have nursed their doubts in silence, some under 
a sense of guilt' If this statement be true, it seems 
to me to show a lamentable lack of moral courage on the 
part of the ministers in question. It is sincerely to be 
hoped that none of these ministers preached what they 
had ceased to believe. I am afraid that the atmosphere 
of ecclesiastical communions generally is not favourable 
to the growth of courage or the development of an independent 
spirit. The dead hand of the ancient creed-makers 



is still upon us. 

"I am told that those who are anxious that Dr. Beet 
should no longer occupy the Professor's chair at Richmond 
College are very desirous of maintaining what they call 
'the purity of doctrine.' It is all very well to stand for 
'purity of doctrine,' if we only knew what purity of doctrine 
is. One, of course, can admire their zeal, and in some 
measure share their anxiety. But it seems to me that if 
we were one-half as anxious about purity of conduct as 
we are about purity of doctrine it would be very much better 
for the world. There are a hundred questions of doctrine 
on which we may disagree, and our disagreement 
will not affect by a hair's breadth the condition or the destiny 
of communities or of individuals.. ..We are horrified 
at what we call heresy, but we wink at drunkenness. 
We plunge the whole denomination into convulsions because 
a man dares to depart, even in the smallest degree, 
from what we conceived to be the standard set up a hundred 
and fifty years ago; and yet we allow publicans and 
brewers and Stock Exchange gamblers and company promoters 
and swindlers and oppressors to occupy prominent 
positions in the Church, to take the chair at missionary 
meetings, and lay foundation stones of churches and Sunday 
schools. 

Notwithstanding the fact that all nations have 
been made drunk with Babylon's wine of false doctrine 
(Rev. 17:2) we find the non-professors rather 
less intoxicated than are professing Christians and 
able to give some rather sound advice, as in the article 
just quoted. Thank God that the Millennial Morning 
is here and that it will not be possible to keep the 
world and the Church asleep, stupid, thoughtless 
much longer! The silver Jubilee trumpets are being 
sounded by the priests (of the "royal priesthood") 
announcing the Jubilee, and incidentally awakening 
all true Israelites to the fact that for a long time they 
have been subjects of "nocturnal halucinations" and 
horrible nightmares, without basis or reason. 

LAWS OF NATURE VS. LAWS OF GOD. 



The Christian, accepting the Bible as his standard 
of philosophy, long ago found himself in conflict with 
so called Science which, ignoring a personal and 
almighty God whose will controls Nature, defies Nature; 
places Nature's Laws high above all others and 
attempts to prove Nature to be her own Creator by 
evolutionary processes under the Laws of Nature. 
The followers of the Lord, Jehovah, recognize his 
right to control the universe and— both directly and 
through his Son and his apostles and others to so 
control Nature that winds and waves and demons 
and disease would obey. Those who believe in the 
miracles of the Bible neither deify Nature nor reverence 



its operations as unalterable laws, but they do, 

on the contrary, sanctify the Lord God in their hearts. 

It is pleasant to find a Scientist committing himself 
on these lines and renouncing his worship of 
Nature as a god. Prof. S. P. Langley, Secretary of 
the Smithsonian Institute, recently took this position 
in a paper read before the Philosophical Society 
of Washington. Among other things he said:— 

"It is perhaps a hard saying to most that there are no 
such things as 'laws of nature'; but this is the theme on 
which I have to speak. 

"These, then, are the laws of man's own mind, or the 
effects of his own mind, which he projects outside of himself 
and imagines to be due to some permanent and unalterable 
cause having an independent existence... 

"To decorate our own guesses at nature's meaning with 
the name 'laws of nature' is a presumption due to our own 
feeble human nature, which we can forgive for demanding 
something more permanent than itself, but which also 
leads us to have such an exalted conceit of our own opinions 
as to hide from ourselves that it is these very opinions 
which we call nature's laws. 

"The history of the past shows that once most philosophers, 
even atheists, thus regarded 'the laws of nature,' 
not as their own interpretations of her, but as something 
external to themselves, as entities partaking the attributes 
of Deity— entities which they deified in print with capital 
letters— as we sometimes do still, tho these 'laws' now are 
shorn of 'the glories of their birth and state' which they 

R3049 : page 229 

once wore, and are not turning out to be, 'substantial 
things.' 

"But are there not really things (like the fact of gravitation, 
for instance) external to ourselves, which would 
exist whether we were here or not, and which are part of 
the order of nature? Apparently, yes,— but part of the laws 
of nature, no ! 

"The present generation has begun, if not to be modest 
or humble, to be somewhat less arrogant in the assumption 
of its knowledge. We are perhaps beginning to understand, 
not in a purely poetical sense, but in a very real 
one, that there may be all around us, in heaven and earth, 
things beyond measure, of which 'philosophy' not only 
knows nothing, but has not dreamed. 

"As a consequence of this, there is growing to be an 
unspoken, rather than clearly formulated, admission that 
we know little of the order of nature, and nothing at all of 
the laws of nature.... 

"Let us repeat, and repeat once more, that tho nature 
be external to ourselves, the so-called 'laws of nature' are 
from within— laws of our own minds— and a simple product 
of our human nature. Let us agree that the scientific imagination 
can suggest questions to put to nature, but not 
her answers. Let us read Bacon again, and agree with him 



that we understand only what we have observed. Finally, 

let us add that we never understand even that, in the fulness 

of its meaning; for remember that of all the so-called 

laws of nature the most constantly observed, and most intimately 

and personally known to us, are those of life and 

death— and how much do we know about the meaning of 

them?... 

"The lesson for us is we must not consider that anything 
is absolutely settled or true." 

Ah yes! Now we know that they know that they 
don't know. Believers alone know the knowable 
things, and all else they leave to the all wise One in 
whom they trust. "Thy Word is Truth," and it is 
scientific from the standpoint of The Divine Plan of 
the Ages and from no other standpoint. 

"WITHOUT RELIGION MAN IS LOST." 



The Atheists of Berlin, a numerous body, are criticising 
the Kaiser for his pronounced religious tendencies and 
the publicity he is giving his views on the subject. They 
remind him that the ablest minds in Germany do not 
share his belief in a hereafter, that in proof of it the 
Berlinese are the least given to church attendance of any 
large city in the world, and that disbelief instead of hindering 
actually does more to advance the material well-being 

R3050 : page 229 

of the empire than Christianity has done or can do. 

The critics inveigh particularly against the royal pronouncement 

that a man whose life is not founded on religion 

is a lost man. This reasoning they contend belongs 

to the benighted centuries and is a reflection upon enlightened 

Germany of today. The address which has aroused 

this complaint was delivered last week in Posen. Here 

is the part objectionable to infidelity: "The German empire 

to-day is rooted in simplicity and fear of God. I look to 

all, priests and laymen, to help me uphold religion among 

the people, in its health and strength. This applies 

equally to the two creeds, Catholic and Protestant. 

"It is with pride and joy that I am able to tell you that 
the pope said to my special ambassador who went to Rome 
on the occasion of the Holy Father's jubilee that he had always 
had a high opinion of the piety of the Germans, and 
especially of that of the German army. The pope asked 
my ambassador to tell his sovereign that the one country 
in Europe where order and discipline still prevailed, with 
respect for authority and regard for the church, and where 
the church could live, was the German Empire, and for 
that the Papal See was indebted to the German Emperor. 

"This justifies me in saying that our two great creeds 
must, while living side by side, keep in view their one 
great aim— to uphold and strengthen the fear of God and 



reverence for religion. Whether we are 'moderns' or 
whether we labor in this or that field, does not matter at 
all. He who does not found his life on religion is a lost 
man. I rejoice that I have placed my whole empire, my 
people and my army, as well as myself and my house, beneath 
the Cross and under the protection of Him who said, 
'Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not 
pass away.'" 

We are living in a peculiar time in more respects 
than one. While the whole "religious world" is 
losing its faith in the Bible and accepting instead a 
belief in Evolution;— that Nature is our god which 
made us and is evolving us into higher conditions by 
some kind of "Laws of Nature"— and while doubt is 
growing respecting a personal Creator or any interest 
he takes in mankind;— at the same time each skeptical 
person seems more anxious than ever that the 
common people should maintain their respect for 
"religion." They care little what kind of religion- 
good or bad— so long as it has some fear, some terrors, 
connected with it that will restrain the common 
people. They realize that if the latter ever get to see 
matters in the same skeptical light in which the 
wealthy and educated view them it would mean a 
death knell to the present order of things social, political, 
financial and ecclesiastical. They want no 
change; realizing that any possible change would 
surely be to the detriment of their "interests." 

The Kaiser is one of the world's wise men; and 
it is for this reason that he throws his influence more 
and more toward Papacy which, he realizes, will 
hold its influence upon the "common people" longer 
than will Protestantism; because it has a firm grasp 
upon the reason and intellect of its votaries. This 
disposition is a growing one: Patronize every religion 
that will maintain superstition. 

We do not complain at this worldly wisdom, believing, 
as we have frequently stated, that the worst 
form of government is better than anarchy, and that 
even gross superstition has points of advantage 
over scoffing atheism. It is for this reason that we 
seek to avoid setting free with the truth those who 
would use their liberty as a license for evil doing. 

But in this general tendency we forsee some of our 
coming tribulations. As the Pharisees and rulers 
and Doctors of Law, in the harvest of the Jewish 
Age, were "grieved that they taught the people" and 
fearful that the truth would lead to dire calamities 
upon their nation, so we apprehend it will ere long 
be in this harvest of the Gospel Age. Not only will 
the nominal Church preachers feel jealous that their 
flocks should understand the Bible better than themselves, 
but civil rulers, public men, legislators, etc., 

R3050 : page 230 



will sympathize with and assist in suppressing anything 
that would "unsettle the faith" of Christendom. 

Poor fellows ! they do not realize that the people 
generally have almost no faith to unsettle; and that 
the vast majority are too indifferent to heed and 
search for and thus obtain the truth and too weak-kneed 
to stand up for it if they did see it. Nor do 
they know, as we do, that the Lord has so arranged 
it that— "None of the wicked shall understand but the 
wise shall understand."— Dan. 12:10. 

HIGHER CRITICISM INFIDELITY REACHING 
THE SUNDAY SCHOOL. 



Having conquered the college professors and 
through them the ministry, during the last twenty-five 
years, this latest form of Infidelity has permeated 
denominational literature and public school text 
books, and now the question is how to deal it out 
in the Sunday Schools wisely; i.e. how to insidiously 
introduce it to the young so as not to shock them and 
lead them to a total repudiation of Churchianity and 
all else built upon the Bible, and so as not to shock 
any of the parents who may still be "old-fogy" believers 
in the Bible's divine authorship. The ideas of 
one prominent in the preparation of the "sincere milk 
of the Word:" 

Rev. A. E. Dunning, D.D., editor of The Congregationalist 
and one of the International Committee on the Sunday 
school lessons, describes the situation as follows: 

"A widening chasm divides the teaching of the Bible 
in schools and colleges from its teaching in many Sunday 
schools. The accepted principles of the development of 
life and of the growth of literature, as taught in public 
schools, are being contradicted in Sunday schools, in the 
effort to defend theories of the creation of the universe 
and of the composition of the Bible which are contrary to 
known laws of the evolution of nature and of literature. 
The consequences of such opposing teachings are not difficult 
to predict. 

"The main conclusions of Biblical criticism are now 
accepted with practical unanimity by all scholars who have 
given attention to them. They have been reached by patient 
investigation, and have displaced traditional theories 
among educated people. 

Zion's Watch Tower cheerfully takes its place 
amongst the uneducated who refuse to accept the 
guesses, philosophies and conclusions of "science 
falsely so called" in contradiction to the testimony of 
"holy men of old who spoke and wrote as they 
were moved by the holy spirit,"— the Bible. All of 
Satan's attacks of the past have been weak and 
puerile as compared with this one,— this deflection, or 
revolution, rather, inside the ranks of those professing 



loyalty to God and the Bible. Our expectation is 
that it will spread with amazing rapidity, and constitute 
a part of the sifting of wheat from tares and 
chaff. And many will be surprised at the results 
unless forewarned by the voice of the Lord through 
his Word, that— "A thousand shall fall at thy side, 
ten thousand at thy right hand."— Psa. 91:7. 



R3050 : page 230 

WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH? 

"No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every 
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. 
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their 
righteousness is of me, saith the Lord."— Isa. 54:17. 

WHAT A HERITAGE! What would one not 
give, sacrifice, to have this assurance which 
pertains not only to the life which now is, but 
goes far beyond, lays hold upon and blesses the eternal 
interests of all who attain this heritage. It is not 
applicable to one individual alone, but as declared, it 
belongs to all the servants of the Lord— every true 
spiritual Israelite may claim it, rest upon it and rejoice 
in it. 

Our text may to some extent be applicable to regathered 
and re-favored Israel after the flesh, in the 
near future when the Lord will fulfil to them all his 
good promises; but without question it belongs to 
spiritual Israel— new creatures in Christ Jesus, joint-heirs 
with him of the Abrahamic promises as the seed 
of Abraham.-Gal. 3:29. 

Spiritual Israel may sometimes feel as our Lord 
himself expressed the matter, "My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me?" and may not always 
realize the object and necessity for some 
of the experiences through which the Lord 
permits Zion as a whole, and each individual 
Christian as her members or children, to 
pass; they may see that at times the Lord has apparently 
permitted the great adversary or his deluded 
servants to forge against them grievous weapons of 
destruction, and to assail them in health or in their 
social peace or financially; sometimes these weapons 
of the adversary have seemed to do terrible execution 
against them, and many may wonder how the Lord's 
good promise of our text is being fulfilled: "No 
weapon that is formed against her shall prosper." 

Many tongues have arisen against the Lord's Zion 
as a whole and against each member individually— 
tongues laden with the "poison of asps", tongues 
bitter with envy, malice, hatred and strife,— tongues 
which hesitate not to slander and misrepresent, to 



say all manner of evil falsely. And to a large extent 
these weapons and tongues have succeeded, have 
wrought havoc with the sheep, as also with the 
Shepherd; and God permitted it— he neither stopped 
the weapon nor stilled the tongue; and yet he assures 
us apparently to the contrary of this in our text. 
What is the true explanation of this situation? 

The explanation is that "Ye are not in the flesh, 
but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell 
in you"— ye are "new creatures" in Christ Jesus, "old 
things are passed away, behold all things have become 
new." (Rom. 8:9; 2 Cor. 5:17.) The weapons 
and tongues attempt to assail us as new creatures, 
but fail of this and merely do injury to the old 
creature— to the flesh, which we have already consecrated 
to death anyway. By helping to kill or to 
mortify the flesh, our adversaries are really helping 
us as "new creatures" instead of hindering us as 
designed. God thus turns what seems to harm us 
into everlasting joy and blessing. 

The context bears out this thought, declaring, "All 

R305 1 : page 23 1 

thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great 
shall be the peace of thy children." (v. 13.) Ah 
yes, these spiritual sons of God need the instructions 
of the Lord's Word in order to understand his dealings 
—in order to enable them to have the great 
peace here predicted. God's children in the school 
of Christ learn not their lessons all at once, but 
gradually, "Line upon line, precept upon precept, here 
a little, and there a little," by degrees they come to 
comprehend the exceeding great and precious promises 
of the Father's Word which unite in declaring 
that under his supervision "All things shall work 
together for good to them that love God— to the 
called ones according to his purpose"; this is a 
sufficiency for the beginning of faith and, therefore, 
a sufficiency for the beginning of the peace. As our 
instruction progresses we learn the philosophy of 
our experience— that by the trials and vicissitudes of 
this present life, by our warfare with the world, the 
flesh and the devil, by our strivings in this battle, we 
are forming characters in accord with righteousness; 
and, additionally, we learn that God seeketh such 
characters, and is thus developing us because he has 
for the world in general a great and wonderful plan 
of salvation not yet fully made known, in which he 
desires that the "elect" Church of this Gospel age 
shall be co-workers, joint-heirs with their Lord and 
Redeemer, as the royal priesthood under him, their 
Head,— the great Prophet, Priest and King so long 
promised, whose work shall be to overthrow the 
powers of evil, to bind the Adversary, to lift up and 
enlighten the world of mankind and to grant to every 



redeemed child of Adam a full, gracious opportunity 
of return to the Father's favor through obedience 
and restitution. 

When once the eyes of our understanding are 
opened to appreciate the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of our Father's plan, we see that 
the world of mankind are not in torture and hopeless 
misery, but are in the great prison house of death; 
we see that our Lord Jesus has by the grace of God 
tasted death for every man; and we see that it is on 
the strength of this redemption for the whole world 
by the one sacrifice of sin that the promise has gone 
forth that all shall be brought to a knowledge of the 
truth that they may be saved. From this standpoint 
everything becomes new; old fears and perplexities 
pass away, and the light of the knowledge of the 
goodness of God shining into our hearts, becomes 
more and more a transforming power therein,— 
changing us from glory to glory. And if we continue in 
this way it will eventually fit us for participation with 
our Redeemer in all this glorious Millennial work. 
We see that it is because of God's desires to have us 
thus members of his "elect" Church that he has 
favored us in advance of the world with the knowledge 
of his goodness and redeeming love, and that 
he has anointed us with his spirit and called us to 
this high, heavenly calling. Praise his name! 

As the teaching of the Lord to the Church belongs 
to the present time, so does the peace of those who 
are taught apply in the present time, and is in proportion 
to our readiness to receive instruction and 
come to a knowledge of God. Those who instructed 
by the divine Word have reached a large degree of 
knowledge of the divine character through the divine 
plan, may, should, must have the peace of God which 
passeth all understanding, ruling in their hearts. If 
they have not the peace they cannot have the joy of 
the Lord; and if they have not this, even under the 
present trying circumstances and conditions, it is 
because they have not been sufficiently taught of the 
Lord; and if they have been long in the school of 
Christ without this attainment, it is an evidence that 
they have not been giving the proper earnest heed 
to the Word,— it is an evidence that they have been 
following the traditions of men rather than inquiring 
for the old paths, the way of the Lord. Let us all 
take heed lest we let slip those things which we have 
heard, remembering that the earthen vessels in which 
we have the treasure of the new mind are leaky, and 
that this necessitates our keeping near to the fountain 
spring— near to the Lord, near to his Word and, 
hence, near to all others who are close to the Lord 
and to his Word. 

The context further declares respecting this class 
under consideration, "In righteousness shalt thou 
[the godly] be established; thou shalt be far from 



oppression, for thou shalt not fear; and from terror, 

for it shall not come near thee." (vs. 14.) This also 

applies to the present life and not to the life of glory. 

Those who are not established in righteousness now 

will not be accounted worthy to be sharers in the 

first resurrection, respecting which it is written, 

"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. 

Righteousness, justice, must be the 

foundation of every character acceptable to God: 

as justice is the foundation of the Lord's throne, 

so it is the foundation of all with which he has 

to do; and if we are his it must be the 

sub-stratum of our Christian character. We 

must learn to be just before we are generous; we 

must learn that while love may call for sacrifices, duty, 

obligation calls for justice first. In the blindness and 

darkness which came to us from the dark ages, before 

the anointing of our eyes with the eyesalve of truth 

from the words of the Lord and his apostles— when 

in our blindness we conceived of God as unjust and 

unloving because of misrepresentation of his plan, we 

had so low an ideal before our minds that we found 

it easy to excuse injustice or cruelty or selfishness, 

since, according to our false standard and misconceptions 

of God, he was the exemplar of all this. The 

Lord undoubtedly had mercy upon us on account of 

our ignorance and blindness; but now since he has 

opened the eyes of our understanding, has shown us 

his own justice and his own boundless love, and since 

we are seeking to copy these, there is no longer room 

for us to excuse unrighteousness or injustice in our 

hearts. It may require time to bring every word and 

act and thought into harmony with the new mind 

instructed from the Word;— we may never succeed 

to our own satisfaction in this matter in our present 

life, because of the weaknesses of the flesh through 

which our wills must operate; but we can at least 

make strong effort, and by the Lord's assisting grace 

R3051 : page 232 

accomplish great things in righteousness, not only 
of intention, but in righteousness of thought, of 
judgment, of conduct. 

This righteousness in which the Lord's children 
are to be established, is further explained by the 
statement, "Thou shalt be far from oppression, for 
thou shalt not fear." As we look back into the dark 
ages we see that it was full of oppression practiced 
in the name of the Lord and in the name of righteousness 
and in many cases, undoubtedly, practiced 
conscientiously. In all good conscience men oppressed 
one another because of their fears, their false 
theories declaring that the Lord was about to torture 
to all eternity all who did not accept a certain theory 
of belief, and it seemed to them the veriest kindness 



to inflict torture by thumbscrew, rack and stake for 
the correction of heretics— with a view to saving 
them possibly from an eternity of suffering; and with 
the view also to hinder them from misleading others 
to such an awful eternity. This oppression, this 
cruelty, was the result of fear, and the fear was the 
result of misunderstanding of God's character— because 
they were taught of men and not taught of the 
Lord, as the Prophet declares, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precept of men."— Isa. 29:13. 

As the light of the truth comes into our hearts 
giving us a true knowledge of the Lord, instructing 
us as his children, perfect love casts out fear, and 
proportionately it casts out superstition and intolerance 
and oppression, as the Prophet here declares. 
The Lord's people are to love religious liberty for 
themselves and are correspondingly to grant the same 
to all others. "Thou shalt be far from oppression, for 
thou shalt not fear." This class will be anxious to 
set men free, not anxious to enslave them. On the 
other hand the declaration is, "Thou shalt be far from 
terror, for it shall not come near thee;" the Lord's 
people ought to be the most fearless people in the 
world as respects earthly disasters and calamities; 
taught of the Lord they have learned that there is 
only one being who needs to be feared— the one 
who has the power to destroy the soul. They do 
indeed fear to displease or offend him; and yet, having 
learned of his goodness, mercy and love, they do not 
fear him in the ordinary sense of the word, but rejoice 
in him, confide in him, trust him as a child trusts a 
father, and this confidence grows in proportion as 
they are taught of the Lord— in proportion as they 
learn to trust, both from the Word of the Lord and 
from his providences, his dealings with them. 

The text further shows that there will be not only 
individual oppositions to be encountered, but that 
Zion as a whole will be assailed by foes; as we read, 
"Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not 
by me; whosoever shall gather together against thee 
shall fall for thy sake." (vs. 15.) Wonderful words 
of consolation! We cannot at present judge to what 
extent this may have a fulfilment not many years 
hence, when there shall be a general gathering together 
of opponents to the truth and its servants. 
Already there have been various combinations instigated 
by the adversary, and they have all come to 
naught. They have really harmed none because it is 
impossible to injure the very elect. They have indeed 
caused the stumbling of some, and heartaches to 
many, yet, nevertheless, under the Lord's providence 
they have worked out deeper and richer experiences 
in all who were in the proper attitude of heart to be 
thus taught. 

R3052 : page 232 



"Nearer my God to thee, 

E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

The assurance here given is nothing but what we 
might reasonably know when we consider the Lord's 
own declaration, "So shall my word be that goeth 
forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me 
void, but shall accomplish that which I please, and 
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) 
So surely as our Heavenly Father has purposed 
the blessing of all the families of the earth 
through the seed of Abraham, just so surely it will 
be accomplished. And as the power of the Adversary 
raised against our Lord Jesus and the weapons 
formed against him, and which smote him down in 
death prevailed for a time, yet were merely so much 
of the outworking of the foreknown divine plan, so 
all of the machinations of the Adversary and the 
oppositions of the world and the flesh as well, cannot 
hinder the development of the various members of 
the body of Christ who, as the Heavenly Father 
has predicted, are to be joint-heirs with his Son in 
the Millennial Kingdom of blessing. 

The Word of the Lord declares that even those 
who crucified the Master, and who, in their conscientious 
conviction that they were doing right, said, "His 
blood be upon us and upon our children"— these are 
all yet to be the subjects of divine mercy in due time; 
because as the Apostle Peter declares that they 
did it "through ignorance." (Acts 3:17.) The Lord 
foretells the time that they shall look upon him whom 
they have pierced, and shall all mourn because of him; 
and he foretells, too, that at that time so far from 
crushing them or torturing them, he will favor them 
by pouring upon them the spirit of prayer and 
supplication.— Zech. 12:10. 

It is a different matter, however, when those who 
"have been enlightened and have tasted of the good 
Word of God and of the powers of the age to come 
and have been made partakers of the holy spirit," 
shall become accusers of the brethren, adversaries, 
persecutors. No blessings are promised to these; 
but the declaration is that "It were better for him 
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he 
were cast into the sea." Judas was an ensample of 
this class in his day; of him the Master said in love 
and in sorrow,— not in anger,— "It were better for 
that man had he never been born"— his life has been 
more than wasted. It is not our thought that the 
Lord will have torments for these in the future, but 
rather that they die the Second Death, and that in 
some manner they receive retribution in the present 
life as did Judas. 

But he that is one of the Lord's people, possessed 
by his spirit, could not be a persecutor or opponent of 
the brethren,— none surely except those who become 



poisoned with the adversary's covetous disposition, 

R3052 : page 233 

with the desire for self-exaltation. No wonder that 
the Lord cautioned us against this sin of covetousness 
under which Satan originally fell, by which Mother 
Eve was seduced from loyalty to the Lord, and by 
which Judas and various other enemies of the Lord 
have been mislead. Let us be more and more on 
guard against it. Let others do what they will- 
whatever the Lord may permit— as for us, let us say 
with the Apostle, "we can do nothing against the 
truth, but for the truth"— all of our energies and 
powers must be enlisted on the side of the Lord and 
on the side of all those who are his. Not a finger 
dare we move, not a whisper dare we utter injurious 
to the members of the body of Christ, of whom the 
Lord declares, "No weapon formed against thee shall 
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee 
in judgement, shalt thou condemn." 

WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH? 

The closing words of our text remind us of the 
language of the Apostle (Rom. 8:31-39), "If God be 
for us, who can be against us?"— who can prosper 
against us, who can accomplish anything against us? 
That God is for us is already manifested in that he 
spared not his own Son, but redeemed us with his 
precious blood; and in that he has called us in Christ 
Jesus to be his "elect" Church, his Bride. "Who 
shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It 
is God that justifieth." In harmony with this, our 
text declares of these servants of the Lord, "Their 
righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." Some may 
endeavor to condemn them and may indeed succeed 
in finding fault with them for having imperfect judgments, 
and being sometimes imperfect in their conduct 
or words; but what will it matter that such 
should condemn those whom the Lord approves? 
The Lord informs us that he knows our imperfections 
better than any could know them; but that of his 
own grace he has provided a covering for our unintentional 
blemishes through the merit of the sacrifice 
of his Son. Who then shall succeed in condemning 
these whom God approves, whom God justifies, whom 
God declares to be right and acceptable to him 
through Jesus Christ? Others may claim that they 
are actually as nearly perfect as some of the faithful 
"elect," but the difference is that whereas God must 
reject all to any degree blemished, these have the covering 
of his Grace in Christ and are accepted according 
to their intentions and endeavors; and, therefore, they 
shall be able to stand, for he is able to make them 
stand in their testing or judgment.— Rom. 14:4. 



Let us as members of the house of Sons, accepted 
in the Beloved, take from our Father's Word in this 
text the strong consolation which he intends it should 
give us. Let our faith triumphantly sing, and our 
joy and rejoicing in the Lord know no bounds. 
According unto our faith it will be unto us. But 
while it will be on account of our faith that the Lord 
will approve of us, accept us, and bless us, he has, 
nevertheless, assured us in advance that where the 
tree of faith exists and grows, the character development, 
the fruitage of the faith will surely also abound, 
and that thus by our works (imperfect though they be) 
we shall give evidence of the faith that is in us. Such 
a living faith may well cause rejoicing in the house 
of our pilgrimage, with this assurance that even the 
machinations of our enemies shall work out for us 
blessings, under our Heavenly Father's supervising 
care, wisdom, love and power. 



R3052 : page 233 

THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS SHALL COME. 

"For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet once [more] it is a little while 
and I will shake the heavens and the earth and the sea and the dry land. 
And I will shake all nations and the Desire of all Nations 
shall come; and I will fill this house with glory, 
saith the Lord of hosts."— Hag. 2:6,7. 

HERE IS ONE of the richest promises in the 

blessed Word of God. It is the gospel in a 

nutshell— the gospel of grace to the world 

and of glory to the Church; and it is signed at both 

ends with the signature of the Sovereign of the universe, 

Jehovah of hosts. It was thus uttered by the 

mouth of one of his holy prophets— Haggai. But 

though with the other writings of the prophets it was 

held sacred as the Word of the Lord and reverently 

read by his anciently chosen people, fleshly Israel, 

their understanding of it fell far short of its true significance; 

and not until the holy Spirit was given as 

a comforter, a guide into all truth and a revealer of 

things to come (John 14:26; 16:13), was the precious 

import of this declaration of Jehovah made manifest 

to his saints (the gospel Church), as it has been 

through his holy apostles and prophets.— Eph. 3:5. 

Fleshly Israel thought they saw in this declaration 
an intimation of the exaltation and universal dominion 
of their nation, the fall of the Persian 
kingdom and the subserviency of all other nations to 
them, and that the house of Israel, thus exalted and 
enthroned above all the nations, would be filled with 
the glory of the Lord and recognized by all the world 
as God's specially chosen and honored people— a holy 



nation and a royal priesthood. With such a hope in 
view they diligently and cheerily worked to rebuild 
the ruined temple and to repair the fallen walls of 
Jerusalem after the decree of the Persian monarch, 
Cyrus, granted them liberty to return from captivity. 
But centuries rolled on; the Persian empire fell but 
Israel's glory still tarried; for they only passed from 
under the dominion of Persia to that of Greece, and 
then of Rome; and then, as a nation scattered and 
peeled, they were driven out of the land of their 
fathers— the land of divine promise— and scattered 
among all nations and persecuted among them all 
unto this day. 

What then? has God's promise failed? or has he 
forgotten it? No; for the Apostle Paul, under the 
leading of the holy Spirit, calls it to mind again (Heb. 12:26-28) 
and shows that the house which is to be 
thus filled with the glory of the Lord is not the 
fleshly house or kingdom of Israel, but the spiritual 
house or kingdom of God— the Gospel Church. 

The shaking of the earth mentioned in this text 

R3052 : page 234 

presupposes a former shaking, and this one is shown 
to be the last. The former shaking was that typified 
in the quaking of the earth at the giving of the law at 
Sinai; for under the law, says the Apostle, every 
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense 
of reward, and at various intervals the 
nation was thoroughly shaken and sifted by captivities 
and otherwise, that only the loyal and true might 
remain. (See Hebrews 12:25,26; 2:2; 3:17; 10:28.) 
But this last shaking is to be a greater shaking than 
fleshly Israel ever experienced; it is to be a shaking 
of the heavens [symbol of the ruling power] and the 
earth [all organized and law-abiding society] and the 
sea [the lawless and anarchistic elements] and the 
dry land [the established aristocracy of wealth and 
social independence]. And it is to be a shaking, not 
only of one nation, but of all nations— "And I will 

R3053 : page 234 

shake all nations." Surely this predicted shaking of 
all nations is but a repetition of the prophecy of 
Daniel (12:1) of a great time of trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation. 

But the Apostle Paul gives us the comforting 
assurance that "This word, yet once more, signifieth 
the removing of those things that are shaken, that 
the things that cannot be shaken may remain." And 
he further shows (Heb. 12:28) that that which will 
remain after the shaking, and which cannot be 
moved, will be the kingdom of God, which we shall 
inherit if we prove worthy— i.e., if we stand all the 



tests and shakings and cannot be shaken out. 

The Apostle, in stating that the kingdom of God 
—the true Church, the elect— cannot be shaken, 
thereby intimates that it shall not be exempted from 
those blasts that shall shake and utterly remove all 
other organizations, but rather that the true, elect 
Church shall not be moved by them. Her foundation 
is sure. "God is in the midst of her, and she 
shall not be moved." (Psa. 46:5.) As a matter of 
fact, we find ourselves today in the midst of these perilous 
and disintegrating influences. The storm is 
rising, and, as predicted, it is felt first by the Lord's 
little flock of consecrated believers. Their faith and 
patience and zeal and endurance are being tried by 
every means that the adversary can devise. Every 
device of error is being put forth in its most pleasing 
and subtle form; and advantage is being taken of 
every weakness of the flesh to overcome those who 
are endeavoring to fight the good fight of faith and 
to overcome the world, the flesh and the devil. 

And when we consider that "we wrestle not with 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, and powers, 
and against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places" (Ephesians 6:12), 
we realize that the contest is a very 
unequal one unless we lay hold upon the strength 
which God supplies to us through Christ. 

The Apostle's language further intimates that 
since only that which cannot be shaken will remain and 
will inherit the kingdom, all others will fall. And in 
this light the words of the Psalmist— "A thousand 
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right 
hand"— are seen to be no exaggeration. Nor should 
the faithful few be at all dismayed when the various 
shakings sift out their number; for so it must be 
until only that which cannot be shaken shall remain. 
Thus the whole nominal church, both within and outside 
the various organizations, must be shaken until 
only the true and faithful remain; for God will gather 
out of his kingdom all things that offend.— Matt. 13:41. 

But this shaking is permitted, not only to sift out 
of the Church all shakeable things, but it is to extend 
to all the nations; and so unprepared are they for 
the storm that is coming, and so unable to resist it, 
that the Apostle, with prophetic foresight, declares 
that their shaking signifies their removal (Heb. 12:27); 
and further, that their removal is not in order 
that anarchy may prevail, but in order that the kingdom 
of God, which cannot be shaken, may take their 
place. 

Thank God for the prospect of an unshakeable 
kingdom, whose kings shall reign in righteousness 
and whose princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1; Prov. 8:15), 
and under whose dominion the whole earth 
shall be at rest. (Isa. 14:7.) This is the kingdom 
which the Prophet declares will indeed be "the desire 



of all nations," when it is once established and its 
blessings begin to be realized by the world. Yes, 
truly "the desire of all nations shall come"— with 
blessings of life and health and peace and prosperity 
and good government. It is for this coming kingdom 
and its blessings that the whole creation groans 
and travails together in pain, waiting for the adoption, 
viz., "the redemption of our body"— the body of 
Christ, the heirs of the kingdom. (Rom. 8:22.) As 
soon as this body is all selected, fitted and tested, 
then the kingdom will be established and the desire 
of all nations will have come— the long desired peace 
and prosperity which every experiment of their own 
will have failed to secure. And doubtless every 
possible experiment will have been tried and proved 
futile before that time; the last, that of socialism, 
ending in universal anarchy. 

It is this body of Christ, this spiritual house of 
Israel, which, though lashed by many a storm, nevertheless 
"cannot be shaken," because it is firmly 
founded upon the Rock Christ Jesus: it is this house 
that Paul calls "the temple of God" (I Cor. 3:16; 6:19) 
that is to inherit the kingdom of God, and that 
Jehovah says he is going to fill with his glory. 

He will fill it with the glory of the divine nature: 
he will make every member of it like unto Christ's 
glorious body: he will endue them with power from 
on high to execute faithfully all of the divine purpose 
for human restitution, and for the establishment of 
universal harmony and peace. Praise the Lord for 
such a prospect for both the Church and the world. 
May its inspiration be felt by every devoted heart, 
and its warning be heeded by every one who feels to 
any degree inclined to be unstable. Take unto you 
the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand 
unshaken in the midst of the storms of this evil day, 
and be counted worthy to be a living stone in that 
glorious temple of God, now shortly to be filled with 
his glory, and to be an heir of that kingdom which 
cannot be moved, and which shall indeed be the 
desire of all nations. 

R3053 : page 235 

"HE CARETH FOR YOU." 

"Casting all your care upon him; 
for he careth for you."— I Peter 5:7. 

"What can it mean? Is it aught to him 
That the nights are long and the days are dim? 
Can he be touched by the griefs I bear, 
Which sadden the heart and whiten the hair? 
Around his throne are eternal calms, 
And strong, glad music of happy psalms, 
And bliss unruffled by any strife. 



How can he care for my poor life? 

"And yet I want him to care for me, 
While I live in this world where the sorrows be; 
When the lights die down on the path I take; 
When strength is feeble, and friends forsake; 
When love and music, that once did bless, 
Have left me to silence and loneliness; 
And life-song changes to sobbing prayers- 
Then my heart cries out for a God who cares. 

"When shadows hang o'er me the whole day long 

And my spirit is bowed with shame and wrong; 

When I am not good, and the deeper shade 

Of conscious sin makes my heart afraid; 

And the busy world has too much to do 

To stay in its course to help me through, 

And I long for a Saviour— can it be 

That the God of the universe cares for me? 

"Oh wonderful story of deathless love! 
Each child is dear to that heart above: 
He fights for me when I can not fight; 
He comforts me in the gloom of night; 
He lifts the burden, for he is strong; 
He stills the sigh, and awakens the song; 
The sorrow that bowed me down he bears, 
And loves and pardons, because he cares. 

"Let all who are sad take heart again. 
We are not alone in our hours of pain; 
Our Father stoops from his throne above 
To soothe and quiet us with his love. 
He leaves us not when the storm is high, 
And we have safety, for he is nigh. 
Can that be trouble which he doth share? 
Oh, rest in peace, for the Lord does care!" 



R3053 : page 235 

ISRAEL'S TYPICAL TABERNACLE. 

-EX. 41:13.-AUGUST 3.- 

"Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and 
into his courts with praise."— Psalm 100:4. 

WE CANNOT DO JUSTICE to this lesson 
here; nor is it necessary. We refer our 
readers to the booklet, "Tabernacle Shadows 
of Better Sacrifices,"* which a majority of them 
already possess, and which we believe has been very 
helpful to the Lord's people,— deepening the work of 
grace in their heart by its explanations of the riches 



of divine grace already bestowed upon us and those 
yet future, illustrated in Israel's typical tabernacle 
and its typical arrangements, sacrifices, etc. 

Incidentally we guard our readers against certain 
misapplications which, from contemporary reviews of 
the lesson, we may infer to be quite common. The 
tabernacle and its court, etc., were not, as many suppose, 
a church edifice, or place of worship for Israel. 
An ordinarily able minister and writer wholly misrepresents 
the tabernacle and its services as follows: 

"Suppose yourself approaching the Tabernacle at some 
desert camping place. ...It is a brilliant sight; 
the white hangings of the court contrast with the dark 
coverings of the tabernacle within. The gorgeous entrance 
curtain is looped up, for the Court is full of worshipers 
bringing sacrifices. White-robed priests are burning offerings 
at the large bronze altar in the center, while another 
is using the sacred laver near the Tabernacle entrance 
preparatory to entering. The many-colored curtain is here 
looped back on its golden pillars. From within we catch 
a gleam of the golden table and exquisitely wrought lampstand, 
while a fragrance of rare incense floats out upon 
us. Deep in the recesses of the Holy Place we can see the 
resplendent curtain, and we tremble as it seems almost 
luminous with the shining of the Shekinah behind it. All 
is so reverently silent that we hear the chime of bells on 
the high-priest's garment as he moves forward, and, turning, 
we read above his beautiful robes and glittering 
breast the crown and meaning of it all, "Holiness to the 
Lord." 

Quite to the contrary of this description, the Israelites 
in general were not permitted within even 
the outermost of the Tabernacle enclosures, the 
Court. Nor could they see over the high linen curtain 
which enclosed it, nor directly see through its 
doorway, which was behind a "gate" of heavy curtains. 
Only the tribe of Levi, consecrated to the 
Lord's service, was permitted inside this enclosure in 
the Court, and of these only the one priestly family, 
consisting at first of the five persons, Aaron and his 
four sons, were permitted to enter the Tabernacle 
proper, whose curtains, so far from being looped up 
about the gold-covered pillars, so as to permit the 
Levites to see the candlestick, tables, etc., were kept 
down, with the very object of hindering them from 
seeing anything within. And that they might not 
seek to look in when the officiating priests lifted the 
curtain and passed under it, a divine law was promulgated 
forbidding them to look, and prescribing a 
penalty of death for disobedience.— Num. 4:19,20. 

All of this has a deep significance in connection 
with the proper understanding of the meaning of 
these types. As the Court represented the condition 
of justification through faith in the sacrifice for sins 
in the atonement accomplished by the high-priest, so 
its brazen altar represented primarily the perfection 



of the man Christ Jesus, upon which his offering was 
accepted of God, as our sin-atonement, sanctifying in 
turn any offering of others that might be presented 
upon it. Likewise the laver taught in type a cleansing 
of the flesh, and a putting away, so far as 
possible, of all filthiness of the flesh and spirit on the 
part of those in the justified condition as preparatory 
to their entering the Tabernacle itself. As only the 
priests were permitted to enter the Tabernacle, or 



*Price 10c. each; 50c. per doz— free to those too poor 
to pay, upon postal card application. 

R3054 : page 236 

even to see its glories and beauties, the teaching is 

that as the Court represents one condition, the 

"Holy" represents another, and the "Most Holy" still 

another condition. As the priests, before being consecrated 

to the priestly office, must be Levites, so 

those who would be of the Royal Priesthood must 

previously have been justified believers, otherwise 

they would not be acceptable as members of the 

Royal Priesthood. Their entrance as priests into the 

Holy symbolizes their change of nature— from justified 

human nature to that of "new creatures," begotten 

of the spirit. The Holy represents the state 

or condition of these new creatures in this present 

life, while still in the flesh, and only reckonedly new 

creatures, while the Most Holy represents their 

future state or condition, in which they will be perfected 

as new creatures by participation in the first 

resurrection— beyond the "Vail." 

Our Forerunner, the "High Priest of our profession," 
or order, passed through the Court condition 
as the perfect man, presenting himself in consecration 
when thirty years of age; and then passed 
from the Court condition into the Holy, the sanctified 
or new creature condition, when begotten of the 
holy spirit. The three and a half years of our Lord's 
ministry are represented in the Holy of the Tabernacle; 
and as the First Vail represented his consecration 
to death, so the Second Vail represented 
his actual death, beyond which he arose in the perfect 
spiritual condition— the Most Holy. In all this 
he was the Forerunner of those who will constitute 
the Royal Priesthood, his house, the members of his 
"Body." We by nature are sinners, and hence must 
enter the Court condition of justification through 
faith in our Lord's sacrifice; we must be cleansed 
from the defilements of the flesh, so far as possible, 
through the word spoken unto us, represented in 
the washing at the Laver; and then we must make 
our consecration full and complete, represented by the 



Vail at the door, if we would enter thus into the 
Holy, enjoy the privileges typically represented in 
the light of the Golden Candlestick and the Shewbread 
and the Incense Altar, which signify the light, 
the truth, and the spiritual privileges, praises, prayers 
and communion which we have with the Lord as 
members of the body of Christ, this side the Second 
Vail. And for all who shall finish their course faithfully 
and joyfully, there remains beyond the Second 
Vail of actual death a glorious share in our Lord's 
resurrection to perfect spiritual conditions, to be partakers 
of the divine nature and to behold his glory in 
the first resurrection. 

The natural man, even tho justified, represented 
by the Levite, cannot see into, cannot discern, cannot 
appreciate, cannot enjoy, the privileges of the consecrated. 
He can hear through the priests some description 
of the glorious things beyond, but he cannot 
fully comprehend them or see their beauty— 
except by becoming a priest— by consecration, by 
self-sacrifice to the Lord. 

The same expositor whom we quoted above, errs 
again, as follows:— 

"Christian ministers continue the Tabernacle service 
of Aaron and his sons, pointing men to Christ, leading men 
in prayer, and inciting them to offer their bodies a living 
sacrifice. They are to be revered as standing in this noble 
succession." 

We fear there are many ministers in the nominal 
church who have neither part nor lot in the Royal 
Priesthood. Many of them confess that they are 
not even Levites, not even in the Court condition, 
when they acknowledge that they disbelieve the 
Scriptural teaching of man's fall into sin and the 
atonement for his sin effected by the great High 
Priest— when they claim, on the contrary, that there 
was no fall and no need of a redemption, but that 
man has reached his present plane of intelligence by 
a process of evolution. These evolutionists, of whom 
there are many in the nominal church ministry, are 
not in the Court condition of justification, nor have 
they any right or standing there. They are not even 
of the Levite class, the household of faith; consequently, 
they could not be of the priestly class. 

Altho many others of the ministers of the nominal 
church, as well as of the laity, have reached 
the position of justification through faith in the 
Lord's redemptive work, and altho some of them have 
washed at the brazen laver, purifying their lives 
through the Word of truth, yet comparatively few 
have gone on to take the step of full consecration 
necessary to their becoming members of the Royal 
Priesthood— necessary to their having the right to 
enter into the Holy, to discern the glorious truths 
represented therein, "the deep things of God," which 
can be seen only in the light coming from the Golden 



Candlestick, symbolizing the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit. But if the word "ministers" be used in the 
Scriptural sense, as signifying servants— persons devoted 
to the service of God, consecrated to do his 
will even unto death, then the term "minister" will 
be applicable, not only to those of this class who do 
public preaching, but to those of this class also who 
with different talents are serving the Lord and laying 
down their lives for the brethren in other ways 
public and private. 

Human systems, misnamed churches of Christ, 
have raised false standards on the subjects of the 
priesthood, and have separated God's people contrary 
to his arrangement, into "clergy" and "laity." 
Very shortly now the Lord will show how different is 
the divine standard of measurement; for surely then 
will be demonstrated what our Lord and the apostles 
explicitly declared, that "not many wise men after 
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are 
called" and accepted into his priesthood; but chiefly 
"the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the 
Kingdom."— I Cor. 1:26; Jas. 2:5. 

Amongst the Lord's priests will be found some 
very lightly esteemed amongst men, some who have 
been mechanics or farmers or laborers or housekeepers, 
but whose hearts were fully devoted to the Lord, 
and whose ministry consisted in doing with their 
might whatsoever their hands found to do, as unto 
the Lord— doing good unto all men as they had opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith- 
laying down their lives for the brethren. When the 
lists shall be proclaimed doubtless the names of many 
highly esteemed amongst men, the names of many 

R3054 : page 237 

great and noble and wise and learned, honored of 
men and expected to be honored of the Lord, may 
be found wanting; because, in their love for the approval 
of men they sought not exclusively the honor 
which cometh from God only— because either of 
their failure in not exercising the proper faith in the 
ransom, or because of their failure to exercise the 
proper consecration,— devotion of their lives to the 
Lord's service. 

It is to this priestly class that the Golden Text is 
applicable. Their thankfulness to the Lord for his 
mercies and blessings leads them to count not their 
lives dear unto themselves, but to lay down their lives 
willingly in his service. Their hearts are filled with 
praise, because, having made consecration of themselves, 
and having entered thus the courts of the 
Lord to be seated with Christ in heavenly conditions, 
the heavenly light and food supplied them 
enables them to rejoice exceedingly even in 
tribulation, even in matters which otherwise, 



according to the flesh, without the strength 

and enlightenment of the truth, would discourage 

them and cause them fear. Because they 

have entered into this fellowship with the Lord in his 

sufferings, with his spirit of appreciation, therefore 

they may be joyful even in the house of their pilgrimage 

—and when the pilgrimage of the present life 

is ended, and as new creatures they shall pass beyond 

the vail, there shall be fulness of joy for them as 

they enter into the joys of their Lord in the full and 

complete sense— made like him, seeing him as he is, 

and sharing his glory. 



R3054 : page 237 

NADAB AND ABIHU CUT OFF. 

-LEV. 10:1-11. -AUGUST 10.- 

Golden Text.— "Let us watch and be sober."— I Thess. 5:6. 

ALTHOUGH not directly so stated, there is 
sufficient ground for the inference that the 
sin for which Nadab and Abihu were smitten 
by the Lord, was committed while they were 
under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The basis 
for this inference is that immediately following the 
description of their wrong doing and its punishment 
comes the Lord's injunction,— "Do not drink wine 
nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when 
ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die; 
...that ye may put difference between holy and 
unholy, and between unclean and clean."— Vs. 9,10. 

The two young men smitten in the prime of life, 
were Aaron's oldest sons; there were two younger 
brothers. All had just been consecrated to the 
priesthood, under their father Aaron as the chief 
priest, by the direction of their uncle Moses, carrying 
out the divine arrangement. With many advantages 
every way, they had corresponding responsibilities, 
as well as grand prospects for the future, all of which 

R3055 : page 237 

were destroyed because of their lack of reverence for 
the Lord— their carelessness respecting his regulations, 
and the vows which they had just taken upon 
themselves as his special servants. Their experience 
furnishes an excellent temperance lesson. How many 
others in highly favored situations in life have come 
to disrespect the Almighty's arrangements through 
the use of intoxicating liquors!— how many have 
similarly blighted their prospects in life, hastened 
their death, and brought sorrow upon their kindred! 



The Chicago Tribune has collected statistics respecting 
the murders in the United States, between 
the years 1891 and 1901, and declares that 53,000 of 
these murders resulted more or less directly from the 
use of intoxicating liquors. The statistics of the State 
of Massachusetts for the year 1895 show that over 
ninety-six percent of those convicted for crime 
in that State, were users of strong drinks. In 1899 
the New Voice obtained the testimony of one thousand 
jailors (whose terms of office would aggregate more 
than six thousand years of experience), and their returns 
showed that seventy-two percent of the 
criminals then in jails under their charge, were 
brought there by drink. The American Grocer using 
government statistics (April 1901) figures the total 
bill of this country for liquid refreshments during the 
year at $1,228,674,925. And of this amount it figures 
that alcoholic liquors cost $1,059,563,787,— the remainder 
representing the sum spent for tea, cocoa, 
coffee, soda water and the like. Some one has calculated 
that the money spent for alcoholic liquor 
would equal a pile of silver dollars 1754 miles high; 
and the Christian Observer remarks, "It would take 
ten men with scoop shovels to throw away money as 
fast as we are wasting it for grog." 

In the presence of such a stupendous evil, blighting 
earthly prospects for so many, depriving so many 
of the reasonable comforts and necessities of life, 
disqualifying so many for thoughts and deeds of 
purity and goodness, and accomplishing instead so 
much misery and sorrow, what Christian could feel 
interested in the traffic? What Christian would not 
be willing to forego personal rights and liberties in 
connection with this terrible adversary of the race 
and rejoice in any self-denials it might cause him, 
even though he might feel himself stronger than the 
majority of men, and thoroughly capable of withstanding 
its insidious attacks and undermining tendencies 
as respects character, etc? It is not for us 
at the present time to make "sumptuary laws" 
for the world, nor in any manner to attempt 
to rule the world; but as surely as we believe 
that when the Lord's Kingdom shall have fully 
come it will thoroughly chain up this monster evil, as 
one of the most powerful of Satan's agencies, just so 
surely should all who so believe show to others by 
precept and example their opposition to this curse. 

There is, however, a deeper lesson for us in the 
experiences of the two priests under consideration. 
As they were members of the tribe of Levi, so those 
whom they typified would be members of the "household 
of faith." As they went further than this and 
consecrated to the priesthood and were truly and 
properly accepted of the Lord as priests, their antitypes 

R3055 : page 238 



must be persons, classes, who have come under 

the terms of the "royal priesthood" in the full, proper 

sense of the word. They do not represent merely 

nominal Christians— merely such as imagine themselves 

consecrated to the Lord through a misunderstanding, 

as is the case with many in the nominal 

church of today: they represent persons, classes, in 

the true, consecrated Church of the Lord. 

The Scriptural account does not specify respecting 
the wrong doing of Nadab and Abihu. The expression 
"strange fire" does not clearly indicate to us 
whether their wrong doing consisted in using an incense 
other than the kind that the Lord had prescribed, 
or whether they used it at the wrong time, 
or in a wrong place, or whether the fire which enkindled 
the incense was taken from some other place 
than the altar, as the Lord had prescribed, or whether 
their incense was repulsive to the Lord because the 
offerers were in a state of intoxication— possessed of 
a wrong spirit. The latter, as we have suggested, 
seems to be implied in the declaration of the 10th verse 
respecting holy and unholy, clean and unclean 
conditions of approaching the Lord. 

The great lesson here for the royal priesthood 
is not so much in respect to intoxicating liquors, as 
in respect to a wrong spirit and unclean condition of 
mind and heart in approaching the Lord. We are 
bound to suppose that those who have made a consecration 
to the Lord and are seeking to "cleanse 
themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 
perfecting holiness in the fear of God." (2 Cor. 7:1), 
will not be guilty of literal intoxication. Those who 
have received to any degree the spirit of the truth 
and have come to appreciate in any measure the 
spirit of a sound mind, surely realize that in our soberest 
and most favorable condition, our minds are 
none too sound;— they realize that continually the 
Lord's people have need of his assisting grace supporting 
their imperfect judgments, and they could not 
ask for such grace to help were they not also using 
their best endeavors to preserve and exercise what 
sense they have naturally. 

The lesson for the consecrated, therefore, is in accord 
with what the Apostle has written, "Let us 
therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short 
of it." (Heb. 4:1.) Our consecration through faith in 
the Lord has brought us under the anointing of the 
holy spirit, has permitted us to enter into the holy and 
to enjoy the privileges and favors of those "deep 
things of God" which none can see or appreciate 
without the anointing of the spirit. Outsiders— 
not of the consecrated and accepted class, not of the 
royal priesthood, the peculiar people, and who therefore 
have no privilege in the way of offering incense 



to the Lord, have no such opportunities as we of offending 

the Lord by offering him unacceptable 

sacrifices,— unacceptable prayers, unacceptable services. 

As we do not know in which way these two 

sons of Aaron offended against the divine arrangement 

or whether they both offended alike, we may 

lay to ourselves, as the antitypical priesthood, lessons 

all along the line. 

(1) When we approach the Lord we are not to 

come to him under the influence of an evil spirit, intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world or of Babylon, 
by whose wine it is declared all the nations have been 
made drunken.— Rev. 14:8; 18:3. 

(2) When we would approach the Lord even in 
a right spirit, we must make sure that we have the 
proper incense which he has stipulated will be acceptable 
to him, whose ingredients represent the 

perfections of our Lord Jesus reckonedly appropriated 
to us. 

(3) Additionally we must be sure that we do 
not get fire for our incense from any other quarter 
than from the altar— consecrated fire or zeal, sanctified 
by the merit of our Lord's sacrifice. 

In "Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices" 
we have offered the suggestion that these two 
priests possibly represent two different classes in the 
church— two classes amongst those who have made 
consecration to the royal priesthood and have been 
accepted, both of which classes will fall from the 
priesthood. We have suggested that one may represent 
the class who will die the Second Death (Heb. 6:4-6; 
10:26,27) and that the other may represent 
the class who lose their membership in the royal 
priesthood because of an insufficiency of zeal to make 
their calling and election sure; but who, nevertheless, 
are at heart loyal to God and will be "saved so as by 
fire," through great tribulation. (Rev. 7:14.) True 
there is nothing in the type to indicate any difference 
between these two, nothing to indicate any hope in 
the future for either of them. We think it not unreasonable, 
however, to surmise that the type merely 
shows that both men lost their standing in the 
priestly company by reason of failure to rightly appreciate 
their privileges. We are assured that all 
these matters are typical, yet we find it difficult to suppose 
this type to mean that one-half of all who consecrate 
to the Lord as members of the royal priesthood, 
will suffer the Second Death. Yet this would seem 
to be the only alternative interpretation, if we reject 
the thought that the two men merely represented 
the two classes who lose the priesthood without indicating 
their proportion as respects the whole. The 
two should have a meaning;— either as one half of the 
whole or as two classes. We accept the latter view; 
because the Scriptures clearly show two classes who 
will lose the royal priesthood, and because the other 



proposition, that they represented one-half of the 
consecrated lost in Second Death, seems to us wholly 
untenable. 

In any event the lesson to those who desire to be 
faithful to their privileges, is a strong one, having 
made our consecration to the Lord, having received 
of his anointing, let us seek carefully to "make our 
calling and our election sure" to the blessings and 
privileges of the future— as the dispensers of divine 
bounties to mankind in general, in the Millennial 
Kingdom, associated with our Lord. Let us take all 
the lessons out of this that we can, as respects due 
reverence to him with whom we have to do, and due 
appreciation of the proper spirit, the proper incense 

R3055 : page 239 

and the proper zeal to be used in coming before the 
Lord, that we may abide in his love and favor. 

MISCONCEPTIONS CAUSE DIFFICULTIES TO MANY. 

Those who do not see with us the great divine 
plan of the ages, with its wonderful opportunities of 
the future for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth;— who do not see with us that the present age 
is merely for the selection of the royal priesthood for 
the future work of glory and blessing of mankind;— 
who do not see with us that the Jewish system with its 
priesthood, sacrifices, incense, etc., etc., were merely 
types or shadows of the higher things in God's plan 
now being developed;— such are apt to look at the 
statements of this lesson with astonishment; and are 
apt to feel that God acted in a very arbitrary manner 
toward these two priests in striking them down in 
death, because of some failure to approach him in 
the prescribed manner. They fail to see that the Lord 

R3056 : page 239 

was instituting types which must be carried out to the 
very letter, and which must illustrate the exactness 
of his dealings with the "royal priesthood." 

Looking at the matter in a wrong light, they not 
only see the two men suddenly deprived of life, but 
they reason that if God's anger thus destroyed them 
—then, the very next moment, according to their 
theory, they would appear at God's bar for their 
eternal sentence; and since they could not believe 
that the two men who were unfit to live amongst men 
were any more fit to live in heaven, they feel obliged 
to conclude, according to their theory, that the Lord 
not only suddenly smote them down as respects their 
earthly life, but additionally turned them over for an 
eternity of torture at the hands of devils. Those 
who really believe this misrepresentation of the divine 



plan must necessarily be unfavorably influenced 
by it in their own dealings with their children, their 
neighbors, etc.,— their ideas of justice and of love, 
etc., must necessarily be blunted by such misconceptions 
of the divine character and procedure. 

To our understanding of the teachings of the 
Lord's Word, on the contrary, there would be no 
such difficulty as this. Nadab and Abihu were men, 
members of the fallen race, all of whom are under 
sentence of death. They had been merely reckonedly, 
not actually, justified, because "the blood of bulls 
and goats could never take away sin." They were, 
therefore, although typically occupying the place of 
priests, not really different from the remainder of 
the world— for they had received no release from the 
Adamic condemnation. Hence, since their position 
and all were typical, so also their death under the 
circumstances could mean no greater loss to them 
than death under other circumstances would mean 
to their fellows— they merely went into the tomb a 
little sooner than they otherwise would have done. 
But long centuries after their death and the death of 
their fellows,— better and worse,— in God's appointed 
time, the great antitypical sin-offering appeared; 
—and the great antitypical Priest, offered the great 
sacrifice for sins accomplished at Calvary, and the 
whole world was brought back from the sentence of 
sin and death— including Nadab and Abihu, Aaron 
and Moses, and all the remainder of our race,— including 
also us who were not yet born. 

The Atonement day sacrifices begun by our Lord 
and Redeemer, continue; and we, his called ones of 
this Gospel age, are privileged to participate in the 
sacrificing work with our great High Priest, as the 
sons of Aaron participated with their father. Soon 
the entire work of sacrificing will be at an end; soon 
the great High Priest will finish the work of making 
an atonement, and will then, as did the priest in the 
type, come out to the altar and lift up his hands and 
bless all the people— the dead and dying world. The 
day of blessing will be a long one, because "a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years." It will be 
quite sufficient to accomplish the purposes intended, 
of lifting up, helping, strengthening, blessing, bringing 
to full restitution, all who will come into harmony 
with the Father. In that day Nadab and Abihu 
with others of mankind, who have done better and 
who have done worse, will be on trial before the judgment 
seat of Christ,— the Church, the royal priesthood, 
being associated with Him in the judgment. 
(I Cor. 6:2.) In proportion as any have had favorable 
opportunities and used them unfavorably, in 
similar proportion have they degraded themselves so 
that they will proportionately experience stripes and 
difficulties in getting started upon the great "highway 
of holiness," which will then be opened up for 



the whole world of mankind,— that they may return 
thereon to the Lord and to eternal life; and only 
those who fail to come back under such gracious 
opportunities, into full harmony with the gracious 
divine plan, will be destroyed irrevocably in the Second 
Death. 

"LET US WATCH AND BE SOBER." 

The Apostle's exhortation in our Golden Text is 
well worthy of being continually borne in mind by 
all who would make their calling and election sure 
to a place in the glorious priesthood of the future— 
"Let us watch and be sober." Let us watch in the 
sense of taking careful notice of all the directions 
which the Lord our God has given us, respecting 
what would not be acceptable service to him. Let 
us watch ourselves, striving to walk as nearly as 
possible in the footsteps of the great High Priest, 
who was, we are sure, right and acceptable to the 
Father in every particular. Let us be sober— not 
only not literally intoxicated with ardent spirits, but 
let us not be intoxicated with "the spirit of the 
world," or the spirit of Babylon, churchianity. Let 
us have the spirit of Christ, the spirit of a sound mind, 
the spirit of meekness, the spirit of gentleness, the 
spirit of love for God, for our fellows, and for all men, 
seeking as we have opportunity, to do them good. 
Let us be sober in the sense that we will not be 
frivolous; that while happy, joyous in the Lord, free 
from the anxious cares that are upon many others 
through misapprehension of our Father's character 
and plan, we may, nevertheless, be sober in the sense 
of earnest, appreciative of present opportunities and 
privileges in connection with the Lord's service;— 
not thoughtlessly negligent, letting opportunities and 
privileges slip through our hands to be afterwards 
regretted. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 