A Good-bye to War
PEOPLE everywhere have long dreamed of a world without war. It is a dream that remains unfulfilled. As we saw in the preceding article, many believe that global peace can come only through world government, a government that would impartially represent all the peoples of earth. Most realize, however, that human rulers will never willingly give up their sovereignty to a government that represents everyone on earth. Does this mean that world government is impossible?
It might seem so. Yet, Bible prophecy shows that a government ruling over all the earth will soon bring peace to the earth. This will not come because of human negotiation or through international agreements. The prophet Daniel was inspired to write: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin.”—Daniel 2:44.
It is the same Kingdom that Jesus told his followers to pray for in the prayer known by millions as the Lord’s Prayer, or the Our Father. Possibly you are familiar with that prayer, found in the Bible at Matthew 6:9, 10. Part of it makes this appeal to God: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” God will answer that prayer. Soon that Kingdom will “come” to carry out God’s will for the earth. God’s will involves transforming the globe into a paradise of peace.
A Realistic Vision of Global Peace
Is there any reason to believe that God’s Kingdom will do a better job than human governments have? Consider eight features of God’s Kingdom that will ensure lasting peace for all in its domain.
1. The Kingdom will have as its God-appointed leader the glorified Jesus Christ, the “Prince of Peace.” (Isaiah 9:6) While on earth, Jesus showed that his servants do not arm themselves for physical warfare. He said to Peter: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take the sword will perish by the sword.”—Matthew 26:52.
2. The Kingdom will truly be a world government. Concerning the authority given to Jesus, Daniel foretold: “To him there were given rulership and dignity and kingdom, that the peoples, national groups and languages should all serve even him.”—Daniel 7:14.
3. The Kingdom will represent all peoples. Jesus will have corulers who come “out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation,” and they will “rule as kings over the earth.”—Revelation 5:9, 10.
4. God’s Kingdom will bring to an end all human governments, which oppose its authority. “The kingdom . . . will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
5. The peoples of earth will be governed by international law. Isaiah prophesied of that time, saying: “Out of Zion law will go forth, and the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem. And he will certainly render judgment among the nations and set matters straight respecting many peoples.”—Isaiah 2:3, 4.
6. Subjects of the Kingdom will learn the ways of peace. Isaiah continued: “And they will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”—Isaiah 2:4.
7. Lovers of violence will be swept away. “Jehovah himself examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one, and anyone loving violence His soul certainly hates. He will rain down upon the wicked ones traps, fire and sulphur and a scorching wind, as the portion of their cup.”—Psalm 11:5, 6.
8. Weapons will be eliminated. “Come, you people, behold the activities of Jehovah, how he has set astonishing events on the earth. He is making wars to cease to the extremity of the earth. The bow he breaks apart and does cut the spear in pieces; the wagons he burns in the fire.”—Psalm 46:8, 9.
Putting Faith in God’s Promises—Why and How?
The Bible gives many more details about God’s Kingdom. For example, it shows who will join Jesus Christ in governing earth’s affairs. It further tells how they are selected and what qualifications they must meet. The Bible also tells how the Kingdom will administer the earth’s resources to promote prosperity and happiness among all the peoples of the earth, eliminating the envy and greed that have so often led to conflict.
Are such prophecies to be believed? Jehovah himself has stated: “My word that goes forth from my mouth . . . will not return to me without results, but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted, and it will have certain success in that for which I have sent it.” (Isaiah 55:11) This statement is much more than an assurance that God keeps his promises. Jehovah is the Almighty, so he has the power to establish global peace. There is nothing beyond his understanding; therefore, he has the wisdom to maintain peace. (Isaiah 40:13, 14) Moreover, Jehovah is the very personification of love, so no one in the universe has a greater desire to bring world peace.—1 John 4:8.
Of course, it requires faith to believe in God’s promises. Faith is based on knowledge and is cultivated through the study of God’s Word, the Bible. (Philippians 1:9, 10) As we learn of God’s personality and purposes, the reality of God’s Kingdom becomes evident. Yes, war will be abolished, not through the efforts of humans, but by means of a glorious world government with divine backing, God’s Kingdom.
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
Under God’s Kingdom, subjects will learn peace, and weapons will be eliminated

