From Our Readers
Jesus’ Beard  In your series “Jesus—What Did He Really Look Like? What Is He Now?” (December 8, 1998), your illustrations suggest that Jesus disobeyed the law stated at Leviticus 19:27: “You must not cut your sidelocks short around, and you must not destroy the extremity of your beard.” Why don’t your illustrations depict him with uncut sidelocks?
C. S., England
This law was evidently given to prevent the Jews from trimming their beards or hair in a way that would imitate certain pagan practices. However, God’s command did not mean that the Jews could not trim their beards or facial hair at all. The account at 2 Samuel 19:24 indicates that Jewish men normally “attended to,” or trimmed, their facial hair. To what extent they did so likely depended on the prevailing custom. Archaeological evidence indicates that the Jews wore a variety of beard styles over the centuries. So our artistic representations of Jesus with a short, manicured beard and trimmed sidelocks are in harmony with the evidence.—ED.
Asteroid Collision  In the issue of January 22, 1999, there was an article entitled “Asteroids, Comets, and the Earth—On a Collision Course?” Thank you very much for this article. It provided a credible explanation of the potential threats to earth. Thanks to Jehovah, no disasters have taken place. I appreciated the straightforwardness and honesty of the article.
O. R., Finland
Eating Disorders  You literally saved my life with the January 22, 1999, series, “What Is Behind Eating Disorders?” I had a severe problem along those lines 20 years ago. Then, for the past ten years or so, I maintained a normal weight. Recently, though, I suffered from depression and lost ten pounds [5 kg] in 16 days. I was beginning to choke every time I took a bite of food. I was really scared about where I was heading. The articles helped me to think things through and made me determined to get proper nutrition. Thank you from the bottom of my heart for your caring and loving articles.
P. M., United States
When I read these articles, tears welled up. It seemed as if they were written just for me. They touched my heart and helped me to understand that if I continue relying on Jehovah, I will recuperate from this illness.
G. G., Puerto Rico
I am 14 years old and want to say a big thank-you for the articles on eating disorders. I was suffering from the early stages of bulimia. I did not know what to do, since even books dealing with the problem did not help me. My parents noticed my situation and spoke with me about the articles. Thanks a lot.
N. H., Germany
About a year and a half ago, I suffered from bulimia. I thought I was fat, even though I wasn’t overweight at all. I knew that bingeing and purging were wrong, but I could not stop. With Jehovah’s help and with encouragement from close friends, I got better. These articles have really helped me. I see that I am not the only one who has had these problems.
M. R., England
I studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses for two years but stopped because of depression. I suffer from bulimia. Since I am under constant medical care, I intend to distribute this magazine among my doctors and fellow patients. I hope to start studying the Bible again.
V. K., Czech Republic

