VOL. XXV. JUNE 1, 1904. No. 11. 

CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

Denominational Union is the Cry 163 

A Moderator Awakening Late 164 

The Jonah Story Corroborated 164 

"Preach the Word." 165 

The Trend of Socialism 165 

En Route to Los Angeles 165 

Enoch, Elijah and the Sentence 166 

Importance of Jesus' Resurrection 167 

"What of the Night?" (Poem) 173 

The Life of Christ in Review 173 

Cheering Words from Australia 174 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES AND TERMS FREE. 



OUR MOTTO STOCK EXHAUSTED. 



We are unable to supply more mottoes until our stock 
is replenished. We are ordering a new lot from Great 
Britain, which will be in place about November. Hold 
your orders until further announcement. 

SUNDAY DISCOURSES IN PITTSBURGH GAZETTE. 

It is to permit a general use of these reports that we 
have arranged for quantities of them at the low rates quoted 
in our recent issue, which for the convenience of all we 
here repeat. We can supply you the Pittsburgh Gazette 
daily (except Sunday) for: 

A year (313 issues) postpaid, for $2.25 

Six months (156 issues) postpaid, for 1.15 

Three months (78 issues) postpaid, for 60 

Anyone thus a regular subscriber for the daily Gazette 
is privileged to receive extra copies of Pastor C. T. Russell's 
weekly sermons at the following rates:— 

Seven copies every Monday for 10 weeks, $1.00 

Fifteen ' 10 " 2.00 

Fifty ' 10 " 5.00 

For 20 or 30 or 40 weeks, or for 100 or 200 or 500 
copies at proportionate rates. 



R3372 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DENOMINATIONAL UNION IS THE CRY. 



THE following from the Toronto (Canada) News 

well illustrates the trend of public opinion 

throughout Protestant Christendom. The spirit 

of union, or confederacy, is in the very air, as foretold 

by the prophet, who says: "Say ye not, A confederacy, 

to all them to whom this people shall say, 

A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be 

afraid."— Isa. 8:12. 

Fear, a realization of weakness, is at the bottom 
of this desire for union at the expense of the Truth. 
A union would give prestige to doctrines which cannot 
be sustained either by reason or Scripture. A 
union would give greater political power, and lead 
ultimately to the suppression of the Truth as unsettling 
and antagonistic to the peace of error and errorists. But 
the Truth has naught to fear, and the Truth people 
see clearly that only the Truth can produce that real 
heart-union which the Lord referred to in his prayer 
for his people— "that they all may be one." Another 
part of our Lord's petition was, "Sanctify them 
through thy Truth." Wherever the sanctifying of 
the Truth goes, there true union goes, proportionately. 



Not worldly union, however; not denominational 

union, for the Truth separates from the 

world and from denominationalism and unites all developed 

children of the Truth to each other, by uniting 

each to the Head— our Lord. Such are taught 

of God; such hear their Head; such are thus made 

one in Him and in his Truth. 

We quote the popular and erroneous view of 
the question, as follows:— 

"One of the most encouraging features of the 
present religious condition of the world is the increasing 
prevalence of a desire for Christian union. The 
arguments in favor of union are numerous and 
weighty. But the most powerful of them all— the 
consideration that should be kept in the forefront of 
the whole discussion— is that the object aimed at is 
very dear to the heart of Christ himself. 

"The union that most Christians desire is not a 
vague, unsubstantial thing, but a solid, practical reality 
—not a mere spiritual unity of aim and motive, 
but an external, visible union, which will remove the 
reproach of unseemly rivalry that Protestant Christianity 
has too long been compelled to bear. Such an 
organic union constitutes the only real answer to the 
great intercessory prayer of our blessed Lord— the 
solemnly suggestive petition offered up amid the 
deepening shadows of the last night of his earthly 
ministry: 'That they all may be one, as thou, 
Father, art in me and I in thee; that they also may 
be one in us; that the world may believe that thou 
hast sent me.' How much conviction of the divine 
mission of Christ is likely to be aroused in the heart 
of the world by the sight of the scores of rival sects 
into which the Church of Christ has been split up? 

"Of course, the situation is improving. In our 
own country, nearly thirty years ago, Presbyterians 
led the way in the matter of closing up their denominational 
ranks, and consolidating their forces for the 
performance of their common work; and the example 
thus set was followed a few years later by the Methodists. 
The last quarter of a century has witnessed, 
too, a most gratifying advance in inter-denominational 
fellowship. Ancient asperities are being softened; 
denominational bigotry is slowly disappearing; 
in Christian utterances the irenic is being substituted 
for the polemic; mutual misunderstandings and recriminations 
are giving place to mutual appreciations 
and commendations, and from almost every branch of 
the divided Church of Christ many a 'God speed 
you' is heard, addressed to Christian brethren of 
other communions. All this the world can see, and 
the force of all this the world can hardly fail to feel. 

"But how immeasurably more impressive would be 
the spectacle of one magnificent united Church! How 
irresistible would be the appeal to the world's conscience, 
if all the scattered companies of the Lord's 



R3372 : page 164 

army were united in one grand battalion, 'endeavoring 
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace!' 

"In so far as the Congregational, Methodist and 
Presbyterian Churches are concerned, this desirable 
consummation seems to be within measurable distance, 
the question of their corporate union having now 
come to be a question of practical church politics." 



Sentiment in the United States is similar, as 
voiced by the New York Independent, as follows: 

"Federation is one of the crying needs of our 
Protestant Churches. Some of our denominations in 
their national meetings have pronounced in favor of 
it. It would maintain the separate entity of denominations 
that are not ready to consolidate, and yet 
would be an evidence to the world of their essential 
and spiritual unity. We understand that it ought to 

R3373 : page 164 

be the business of such an organization as the National 

Federation of Churches to seek such a federation of 

denominations. It might be invidious for any one 

denomination to take the lead in inviting a conference 

for federation, for we have in this country no one 

confessedly preeminent denomination, as they have 

in England. But this Federation of Churches, which 

has hitherto labored to secure fellowship in labor in 

cities and towns, might well send a proposal to the 

national body of every Protestant denomination in 

the country, asking it to appoint representatives to 

meet in Washington in 1906— which will give time— 

with a view to the establishment of a federate union 

of the entire body of churches. If this existing Federation 

of Churches does not thus present the matter 

generally, why should not the various national conferences, 

conventions, assemblies, synods and councils 

independently make the proposition and appoint committees? 

We commend this proposition to those of 

every denomination who are interested in the visible 

unity of the Christian Church." 

A MODERATOR AWAKENING LATE. 



"New York, May 4.— 'Look at Andover! What 
honest man can look at that institution and not be 
ashamed?' said Rev. Dr. Robert Russell Booth, moderator 
of the Presbyterian General Assembly and 



pastor emeritus of Rutger's Presbyterian Church, 
speaking at the Bible League in the Marble Collegiate 
Course to-day. He was participating in a discussion 
'On the Practical Consequences of the Attack on the 
Bible.' 

'"What honest man can see endowments saved by 
the toil of the believing and the earnest used in the 
propaganda of those who say that what is recorded in 
the Bible is untrue?' continued Dr. Booth, and there 
were cries of 'amen' from the pews. 

'"For nineteen centuries the Christian Church 
has been the Church persecuted and the Church militant,' 
declared the speaker. 'Now we must fight 
treason in our very midst. Men are using their positions 
in our pulpits and chairs of learning to disseminate 
treason. Church collections, salaries, endowments 
are being used to support those who talk Higher 
Criticism and to spread heresies. 

'"A minister in this city, as prominent as there is 
in the land, reads the Apostles' creed: 'Jesus Christ, 
who, they say, was born of the Virgin Mary. 

'"Jesus, who, they say, was raised after the third 
day.' 

'"No wonder men find excuse for easy virtue 
when ministers, ordained of God, insert "they say" in 
the Apostles' creed. We are living in a time of financial 
immorality according to old fashioned men. There 
has come a change over our ministers which makes people 
suspicious of their honesty. 

"If this continues, if the Word of God as given 
to our fathers is whittled away by the ministers of 
our Protestant denominations, the time must come 
when to those always faithful to God there will be 
but one refuge and that will be the Roman Catholic 
Church, which, whatever it has added to the Word, 
has taken nothing from it. 

'"We of this league expect that Archbishop 
Farley and Bishop Potter will join in this movement, 
if not by enrollment, in heart and spirit. 

"It is an imaginative and fictitious concensus of 
opinion, for which the journalists are to blame, that 
scholarship is all on the side of the critics. I say that 
the ablest scholars will line up on our side, five to 
one.'" 



The Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly 
is just awakening to the fact that the Higher 
Critics have possession of the so-called religious colleges 
and seminaries. The gentleman will ere long 
discover that the "prominent" religious people have 
almost unanimously forsaken the Bible as an inspired 
work and now use it merely as a text-book, useful 
because of its influence with the "common people" 
—but not inspired. Now is the time for us to find 



those not yet contaminated and assist them to the 

Truth, which alone will show the Bible to be both inspired 

and reasonable. 

THE JONAH STORY CORROBORATED. 



The progress of the pulpit above that of the pew 
—away from the Bible and into infidelity— is well illustrated 
by articles recently published side by side in a 
secular journal. One of the articles quoted one of the 
most prominent and venerable ministers of our day- 
Rev. Lyman Abbott, D.D.— as denying the Bible story 
of Jonah, quoted as fact by our Lord. (Luke 1 1:30.) 
Dr. Abbott said: "I do not believe that the great 
fish swallowed Jonah, because there is nothing to attest 
the story," etc. 

The reverse side of the question is an account of 
a Bible class teacher's discussion of the same subject 
with his large class of adults. The teacher, a prominent 
business man of Pittsburgh, Mr. James I. 
Buchanan, averred his faith in the Jonah story. He 
said: "The Bible is sufficient evidence for me, but 
occasionally I get interested in comparing the miracles 
with modern phenomena which remain unexplained." 

R3373 : page 165 

Then he drew the attention of his class to 
the account of a seaman's similar experience during a 
whaling voyage, reported in the public press about 
eight years ago and referred to in these columns. 

The published account told how the whale's nose 
broke the small boat to splinters, and how one of its 
occupants was swallowed. Subsequently the whale was 
killed and the man found unconscious in its stomach. 
Later he told that he could breathe there, but found 
it intolerably hot. His skin was very red, probably 
the result of the action of the acids of the whale's 
stomach. In other words he was in process of 
digestion. 

The story is so similar to that of Jonah as to be 
well worth remembering, and we were specially interested 
in some verifications which Mr. Buchanan related 
to the reporter. He said: 

"Not long after that George Jarvie, a cousin, 
and a Scotch sailing master, happened to be a visitor at 
my home. One day I mentioned the New Zealand 
whale story. 

"He said he had read the story, had heard it 
among the seamen of the islands, and the story was 
generally believed and vouched for among the seafaring 
men. He explained to me how the sailors of 
that region considered the fish story. His version 
tallied with that of the newspaper clipping, which Mr. 



Jarvie had never read. 

"The fish prepared for Jonah's residence was apparently 
not common in Jonah's time, because no 
name is given for the fish. Almost a thousand years 
later someone conceived it was a whale that had swallowed 
Jonah." 

"Mr. Buchanan said that his sister, who had visited 
the New Zealand islands, had also been told the 
modern whale story, as she had heard it from people 
who claimed to know the sailor who had been swallowed 
by the whale and men who had served on the 
ship at that time." 

"PREACH THE WORD." 



"The true pastor, being a messenger of Jehovah 
of Hosts, and not a messenger of Byron, Milton or 
Shakespeare, is bound by the most solemn of all his 
obligations to preach 'Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.' 
The gospel preacher is a minister of the New 
Testament, which became of force on the death of the 
testator, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In this 
Testament is recorded the following statement of our 
Savior: 'The words that I speak unto you, they are 
spirit, and they are life.' This cannot be truthfully 
said of science, or of popular literature, or of the 
writings of the wisest men not inspired of God. In 
His command to His disciples to teach all nations, 
Christ's language is specific: 'Teaching them to 
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded 
you.' No mention is made of human doctrines, and 
no authority given for teaching them. 'The prophet 
that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that 
hath My Word, let him speak My Word faithfully. 
What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord. Is 
not My Word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like 
a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?' The 
Word of God is 'the sword of the Spirit' One armed 
with this sword for destroying evil is required to use 
it. A sword needs no stronger proof of what it is 
than the effects of its use. No learned argument is 
necessary to prove that a hammer is a hammer. Use 
it, and it proves itself. Fire proves its own character 
when applied. God's Word is 'like as fire.' It 
cleanses away evil. 'Preach the Word.' A pastor 
who substitutes anything else for the faithful preaching 
of God's Word— and this is all he is authorized 
by Christ to preach— is trifling with the eternal destinies 
of men, and bringing guilt upon himself. The 
writer has in recent months heard much chaff in sermons, 
and noticed a conspicuous absence of the 'one 
thing needful.' It is the holy Spirit who commands, 
'Preach the Word.'"— The Interior. 



It is not often that such an item as the above can 
be clipped from the "Religious Press." We rejoice to 
find it and to commend it. 

THE TREND OF SOCIALISM. 



"We openly war against God, because he is the 
greatest evil in the world."— Schall, German Socialist 
leader. 

"It is our duty as socialists to root out the faith 
in God with all our might, nor is anyone worthy of 
the name who does not consecrate himself to the 
spread of atheism."— Liebknecht, German Socialist 
leader. 

"We have simply done with God."— Engels, 
German Socialist leader. 

Bebel, another prominent socialist, perhaps the 
greatest living authority on the subject, leaves "heaven 
to the angels and the sparrows." The same 
authority confessed that "Christianity and socialism 
stand toward each other as fire and water." 

"Modern socialism is without religion and its 
tendency is atheistic."— Henry George.— Houston 
Chronicle. 



R3374 : page 165 

EN ROUTE TO LOS ANGELES. 

ABOUT twenty of the Bible House family accompanied 
us to the Pittsburgh depot on our 
departure on April 28 for the Los Angeles 
Convention. As announced, we left in time to make 
four stops with the friends in Texas. We reached Dallas, 
Texas, on Saturday evening, and had a pleasant 
social gathering with the friends and a good rest before 
the Sunday, May 1st, services. 

The morning service was well attended— friends 
being present from many surrounding cities and villages. 
The first hour was devoted to praise and testimony 
and was very profitable, showing great progress 
since our last visit. One Brother testified that he was 
the only one at his place at the time of our last visit 
and that now thirteen were in attendance and rejoicing 
in the Truth. 

R3374 : page 166 

The Testimony meeting was followed by a fine discourse 
on Baptism by Brother Barton, and later several 



symbolized their consecration by water immersion. 

The principal session of the day was at 3 P.M., 
addressed by the Editor— the topic being, "To Hell 
and Back!— Who are There?— Hope for the Recovery 
of Many of Them," as published in the Gazette of 
May 2. The attendance was large. The house was 
crowded to the doors, about 700 being present, and 
about 500 were unable to gain admittance. There 
was close attention and a great demand for free literature 
at the close. 

The evening service was held in a smaller hall 
and was not advertised, but kept for the interested 
friends. Brother Russell spoke at that session from 
the words, "The Lord your God doth prove you, 
whether ye do love the Lord your God or no." 

Early on Monday, May 2d, we started for Austin, 
where we arrived at 6.30 P.M., and, after a good supper, 
met a very intelligent audience, one of whom reported 
that he had come 68 miles by wagon and then 
100 more by rail to attend the meeting and grasp the 
hand of the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN. The audience 
gave excellent attention, and we trust that some 
have been stimulated to a more earnest endeavor to 
follow the Lord and to study the divine plan. The 
friends of the Truth remained for a later meeting and 
some accompanied us to the train. 

Next morning found us at Houston, where we 
had a hearty welcome from the local Church and visiting 
friends from various quarters. The morning session 
was a Rally and Testimony meeting, while the 
afternoon service, addressed by the Editor, was composed 
chiefly of believers. The discourse was from 
the words, "Cast not away therefore your confidence, 
which hath great recompense of reward." 

The evening session was for the public and was 
well attended— about 1200 being present. The subject, 
"The Oath-Bound Covenant," received the closest 
attention. The literature was in great demand 
and the friends hope that the Truth has received a fresh 
impetus. We left by night train for San Antonio. 

Wednesday, May 4th, was devoted to a One-Day 
Convention at San Antonio. The morning session 
was addressed by Bro. Currie. The afternoon meeting, 
also for the Church, was addressed by Bro. Russell. 
We had some very enjoyable interchanges with 
the dear friends here also: our hearts flowed together 
as we communed one with another respecting our experiences 
and prospects. 

The evening session, for the public, was held in 
Beethoven Music Hall. It numbered about 1200 very 
intelligent people, who gave great attention and in 
various ways manifested deep interest. Our hope is 
that the Colporteurs there may find many grains of 
ripe "wheat." It is our experience that careful study 
of the literature is necessary to development. Talking 
and preaching are good to awaken interest, but 



reading is essential to development. 

We are writing while en route to Los Angeles, 
where we hope for a splendid season of fellowship with 
the household of faith. 



R3377 : page 166 

ENOCH, ELIJAH AND THE SENTENCE. 

THE answer to the following query may interest 
others than the inquirer:— 

"Since 'death passed upon all men,' because 
of Adam's sin; and since all had to be redeemed before 
they could escape from that death sentence, how 
came it that Enoch and Elijah escaped from it before 
the redemption-price was paid? 

We answer, that they did not escape, but were 
still under the sentence of death until the ransom was 
paid. The execution of the sentence was deferred in 
their cases, and their lives prolonged; but they would 
eventually have died had they not been redeemed. 
After Father Adam was sentenced he lived nearly a 
thousand years, but under his particular sentence he 
could not have lived more than a thousand years; because 
the sentence read, "In the day that thou eatest 
thereof, dying thou shalt die." And since "a day 
with the Lord is as a thousand years" (2 Pet. 3:8), 
his death was fixed to take place within that "day." 
But God left the way open to make types of Enoch and 

R3378 : page 166 

Elijah, and hence, so far as they and the remainder of 
the human family were concerned, no limit of time for 
the execution of the sentence was fixed. If, therefore, 
it pleased God to have it so, they might have continued 
to live for thousands of years, under the death 
sentence, without dying. In Elijah's case, although 
he was translated, it is not said that he did not die 
afterward. His translation made a type, as we have 
seen (MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II, Chapter viii.), 
and he may have died and been buried afterward, unknown 
to men, as was Moses.— Deut. 34:6. 

But with Enoch the case was different, as we are 
expressly told that he did not die. In his case, therefore, 
it is evident that the execution of the sentence 
was deferred, but there is no evidence that it was annulled. 
He, therefore, remained under that sentence 
of death until he was ransomed by our Lord's death. 
As a member of the fallen race, he was an imperfect 
man, and although redeemed, and although a restitution 
to human perfection is provided for him in the 
divine plan, we are not certain that he is yet a perfect 



R3378 : page 167 

man. For the Apostle seems to teach that none of 

those whose faithfulness was attested before the Gospel 

call was made will be made perfect until after Christ 

and his bride are made perfect. He says (Heb. 1 1:39,40), 

after enumerating many of the ancient worthies, 

Enoch included, verse 5, "These all, having obtained 

witness through faith, received not the promise [everlasting 

life, etc.], God having provided some better 

thing [priority of time as well as of honor and position] 

for us [the Gospel Church], that they [the 

ancient worthies] without us [apart from us] should 

not be MADE PERFECT." And since the Church, the 

body of Christ, has not yet been perfected in glory, 

it is but a reasonable inference that wherever Enoch is 

and however happy and comfortable he may be, he is 

not yet made a perfect man, and will not be until all 

the members of the body of Christ have first been 

made perfect in the divine nature. 

As to where God took Enoch, we may not know, 
since God has not revealed that. Should we speculate 
as to whether God took him to some other world, and 
for what purpose, it would be but an idle speculation. 
We may not be wise above what is written. We may 
be certain, however, that Enoch did not go to heaven 
—the spiritual state or condition— for such is the record: 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven but he 
that came down from heaven— even the Son of man." 
(John 3:13.) Elijah is said to have ascended to heaven; 
but, from our Lord's statement above quoted, that 
must be understood to refer to the air— as, when it is 
said that "the fowl fly in the midst of heaven" it 
certainly cannot refer to the heavenly condition, which 
flesh and blood cannot enter nor even see without a 
change of nature, which change has been promised 
only to the Gospel Church. 

Understanding, as above shown, that Enoch was 
preserved from actual dissolution in death— although, 
already under that sentence, legally dead (Rom. 5:12; 
Matt. 8:22) until the ransom-price for all was paid by 
our Lord's death— we can see that there will now be 
no necessity for his dissolution, but that when the due 
time shall have come he may be fully and completely 
restored from even the measure of human imperfection 
he had inherited to full, perfect manhood. 

So, too, it will be with those of the world who will 
be living when the "times of restitution" are fully ushered 
in: it will not be necessary for them to go into 
the tomb. For although they are already legally dead, 
in that condemnation (or sentence) to "death passed 
upon all men," yet their penalty has also been legally 
met by another, Christ. He now holds the judgment 
against all, but graciously offers to cancel it entirely 
for each one who will accept restitution to life and 
perfection on the conditions of the New Covenant. 



R3374 : page 167 

IMPORTANCE OF JESUS' RESURRECTION. 

-MATT. 28:1-15. -JUNE 19.- 

Golden Text: "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first-fruits of them that slept."— I Cor. 15:20. 

FEW seem to realize the importance of our Lord's resurrection 

—its bearing upon the entire Gospel message. 

The Apostle indicates how much depended 

upon it when he wrote, "If Christ be not risen, then is 

our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.... 

They also who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished." 

(I Cor. 15:14,18.) The numbers of the Lord's professed 

followers, clergy and laity, who fail to appreciate the resurrection 

—who really do not believe in it— is very large. 

The number who really do believe in it is very small. The 

majority, under the teachings which have come down to 

us from the dark ages, fail entirely to realize that death 

means a cessation of life, and, as the Scriptures declare, 

"In that very day their thoughts perish." On the contrary, 

the masses of Christendom have come to believe 

that there is no death, that the dead are more alive than 

they ever were before they died. Applying this thought 

to our Lord, as well as to others, they do not appreciate 

the Scriptural declaration that "Christ died for our sins 

and rose again on the third day." They think of him as 

being alive during that time, and that it was merely his 

fleshly body that was inanimate in the tomb, and that the 

resurrection which occurred on the third day was not his 

resurrection to life, but merely the reanimation of his 

dead body. 

ERROR LEADS TO CONFUSION. 

Confused thus by the errors of medieval times, which 
were adopted by the reformers and are engrafted upon 
the minds of the civilized world today, the majority of 
Christian people cannot appreciate the Scriptural declarations 
respecting the importance of the resurrection of our 
Lord. Instead of believing the Apostle we have just 
quoted, to the effect that our faith is vain, our preaching 
vain, if Jesus did not rise from the dead, the majority of 
Christendom would be inclined to say just the reverse of 
this: "What difference would it make to our dead loved 
ones, what difference would it make to our preaching, 
what difference would it make to our faith, if Jesus' body 
had been left in the tomb?" Hence, only those who realize 
that the dead are dead— that they can have no conscious 
existence until awakened from the sleep of death- 
can really appreciate the importance of the resurrection. 



If Jesus had not been raised up from the dead, we 
have no basis for the preaching of the Gospel— for the 
Gospel message is that, by the grace of God, Jesus' death 

R3374 : page 168 

was the ransom price for father Adam and his posterity, 
and that because Jesus has thus paid the penalty for the 
whole race and redeemed all from the sentence of death 
by his own death, therefore, in due time, in God's appointed 
time, Adam and all of his posterity are to be released 
from the death sentence, and Christ as the great 
King is to establish his Kingdom in the world, and 
through it lift from mankind the burden, the penalty of 
death, and that then all who are in their graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of man and come forth to the glorious 
opportunities of the Millennial Kingdom— opportunities 
for reconciliation with God, and release from all the 
imperfections of the fall. To preach such a Gospel, with 
the fact before us that Jesus had died and without any 
proof of his resurrection, would be vain preaching, foolish 
preaching, deceiving the people. To believe such a Gospel, 
under such circumstances, would be to brand ourselves 
as foolish simpletons; and to have any hope that 
our dead friends could ever be benefited by a dead Christ 
would be absurd. 

Seeing, then, the importance of the Lord's resurrection, 
and how every feature of the Gospel is dependent 
upon this great fact, we understand why it was that the 
apostles, preaching forgiveness of sins and a future blessing, 
based everything upon the fact that Jesus not only 
died for our sins as our ransom price, but that he rose 
again for our justification, for our deliverance from the 
sentence, the guilt, the penalty, that is upon us as a human 
family— the death penalty. No wonder, then, that 
our heavenly Father arranged that we should have so explicit 
an account, so detailed a statement of everything 
pertaining to our Lord's resurrection; no wonder that the 
evangelists recorded matters with such minuteness, no wonder 
that in all the preaching of the apostles this great fundamental 
truth, which was the basis of their own faith toward 
God, was set before the Church as being all important. From 
this standpoint the present lesson must be of deep interest 
to all of the Lord's people for all time— until the outward 
manifestations of the Kingdom shall attest the things 
which the household of faith must now accept by faith 
built upon this testimony. 

HE AROSE ON THE THIRD DAY. 

We concur with the generally accepted— and, we believe, 
well-attested— view, that our Lord's crucifixion on the 
14th of Nisan, Jewish time, corresponded to the sixth day 
of the week, which we now call Friday. According to 
the records, our Lord died at three o'clock in the afternoon. 
Calvary was but a short distance from the gate of 



Jerusalem, the Temple and Pilate's residence. Hence, 

Nicodemus and Joseph, members of the Sanhedrin, evidently 

friendly to Jesus, but not sufficiently convinced of 

the truthfulness of his claims, or else not sufficiently courageous 

to lay down their lives with him, had not far to go 

after noting his death to secure consent for his burial; and 

the tomb in which it is supposed he was buried is within a 

stone's throw of the supposed location of the cross. It has 

been presumed, therefore, that our Lord was buried about 

four o'clock on the afternoon of that day, corresponding 

to our Friday. The next day, which we call Saturday, 

and which the Jews called the seventh day or Sabbath, 

began— Jewish time— Friday evening at sundown and 

ended on what we call Saturday at sundown, and our 

R3375 : page 168 

Lord's resurrection took place early in the morning of the 
first day of the week, which we now designate Sunday. 

Thus our Lord arose from the dead on the "third 
day." He was in death from three o'clock until six on 
Friday, all of the night following, all of the next day, 
Saturday, all of the next night, which, according to Jewish 
reckoning, was the forepart of the first day of the week. 
This would not make three days and three nights full, 
complete— seventy-two hours— but we believe it did 
constitute what the Lord meant when he declared that he 
would rise from the dead on the third day. Some, desirous 
of counting full three days and three nights, have 
been led to claim that our Lord was crucified on Thursday; 
but neither would this make three days and three 
nights— seventy-two hours. In order to have three full 
days and three full nights we would be obliged to suppose 
that the Lord was crucified on Wednesday. But all the 
testimony is against such a supposition and the weight of 
it decidedly in favor of Friday, and the counting of a part 
each of three days and nights as being what our Lord referred 
to. But if any one have a different view from ours 
on this subject, we will not contend with him: it is a 
trifling matter, of no importance whatever. Nothing was 
dependent upon the length of time our Lord would be 
dead. The important items were that he should actually 
die, that he should be dead long enough for it to be positively 
known that he was dead, and that he should rise 
from the dead. 

DESTROYING THE TEMPLE AND RAISING IT UP. 

When our Lord spoke in advance, saying, "Destroy 
this Temple and in three days I will raise it up"— "he 
spake of the Temple of his body." (John 2:21.) But 
of which body did he speak— of the flesh?— of the body 
which he took in order that he might be the sacrifice for 
sin, of the body which he consecrated to death? Was it 
that body that he meant would be raised on the third 
day? We answer that that body was not his temple, but 



merely his tabernacle. Our Lord's resurrection body was 
not the one which the Jews destroyed, but a spiritual body 
which they had never seen, but which was revealed to the 
Apostle Paul as "one born out of due time" when, on 
his way to Damascus, Jesus appeared unto him "shining 
above the brightness of the sun at noonday." 

It is much more reasonable to suppose that our Lord 
spoke of his body which is the Church and of which he 
was and is the Head. The Jews destroyed the Head, and 
all down through the Gospel age the various members of 
the body of Christ have been called upon "to suffer with 
him," "to be dead with him," "to lay down their lives 
for the brethren." The body has been in process of destruction 

R3375 : page 169 

from Jesus' day until now, and very soon, we 

believe, the last member will have proven himself "faithful 

unto death." Now, let us see how the Lord will raise 

up this Temple of which he was the great foundation 

stone, and of which the Apostle Peter declares, each of 

his faithful disciples is a living stone. (I Pet. 2:4) Considering 

the time from the Lord's standpoint— "A day with 

the Lord is as a thousand years"— our Lord died in the 

year of the world 4161— after four days had passed and 

the fifth day had begun. 

The destruction of the Temple of God, which is the 
Church, began there in the destruction of the chief corner 
stone and has progressed since— during the remainder of 
the fifth day, all of the sixth day, and we are now in the beginning 
of the seventh day— "very early in the morning." 
And the promise of the Lord is that the Lord's resurrection 
shall be completed about this time— "The Lord shall 
help her early in the morning." (Psa. 46:5.) Thus we 
view the matter, that the Lord was a part of the three 
days dead and rose on the third day, early in the morning, 
and that likewise the First Resurrection will be completed— 
the entire body of Christ will be raised on the third day, 
early in the morning. 

Evidently the matter of the resurrection was beyond 
the mental grasp of the apostles themselves at the time it 
occurred. Jesus had foretold that he would rise again on 
the third day, but they had not comprehended the 
meaning of his words: None of them for a moment 
thought of his resurrection, but merely of what they could 
do in the way of embalming his body, and showing to it, 
as his remains, the same sympathy and love which they 
would have shown to the remains of any dear friend or 
brother or sister. Thus it was that being hindered from 
coming to the sepulcher on the Sabbath day by the Jewish 
Law, which forbade labor of any kind on that day, the 
Lord's friends began to gather at the sepulcher, probably 
by previous appointment, about daybreak, after the Sabbath, 
—on the first day of the week. There were a number 
from Galilee, and probably they were lodged with 
other friends in different parts of the city, and possibly 



with some at Bethany; hence they went by different routes. 
The accounts vary, and are yet in perfect accord and all 
true. They are told from the different standpoints of each 
writer, and are all the more conclusive to us as evidences 
in that they show that there was no collusion between the 
writers of the Gospels— no endeavor to state the matters 
in exactly the same terms, as there surely would have been 
had the account been a manufactured one, a concocted 
story. 

ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE TRUTH ARE WEAK. 

Before the arrival of any of the disciples, while the 
Roman guard was still on duty at the tomb, an angel of 
the Lord appeared on the scene and a shock like that of 
an earthquake was experienced, and the guard, or "watch," 
became as dead men— almost swooned or fainted— but, recovering, 
hastened from the spot to make their report to the 
chief priests, at whose instance they had been appointed to 
this service. The chief priests induced them to circulate the 
report that the body had been stolen by his disciples while 
they slept, and this report was evidently current for quite 
a time subsequently, as we read, "the saying is commonly 
reported among the Jews until this day"— up to the date 
of writing Matthew's Gospel, which is supposed to have 
been written some nine years after the event. Like all 
arguments against the truth, it was a weak one, but the 
best they could do. How foolish would be the testimony 
of men who would say what took place while they were 
asleep ! A bribe was given to the guard as the price of 
this false statement, and they had the assurance of protection, 
security against the ordinary penalty for a Roman 
soldier sleeping while on duty; but then they were not on 
duty for the Roman government; they were merely a complimentary 
guard furnished in the interests of the priests 
and at their solicitation. 

Meantime, while the guard was on its way to the 
priests to report matters, the Lord's friends began to 
gather, with their love and spices, etc. The women of the 
company arrived first, and in so doing attested for all time 
the love and sympathy of their hearts, and honored, yea 
glorified, their sex in so doing. The three mentioned in 
our lesson have since had noble mention by the poets 
of all nations. One has written:— 

"Three women crept at break of day, 

Agrope along the shadowy way, 
Where Joseph's tomb and garden lay. 

"Each in her throbbing bosom bore 
A burden of such fragrant store 
As never there had lain before. 

"Myrrh-bearers still, at home, abroad— 
What paths have holy women trod, 
Burdened with votive gifts to God! 



"Rare gifts whose chiefest worth was priced 

By this one thought, that all sufficed: 
Their spices had been bruised for Christ." 

During the forty days which began that morning, and 
which ended with our Lord's ascension, he appeared at 
most eleven times, sometimes to one and sometimes to 
another, and on one occasion to above five hundred brethren 
at once. It is quite probable that instead of eleven 
times there were only seven, and that the other four records 
were merely differences of description of four of the 
seven manifestations. 

"HE SHOWED HIMSELF BY INFALLIBLE PROOFS." 

Our Lord's first appearance was to Mary Magdalene, 
she out of whom he had cast seven demons and who, from 
thenceforth, became one of our Lord's most earnest followers. 
She had much forgiven her; she loved much, 
and her love had brought her early to the sepulcher. Apparently, 
Mary Magdalene was the first of the women to 
arrive at the sepulcher, and immediately on finding that 
Jesus was not in the tomb, she hastened to announce the 
fact to John and Peter. Returning to the sepulcher, later 

R3375 : page 170 

she apparently reached it after the other women had been 
there and had gone their way, and it was while she was 
still near the tomb that Jesus appeared to her first of all, as 
described by John-20: 11-18. 

Subsequently the Lord met the other women as they 
were en route to make known the news to the household of 
faith. He addressed them, "All hail!" which in the 
Greek was the usual salutation, practically signifying, Rejoice! 
They fell before him, worshipping him and grasping 
him by the feet, and appeared afraid that anything 
henceforth should separate them from him. Our Lord, 
however, reminded them of their duty toward the brethren 
—that they should spread the good tidings of his resurrection. 
The same lesson comes to us, that after we 
have found the Lord, have come to realize the Truth, we 
have a great privilege in being permitted to serve it, and 
a great duty toward the brethren who as yet know not 
what has caused our hearts to rejoice. We are not to assume 
that we are to merely hug the Truth to our own 
hearts, but are to remember that it is also for others, and 
to take pleasure in dispensing it to them. He who thus 
serves the Lord and the household of faith is sure to have 
the greater blessing in the end. 

Our Lord's message was to tell the disciples that he 
would meet them again in Galilee. Thus it was that, after 

R3376 : page 170 



five or six appearances in the vicinity of Jerusalem, our 
Lord abstained from further appearing to his followers, 
and they returned to their home country, Galilee, where 
he met them, as he had engaged to do. We must remember 
that the most of our Lord's ministry was spent in 
Galilee and that the majority of the believers were Galileans. 
It was to be expected that all of the household of 
faith should have some opportunity for witnessing to our 
Lord's resurrection, and so the Apostle Paul tells us that 
in one of these later manifestations in Galilee, "Our 
Lord was seen by above five hundred brethren at one 
time; of whom the greater part remain unto this present 
[the time the Apostle was writing], though some are fallen 
asleep."— I Cor. 15:6. 

It is necessary that we should note carefully the two 
objects our Lord had in view in the various manifestations 
he gave his followers of the fact that he had risen from 
the dead. The first of these was a demonstration that he 
was no longer confined to earthly conditions, as they had 
known him to be during the previous years of acquaintance, 
but was now, like all spirit beings, able to go and 
come like the wind— invisibly, secretly. Like all spirit 
beings he was now glorious. The Apostle explains the 
resurrection of the overcomers of the Church in I Cor. 15:51,52, 
and the Scriptural assurance is that in our resurrection 
we shall be like the Lord, see him as he is and 
share his glory. The Scriptures also assure us that our 
resurrection is really a part of his resurrection, a part of 
the First Resurrection,— that Jesus the Head of the glorious 
Christ was raised from the power of death, was glorified 
on the third day after his death, and that early in the 
morning of the new dispensation the Church will come 
forth from death in his likeness, sharers in his resurrection. 
-Phil. 3:10. 

OUR LORD'S RESURRECTION CHANGE. 

This being true, we know that the time when our 
Lord received his spirit body was at his resurrection and 
not subsequently; as the Apostle declares, "He was put 
to death in the flesh, but quickened [made alive] in spirit." 
Speaking of our Lord's humiliation and his subsequent 
exaltation at his resurrection, the Apostle assures us that 
our Lord left the glory which he had with the Father and 
humbled himself to become a man, and that in due time 
he humbled himself unto death, even the death of the 
cross— "wherefore God hath highly exalted him and 
given him a name that is above every name." The exaltation 
came to him in his resurrection change. It was 
true of him then, as it will be true of all the members of 
his body in due time, that he was sown in weakness, raised 
in power, sown a natural [animal, human] body, raised a 
spiritual body. 

This spiritual body of our Lord was just as glorious 
in the moment of his resurrection as it was at any time 
afterward or is now. It had all the powers properly granted 



to spirit beings in harmony with the Lord. He was not, 
as previously, merely the man Christ Jesus, but was now 
the Lord of glory. As such he was able to associate himself 
with his disciples, either visibly or invisibly, or to appear 
as a flame of fire in the burning bush, or as a wayfaring 
man, as he appeared with others to Abraham, or in 
any manner he might see fit. He was the same glorious 
being who subsequently appeared to Saul of Tarsus, shining 
as the lightning, much as the angel appeared when the 
Roman guard was overcome and fled. 

Some, then, may inquire, Why did he not appear to 
the women and apostles in the same glorious manner, with 
shining features? We answer that to have so done would 
have been to hinder the very object he had in view. How 
could his followers, who were not then begotten of the 
holy Spirit and consequently were unable to understand 
spiritual things (I Cor. 2:14)— how could they have understood 
that a being shining like an angel was the Lord 
Jesus they had seen crucified three days before? And even 
if they could have associated the two in some manner, 
what evidence would there have been for others since? 
The removal of the remains of our Lord Jesus from the 
tomb was an essential to the faith of the disciples of that 
day, and of all who would believe on him since through 
their word, and manifestations of his being alive from the 
dead were necessary also to all these. The instructions 
which our Lord gave, and his expositions of the prophecies, 
and his application of these to himself, given at that 
particular time, were necessary as a firm foundation for 
faith. None of these objects could have been so well 
served in any other manner as the manner in which they 
were performed. Our Lord's first appearance to Mary was 
as a gardener. She recognized him not; neither his 
clothing nor his features were the same as those she had 

R3376 :page 171 

previously seen, as those she had previously recognized. 
His clothing was divided amongst the Roman soldiers, his 
grave clothes were still in the tomb, the body which she 
saw was a special body and the clothing which he wore 
was special clothing prepared and used for this special 
occasion. She knew not her Lord until he adopted a tone 
of voice which she recognized. 

It was the same with the two on the way to Emmaus, 
later on the same day. Jesus walked with them, but they 
knew him not; his clothing was different, his features 
were different, they saw no prints of nails in his hands 
or in his feet. They asked him, "Art thou a stranger 
in these parts?" He improved the opportunity for discussing 
with them calmly, deliberately, carefully, the 
prophecies relating to himself, expounding these to them 
so forcefully, so clearly, that their hearts burned within 
them as they thought of the possibility that the story 
which they had heard from the women might have been 
really true— that Jesus was to rise from the dead. Our 



Lord did not reveal his identity until he was ready to vanish 
from their sight. When he vanished, his flesh and 
his clothing vanished, too. The same evening he appeared 
to the company in the upper room at Jerusalem, the doors 
being shut. They were doubtless talking about the events 
of the day and of the preceding day, when, suddenly, 
Jesus appeared in their midst. He materialized— that is 
to say, he, a spirit being, came into their midst and there 
assumed flesh, bone, a complete body clothed. Does some 
one ask, How could he do this? We cannot answer, but 
whoever can understand the miracle of the change of the 
water into wine can as easily understand our Lord's appearance 
in the upper room, the doors being shut; and 
how, after the interview, he just as mysteriously vanished 
from their sight, flesh, bone, clothing, all— the doors still 
being shut and doubtless carefully barred for fear of the 
Jews, in anticipation that the hatred which had pursued 
the Lord to death would fasten itself upon his followers. 

BE NOT FAITHLESS, BUT BELIEVING. 

A later appearance was in the same upper room 
probably a week later— again on the first day of the week. 
Thomas was present: he had been absent on the previous 
occasion and he could not believe the testimony of the 
others. Thomas had expressed his doubts most forcefully 
and had insisted that the others were too easily convinced, 
but he was satisfied finally when Jesus, appearing to him 
with the others, requested him to put his finger in the 
prints of the nails. Did Thomas really see and put his 
finger into the nail prints of that body of our Lord which 
three days before had hung upon the cross. We answer 
No; that body of flesh and bones could not have come 
through the door while it was shut. The body which appeared 
in the upper room was a materialization— actual 
flesh and actual bones as our Lord said to them, "Handle 
me: a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have." 
What they saw was not the spirit body, what they saw was 
the actual flesh and bones. He, the spirit being, was 
hidden from their sight; he assumed this body of flesh and 
bones in their midst— created it there and created the 
clothing also. 

Whoever disputes the power of the Lord to create 
flesh and bones has an equal difficulty in accounting for 
the clothing; for who will say that it would be more difficult 
to create the body than to create the clothing inside 
that room, the doors being shut? Who will say that it 
would be easier to make clothing vanish into thin air than 
to make flesh and bones vanish into thin air? The power 
to do these things is not natural to us, nor can we fully 
comprehend the matter. Now we see through a glass obscurely, 
by and by we shall understand how our Lord can 
do the wonderful things that he is continually doing. For 
do we not see miracles all about us in nature, in the transpirings 
of every day? The kernel of wheat— how is it 
possible that out of that little grain should come a stem, a 



sprout, a stock and a head full of grain? It is a miracle 
—something wholly beyond our power to accomplish and 
beyond our power to even understand. We could make 
a grain of wheat, we could combine the various elements 
necessary to it, and could shape them as a grain of wheat 
is shaped; but our grain, while analyzing the same as 
that which nature would put forth, would not send out 
shoots, would have no stock, would bear no grain. 

"HIS FLESH SAW NOT CORRUPTION." 

It is not for us to say what became of the natural 
body of Jesus— the one that was pierced. God has not 
revealed particulars respecting it, except that it did not 
corrupt. Where then is it? We know not; but he who 
hid the body of Moses so that none could find it, was 
likewise able to hide the body of Jesus. (Deut. 34:5,6.) 
Who can tell but that the uncorrupted body of Jesus is 
yet to be produced by the Lord as an evidence or 
testimony of the truth of this whole transaction for the 
world in all future time. We do remember that the manna 
with which Israel was fed was wont to corrupt on the second 
day, except on the Sabbath; but we remember also 
that a golden pot of this manna was preserved in the Ark 
incorruptible, as a witness or memorial of the great miracle 
of the desert. What shall we say, then, respecting this 
bread which came down from heaven, which is also likened 
to manna? Is not the Lord equally able to preserve the 
body of Jesus as a witness, and, although other bodies of 
flesh are wont to corrupt, may not this one be preserved 
incorruptible? There is a certain statement in the Scriptures 
which seems to imply that this same body, spear-marked 
and nail-marked, is somewhere kept for future 
exhibit— as it is written, "They shall look upon him 
whom they have pierced."— Zech. 12:10. 

The first five of the Lord's appearances apparently 
took place during the first eight of the forty days' presence. 
Thus there was a long wait in which there was no manifestation, 
and the apostles had abundance of time to think 
over and discuss the situation. As the majority of them 
were from Galilee, they probably did not remain in 

R3377 : page 172 

vicinity of Jerusalem more than two weeks after our 
Lord's last appearance on the eighth day, but betook 
themselves to their homes, wondering whether or not they 
would ever see the Master again, whether or not he might 
appear to them again on their homeward journey or in 
some other upper room when assembling in Galilee. Perhaps, 
too, they remembered the message sent to them by 
the women, that he would go before them into Galilee and 
meet them there. 

A little longer waiting in the vicinity of the old 
haunts, visited frequently by our Lord and themselves, and 
the practical affairs of life began to press upon them. 



Simon Peter was the first to declare his intention of re-entering 
the fishing business, and others of the apostles, 
accustomed to the same craft formerly, joined him, and 
practically the old partnership arrangement was revived 
as it existed two years or so before, when Jesus 
called them to apostleship. This was the very condition 
of things which our Lord foresaw, and we believe that his 
tarrying forty days after his resurrection before he ascended 
was in great measure for the purpose of giving the very 
lessons which now were called forth. He knew just how 
discouraged they would feel; that all the hopes and prospects 
of the Kingdom, as they had previously viewed it, 
would seem vague and indistinct under the new conditions, 
and how his followers would not be prepared to go out in 
the work he intended without further instruction. He 
was present with them, but invisible, a spirit being, during 
all these weeks; he heard and noted their queries and 
explanations, suggestions and conclusions, and was ready 
to apply the proper lessons at the proper moment. 

"LOVEST THOU ME MORE THAN THESE?" 

The Lord permitted the partnership in the fishing 
business to progress and a fresh start to be made. They 
toiled all that night and caught nothing, and doubtless 
were still further discouraged, concluding that failure was 
attending them in temporal matters as well as in spiritual. 
The opportune moment had come, and Jesus— standing on 
the shore in another form, in a body of flesh and with 
clothing, though not his own flesh and not his usual clothing, 
but specially prepared flesh and clothing— called to 
the apostles inquiring if they had fish; they shouted back 
that they had been toiling all night and had found nothing. 
He suggested the casting of the net on the other 
side of the boat, although it must have seemed to them 
foolish, because it would be but a few feet away from where 
it had already been, and indeed the boat itself was continually 
turning. Nevertheless something about the stranger 
on the shore impressed them and they did cast their net 
on the other side, and immediately the net was filled with 
great fish. So far as Peter was concerned the lesson was 
learned already. He remembered a very similar experience 
they had had at the time the Lord called them to 
apostleship, and quickly he perceived that the one on 
shore was the Lord— in another manifestation. Without 
waiting for the boats, the net or the fish, Peter sprang 
into the water and swam ashore in his anxiety to be soon 
with the Lord, and in his realization that this manifestation 
like the others might terminate suddenly. Besides, 
Peter was anxious to manifest his love and faithfulness, remembering 
how not a great while before he had denied 
his Lord. 

It was in connection with this manifestation that Jesus 
specially directed his words to Peter: "Simon, son of 
Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"— these boats, nets, 
etc. The question addressed to Peter was applicable to all, 



but of special weight and force to Peter as the elder and 
leader of all, and the one who had particularly said but a 
short time previously, "Though all forsake thee, yet will 
not I." Peter declared his love for the Lord, and was told 
to feed the sheep and to feed the lambs. The lesson was 
a timely one and never needed to be repeated. Peter and 
the other apostles, so far as we know, never subsequently 
doubted the importance of their mission as apostles, but 
gave their entire time and energy to the feeding of the sheep 
and lambs. The miracle witnessed convinced them of the 
Lord's power either to bless or hinder them in temporal 
matters, and that equally he will provide for their every 
interest as his apostles and representatives. The lesson was 
given at exactly the right moment. Had it been given 
earlier in their experience it doubtless would have had 
much less weight: it was the part of wisdom to permit 
them to become perplexed and to decide on the fishing 
business, and then on the very first day of their experience 
to give them this forceful lesson. It was a lesson respecting 
the resurrection of our Lord and also demonstrated the 
fact of his change, that he was no longer the man Christ 
Jesus, no longer subject to human conditions. Again he 
vanished out of their sight, but made an appointment for 
the meeting of all at a certain place. 

This meeting by appointment was doubtless the one 
mentioned by the Apostle Paul— the one in which about 
five hundred brethren witnessed a materialization and manifestation 
of the Lord. We know not the full tenor of the 
various lessons taught, but incline to think that the lessons 
were more of the practical kind than in words— that these 
manifestations were for the purpose of convincing them of 
the Lord's resurrection and of his change from earthly to 
spiritual conditions. 

HE THAT DESCENDED IS THE SAME THAT 
ASCENDED. 

The next appearance probably was the one on the 
Mount of Olives at the time of our Lord's ascension. 
Apparently all of the apostles and perhaps others returned 
to Jerusalem and to the Mount of Olives, their instruction 
being to tarry at Jerusalem until they should be endued 
with power from on high. It was while they were present 
with him receiving final instructions that he was parted 
from them; the form that they beheld gradually receding 
into the clouds was received out of their sight. In this 
arrangement the Lord did the best thing possible to be 
done for those who had not yet been begotten of the 

R3377 : page 173 

Spirit and who, therefore, could not understand spiritual 
things. He represented in the flesh the things which really 
transpired in the spirit. Then the apostles could understand 
after they had been begotten of the Spirit, and 
it is from the standpoint of the begetting and not from 



the standpoint of the natural man that their records come 
down to us. 

The essence of this lesson is as expressed in our 
Golden Text, "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first fruits of them that slept." Others have 
been awakened from the sleep of death temporarily merely 
to relapse into it again subsequently, but our Lord Jesus 
was the first "born from the dead," the "first-fruits of 
them that slept"— as the Apostle declares, "He was the 
first that should rise from the dead." His resurrection was 
the life resurrection— to perfection on the spirit plane. In 
that he was the first-fruits of them that slept, the implication 
is that the others slept similarly and are to come 
forth in the resurrection as spirit beings after the same manner. 
To be the first-fruits implies that the others will be 
of the same kind, for although our Lord was the first-fruits 
of all that slept in the sense that his resurrection preceded 
all other resurrections, in another sense he is the first-fruits 
of the Church, which is his body. It is in a still 
larger sense that the Christ, Head and body, is the first-fruits 
brought up to life of the whole world; as the Apostle 
James expresses the matter, "Of his own will begat he 
us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of 
first-fruits of his creatures."— Jas. 1:18. 

Thus we see a first-fruits in two senses of the word: 
as, for instance, we see that strawberries are the first-fruits 
in the largest sense of the word in that they come 
before other fruits in the spring— so the expression that 
the Church is the first-fruits unto God of his creatures does 
not imply that all will have the same nature. Then again 
we may speak of the first ripe strawberries as the first-fruits 
of the strawberries. It was in this latter sense that our 
Lord Jesus was the first-fruits of the Church; and since 
the Church is the first-fruits of the whole creation, it follows 
that Christ keeps this place of primacy, not only in 
the Church, but in respect to all who will ever be raised 
up fully out of death into the fulness and perfection of life. 



R3378 : page 173 

"WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Shadows and darkness encircle me quite; 
Earth is enshrouded in midnight gloom, 
Black as the pall that envelopes the tomb; 
Watchers are few, and mockers are bold— 
The heavens are starless— the night-air is cold. 
I am weary; O would that this night were gone. 
I will watch for the day till the morning dawn." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"In the east appeareth a glimmering light; 
Faint it gleams— but 'tis rising now, 



And streaming afar— 'tis the morning's brow. 
Shadows are passing— the Day Star is out, 
The glory is flashing and leaping about, 
And the golden tints that are poured o'er the earth 
Foretell of the bursting morning's birth." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Day rushes onward all cloudless and bright. 
And warmth, and light, and beauty are driven 
To the farthest bond of the far-off heaven. 
Flashing flames from the throne of God 
Are bathing the world in a golden flood. 
Seraph and cherub are crowding it on, 
And the pure in their rapture are skyward gone." 

"Watchman! watchman! what of the night?" 
"Bursts on my vision a ravishing sight: 
The Lord is in sight with his shining ones, 
And the splendors of twice ten thousand suns. 
He has come! Lo, the night-watch of sorrow is o'er, 
And the mantle of midnight shall shroud me no more. 
Pilgrim and stranger, haste to thy home, 
For the morning, the beautiful morning, has come!" 
— D. T. Taylor. 



R3378 : page 173 

THE LIFE OF CHRIST IN REVIEW. 

-JUNE 29.- 

Golden Text: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, 
and given him a name which is above every name."— Phil. 2:9. 

THIS lesson is appointed, in the International Series, 

as a review of the Bible studies for the preceding 

six months— all of which have related to our Lord 

Jesus' birth, life and experiences from boyhood to his resurrection. 

We trust that our readers have followed the 

studies connectedly, and we can only wish that they have 

received as much benefit as we from this course of studies. 

We will not again go into details, but will suggest 

that it may be profitable for each reader to review this 

series of lessons, and to seek to have and to hold well in 

mind the main thoughts therein developed. 

Our Golden Text is a very precious one. It assures 
us that our dear Redeemer, whose faithfulness to the 
Father's will and whose sympathy for the dying race, led 
him to endure the cross, despising the shame, was not permitted 
of the Lord to suffer a permanent loss through his 
generosity and obedience. If there were no other text of 
Scripture pertinent to the subject in the Bible, this one 
alone would be convincing to us that our Lord Jesus is no 
longer a man. Man, we are to remember, was created 



very good, an image of God— but an image on a lower 

plane than angels, and on a very much lower plane, therefore, 

than our dear Redeemer before he humbled himself 

to take the human nature. "What is man that thou art 

mindful of him?. ..Thou madest him a little lower 

than the angels, thou crownedst him with glory and 

R3378 : page 174 

honor"— in his Edenic perfection. Our Lord as a perfect 
man would be grand and far above men, but as a perfect 
angel he would be a still grander being, still farther above 
man. Hence, if our Lord were a mighty angel now, it 
would still mean that he had suffered a great loss as a result 
of his atonement work for man; and if he were a perfect 
man, it would mean still greater loss on our behalf. 
But this was not necessary, not purposed, and is not the 
fact. He left the glory, humbled himself, came down 
and accomplished the work necessary, paid the price— a 
man's life for a man's life— and our Golden Text gives 
the result: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every 
name." 

Another Scripture, speaking of our Lord's present 
exaltation, declares that he is exalted "far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is named." 
(Eph. 1:21.) We believe these Scriptures, and in harmony 
with them we believe that God's character for justice 
and benevolence is demonstrated by this high exaltation 
of him who was faithful unto death as the man Christ Jesus. 
He is now a partaker of the divine nature, a spirit being 
of the very highest order— of the same order with the 
Father himself. This thought of our dear Redeemer not 
losing eventually by the great sacrifices he endured for us 
must be gratifying to all who are truly his and who love 
him. But, additionally, we have another source of satisfaction 
in thinking of our Master's glorification, and that 
is that the promise is to us who are faithful to him, that 
we may yet share his nature, share his glory, share his 
name, share his exaltation, share his divine nature. O, 
wonderful wisdom and grace and goodness of our God! 
We call upon our souls with every power within us to 
praise and laud and magnify his great and holy name, honored 
before his people through his great and wonderful 
plan, revealed to his people through his wonderful Word! 



R3379 : page 174 

CHEERING WORDS FROM AUSTRALIA. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You will be pleased to know that the work of this 
Branch is opening up; not rapidly, as yet, but we are 
hoping the velocity will soon be considerably increased. 



Some of the dear friends here are exercised concerning 
their opportunities in the Colporteur service, and are 
going ahead to make the effort. May the Lord's grace 
be with them! But the field here is very great, and 
there is plenty of room for many more laborers in it; 
besides, the time is short. We shall be most happy, 
therefore, if those in America who contemplate coming 
out will do so without delay. 

Herewith are extracts from interesting letters lately 
received at this office, also further TOWER subscriptions, 
among which are some new names. 

With much Christian love to you and the Allegheny 
co-workers, and asking an interest in your prayers on 
behalf of this corner of the field, I am, 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 

E. C. HENNINGES, 

Manager Australian Branch. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your letter duly to hand. We were very pleased 
to hear from you, and can imagine how thankful you 
are to be comfortably settled. I wish I could run down 
to see you and help in the grand but difficult task you 
have undertaken. We have just returned from a holiday 
in the country. Spent a good time with Brother 
L., a TOWER subscriber, who, I am sorry to say, is having 
a hard time of it. He has been a great worker in 
the Methodist Church (local preacher, etc., etc.), and, of 
course, a "good fellow," as we say; but having given 
this all up, it is different now. Still, we expect this, 
and rejoice with all those who walk the narrow way. 

I shall soon be wanting a fresh supply of DAWNS, 
so let me know when you receive your big consignment. 
This looks like business, and no doubt it is the right 
thing to do; there is nothing like having plenty of faith. 
It is wonderful the amount of matter Bro. Russell and 
his staff are sending out; God bless them! We are 
anxious to get No. 6 DAWN, feeling sure there is a treat 
for us, though I still read the others with the same 
interest. 

Hoping you will soon get a company of sincere lovers 
of the Truth around you, and that the work of the 
WATCH TOWER office will make great progress in all the 
colonies, and that God will bless you with his presence 
and guidance, I remain, 

Yours in Christian love, in which my wife joins, 
., New South Wales. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Many thanks for your kind letters and enclosures. 
My husband and I will make an attempt, with the help 
of the Lord, for a few weeks, to secure orders for MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. We pray we may succeed. Hitherto 
we have given away, instead of selling, but we shall try 



your plan, and hope to send you cheerful news. Enclosed 
is P.O.O. for three subscriptions and an order 
for cloth-bound DAWNS. We trust, dear Brother, we may 
be able still further to help on so good a work and so 
glorious a gospel. We are grateful to be vessels for 
use in His service. 
Yours faithfully in Christ. 

., New South Wales. 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I received the parcels of DAWNS, Bible, etc., and 
thank you very much for them. I have been reading 
them, and there is not the least doubt about their being 
correct. I have not the time for continual study, but 
intend acquiring all the Bible knowledge I can; it is 
better to get it late than never. I am only sorry I did 
not get these works before; they are clearing up all my 
doubts on Christianity as clergymen could never do. 

I have handed some of the tracts to friends, and 
two or three of them are very much interested. I think 
it will not be long before they withdraw from Babylon. 
One of them wants the DAWNS in cloth, and a Bible the 
same as you sent me, and I wish to ask whether you 
will send him the same for the same money, or whether 
mine was sent for the same price because it was all I 
remitted? You see, the Bible is such a splendid one 
that I am almost afraid to tell him the amount it cost, 

R3379 : page 175 

for fear when he sends he will have to pay more. [The 
brother's fears are not surprising, for Bibles are very 
expensive everywhere in Australia, except at our Depot. 
For example, we have the Holman No. 8836 with 
patent thumb index, for 10s. 10d.; in the Sunday School 
Union Depot in Melbourne the same Bible is priced 
21s.6d.-E.C.H.] 

I intend doing my best to spread the Truth around 
here, though do not expect to make much headway, as 
most people are bound to their various creeds, and 
are "full." However, what time I have to spare I 
intend to use studying the glorious Truths, and helping 
others to the same knowledge. I remain, 

A co-worker for Christ, 

., New South Wales. 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

Yours of 10th inst. duly to hand. My time has 
been so much taken up since receiving your first communication, 
about a month ago, that I have not had 

sufficient at my disposal to give your letter that consideration 
it deserves, and to answer it as promptly as I 
otherwise would. 

Business pressure upon me is very great, and absorbs 
most of my time, but you can rely upon me to 
do all I can for the sale of MILLENNIAL DAWN as time 



will allow. Have received orders today for six volumes, 
which please send. Enclosed is remittance. 
Yours faithfully, ., South Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I received your kind letter of the 10th, intimating 
that a Branch of the Society had been opened in 
Melbourne. Was glad to hear of it, and trust it will 
prove of great service to the dear brethren throughout 
Australia. I, for one, have felt considerable drawbacks 
at having to wait three months for an answer 
from America. 

For several years I have been trying to help Christian 
brethren by lending them volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, but have as yet met with no hearty response 
from any one (one dear brother excepted), the majority 
of those I have tried to reach being very indifferent, 
and a few quite hostile. Years before hearing of Mr. 
Russell's books I was deeply interested in the themes 
of which he so ably treats, and since reading them have 
continued to be so, praying and wishing from my heart 
that others might be led to receive their heavenly teachings, 
but, sad to say, without success, so far as I know, 
with the above exception. Still, I do not despair, nor 
wish to allow myself to get discouraged, remembering 
whose work it is, and the many precious promises he 
has given us in his holy Word. 

I shall be glad to receive some tracts for distribution, 
also full information regarding the Colporteur service. 
I may be able to devote one or two hours daily 
to this kind of work, later on. 

Sincerely yours in Christ Jesus, 

., Tasmania. 

DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Tracts to hand; many thanks. I have given quite 
a number to those who I think will be interested, and 
have already received some interesting accounts from 
those who have gotten them. But I think it will take 
some time before they enter fully into the depths of 
the truths therein contained. My wife has become interested 
in reading "The Plan of the Ages." Please forward 
the six volumes in cloth, which I will lend to 
friends. 

Yours in the Lord, ., Victoria. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

I was very pleased to receive your letter, and to 
know that you are established. I trust that God's richest 
blessings may rest with you in your labors, so that 
it will be a permanent Branch, and that you may long 
be spared to labor in the Harvest work. 

I have been in this colony only three years this 
month. I nearly entered into Present Truth prior to 
leaving England, while you were in charge of the British 
Branch, through some one giving me a WATCH TOWER 



in Canning Town one Sunday morning. As it was, it 
was left over until I arrived in W.A., and at that time 
there were only two or three here who knew anything 
about it. About a fortnight after my arrival, I happened 
to go to Fremantle on a Saturday night and 
heard some one speaking in the open air. I went up to 
listen, but, being hard of hearing, I hardly caught anything, 
though I managed to hear something about 1914. 
I stopped till the brother finished, and then went up to 
ask him where he got his 1914, and that is how I was 
led into Present Truth. Shortly after, I was shown a 
WATCH TOWER. Well, I said, I had one similar to that 
given me in England!... 
With kindest wishes, believe me to be, 
Yours in the Lord's service, 

., Western Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours of the 10th to hand. We were very pleased 
to hear from you and to know that you were getting 
settled in your new home. The Lord sustain you by 
bringing you in contact with true brethren and congenial 
friends ! 

There is little to tell you of our affairs. We have 
meetings twice a week for Bible study and prayer in 
which we always remember you. We could wish the 
Lord had left you with us, but we humbly submit to 
his will in this as in all other matters. I should be glad 

R3380 : page 175 

of any word of instruction or exhortation from you. 

Please deliver one set of DAWNS in cloth to the address 
of the enclosed note, which will recommend you to 
my friends in Melbourne, where I hope you will find many 
who love the Lord and are hungering for the Truth. 
Give my love to all of like mind in the Lord, and let us 
"work, for the night is coming." 

Your brother in Christ, 

., Western Australia. 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Yours came to hand in due time, and I was glad to 
receive news of you and your welfare. I am pleased 
with the choice of position for headquarters, so far as 
the Australian States are concerned. I should have 
written you sooner, but have been very much engaged 
of late; you both and the work under your care are not 
forgotten, the same being remembered by me in prayer. 

Our meeting at Fremantle was very profitable to 
me; I was glad to be there. Though I had to make a 
sacrifice to do it, I was indeed glad to meet you, and 
sorry to leave you, but the Lord's will had to be done. 
I shall be pleased to hear of the progress of the work 
with you later. The Lord bless and prosper you as it 
pleaseth him, and in due time he will exalt you. 



Yours in His service, 

., Western Australia. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY 