Special Issue of Awake! to Be Offered During November!
1 Many people have sincere questions about the value of the Bible. If men wrote it, how can it be called God’s Word? What reasons are there for trusting it to direct my steps? If I read and study the Bible, how will my time and effort be rewarded? Which Bible translation should I use? These are some of the questions that are answered in the November special issue of Awake! entitled “Can You Trust the Bible?”
2 We will want to give this special issue of Awake! wide distribution in our territory. If possible, share in the house-to-house ministry with the congregation each Saturday during the month of November. Show this issue of Awake! to your relatives, neighbors, workmates, teachers, schoolmates, and return visits. Carry copies with you when shopping and traveling. The elders have requested extra copies so that the congregation will have a sufficient supply.
3 Start a Bible Study: If you place the magazine, you can lay the groundwork for a Bible study before concluding your conversation. For example, you might say, “Next time, I would like to show you the Bible’s answer to this question, ‘What is God’s purpose for the earth?’” Then return with the Bible Teach book and show the householder pages 4-5, or consider paragraphs 1-3 of chapter 3. Another option is to say, “Next time, I would like to discuss a Bible prophecy that is being fulfilled right now.” When you return, show the householder chapter 9 of the book and consider together paragraphs 1-3. Or you might simply tell the householder: “Many find it difficult to understand what they read in the Bible. Next time, I would like to show you how you can understand your Bible better.” On the return visit, introduce the Bible Teach book, and demonstrate a study.
4 Only the Bible contains “holy writings,” which are able to make us “wise for salvation.” (2 Tim. 3:15) Therefore, all of us will want to have a zealous share in distributing this special issue of Awake! to help people develop trust in the Bible!

