From Our Readers
Prayer in Sports  Thank you for “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Prayer in Sports​—Does God Listen?” (May 8, 1990) I used to pray fervently to God before a handball game. During key games, I prayed to have strength to win. (We never won any of those games.) Now I know that such prayers were not in harmony with God’s will.
M.A.L.S., Brazil
Youth​—Challenge of the ’90’s  I read the book Questions Young People Ask—​Answers That Work when I first received it. Your articles on youth (September 8, 1990) encouraged me to start reading it again. And I must say, I am enjoying it even more the second time!
B. B., United States
I am a 13-year-old girl, and I wanted to tell you that I really enjoyed the articles on youths. I have a subscription to Awake! But when I would get the magazines in the mail, I would put them away. This one caught my eye, so I read it and really enjoyed it. Afterward, I got out my other copies of Awake! and read some of the articles. Now I’ve asked my mom to study the Bible with me.
A. P., United States
Suicide  My mother, a faithful servant of God, took her life after a month of deep depression. Her death left an indescribable burden and heartache for all of us who loved her. The thought that I might never see her again made the pain of her loss harder to bear. Your article (“The Bible’s Viewpoint: Suicides​—A Resurrection?” September 8, 1990) made me feel more “normal” and happy inside, knowing that I can entertain the hope of her resurrection.
T. M., United States
The article was merciful. But might not distressed ones view such mercy as justification for taking the “easy way out”?
N. G., United States
Feelings of unrelenting despair might make death appear attractive to a severely depressed one. (Compare Job 10:1.) But since suicide is self-murder, it is a violation of God’s law and an unacceptable option for a Christian. If thoughts of suicide afflict a person, he should not presume upon God’s mercy but should seek help to resist self-destructive urges. (James 1:14, 15) He might think of the painful void his death will leave in the lives of loved ones. He should remember that Jehovah “is near to those that are broken at heart” and throw his burdens upon Him. (Psalm 34:18; 55:22) He should also let fellow Christians know of his despair and accept their support. Nevertheless, if a person succumbs to suicidal feelings, bereaved ones can take comfort in knowing that their loved one’s future is in the hands of a loving God.​—ED.
Coping With Paralysis  After reading “Widening Out to Help Others” (September 22, 1990), I just want to say thank you for such an upbuilding and positive article. Being fully fit myself, I sometimes wonder how I could cope under similar circumstances. We are all under tremendous pressure from this world, but Tony Wood copes with this and even more by relying on Jehovah.
P. G., England
Movies  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Pick a Decent Movie?” (August 8, 1990) Today the majority of youths do not know what kind of movies are fit for a Christian to view, nor do they ask their parents if they should watch a movie or not. I liked very much the idea that if a person happens to be watching an inappropriate movie, he should turn it off.
J. N. S., Brazil

