Young People Ask . . .
Should I Work While in School?
SCHOOL days are busy for most youths. Classroom instruction takes up a generous portion of each weekday. Homework and studying tie up the evenings. And in between there are numerous household chores that cry for attention.a
In Western lands school-age youths can usually look forward to the weekend as a time for fun and relaxation. But in many parts of the world, weekends are anything but relaxing. In rural Africa, for example, youths often spend their weekends helping their parents on the farm, making up for some of the time lost during their week of schooling. And among Jehovah’s Witnesses, youths have the added responsibility of participating in the door-to-door preaching work and going to Christian meetings.​—Hebrews 10:23-25.
It may therefore seem unlikely that African youths would want to take on the extra burden of a secular job. But many such youths are working and in a diversity of ways: cultivating their own farms and selling the produce, weaving cloth with handlooms, or making baskets to sell in the marketplace. Still others are fishing, selling newspapers, and picking or selling fruit.
Why, though, are these youths taking on secular work? Does it necessarily mean that you should do the same?
Why They Work
Some youths are virtually compelled to work because of circumstances beyond their control, such as the death of a parent. (This can leave a youth with no one to sponsor his schooling.) On the other hand, some youths take on jobs to establish a measure of independence from their parents.
Consider Kofi, a young man in Ghana. While in technical school, he worked as a farmhand two hours each day after school.b Kofi explains: “My parents had provided my needs throughout elementary school. But I did not want to continue depending on them for my every need. So I started secular work. I felt much happier being able to buy my own stationery and pay my school transportation.”
Kofi’s brother Moses similarly had a job. While in secondary school, Moses privately tutored young schoolchildren. But while Kofi’s income appropriately went to pay for his own needs, some of Moses’ money went toward the upkeep of his family. Why? Coming from a family of eight children, he reasoned: “My doing part-time work gave my parents a measure of relief in caring for the needs of my other brothers and sisters.” He also admits to a sense of satisfaction in being able to buy things for himself.
Helping one’s parents financially when there is a real need may be a way of rendering the honor due them. (Ephesians 6:1, 2) At the same time, though, there is nothing necessarily wrong with working so as to have some spending money of one’s own.
Having a job may also do much to instill a sense of responsibility in a youth. It can help a youth master skills that can later be used in supporting a family. Jesus Christ himself, for example, apparently learned the carpentry trade by working with his adoptive father as a youth. (Matthew 13:55; Mark 6:3) Nevertheless, “the time left is reduced” for this world, and a wise youth makes sure that his or her time is being used profitably. (1 Corinthians 7:29; Ephesians 5:16) So before taking on a job, you should weigh all the factors involved​—including your own motives.
Counting the Cost
Some questions you might consider are: Do my parents really need or even want my financial assistance? Or are they willing to make do with less so that I can apply myself to my schoolwork and spiritual development? Am I really in need of extra funds, or am I responding to “the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life”?​—1 John 2:16.
The wise man Solomon observed: “I have also learned why people work so hard to succeed: it is because they envy the things their neighbors have. But it is useless. It is like chasing the wind. . . . It is better to have only a little, with peace of mind, than be busy all the time with both hands, trying to catch the wind.”​—Ecclesiastes 4:4-6, Today’s English Version.
Another factor to consider would be the effect working might have on your schooling. Kofi, mentioned earlier, recalls: “During my first year in technical school when I did no secular work, my academic performance was outstanding. Then came the second year when I commenced secular work, and my grades began to fall. I still managed to be above average, but it was all so tiring.” Interestingly, one research study conducted in the United States found that “working leads to a decline in school performance and diminishes adolescent involvement in school.”
Do you recall Kofi’s brother Moses, who had a tutoring job? He admits: “Unless one is very careful, one can begin to take on more learners than can be taught within the limited time available.” Mawuli, another African man, worked part-time as a fisherman. He says: “There was great temptation when there was a big catch at the beach. The impulse was to abandon the books to go and earn more money. Lots of boys in the village did that and dropped out of school.”
School plus job can also sap a youth’s strength to the point of adversely affecting him spiritually. It may become hard for him to attend Christian meetings or to concentrate when there. Personal study of the Bible and Bible-based publications may fall by the wayside.
Keeping Your Balance
Nevertheless, after weighing all factors, you and your parents may decide that your working at some sort of job would be advantageous. How can you make the best of the situation?
Self-discipline is essential. The apostle Paul spoke of his own efforts, saying: “I pummel my body and lead it as a slave.” (1 Corinthians 9:27) It will take self-discipline for you to save​—and not squander—​the money you earn. It will also take self-discipline for you to use your remaining time properly. Of course, relaxation and adequate rest have their place and can enhance productive work. But take care that hobbies and recreation do not crowd out homework and even spiritual matters.
You will therefore need to make a realistic schedule of study periods​—and stick to it. For example, it may be best to begin your homework as soon as possible upon returning home from work, not waiting until long after supper when you might feel too drowsy. Others prefer to go to bed early and care for their studies first thing in the morning. Whatever the case, make your study periods as productive as possible. Avoid playing music or indulging in other distractions. Your homework may also go more smoothly if you pay attention to how you listen in class, taking notes on main points and supporting details.​—Compare Luke 8:18.
Most important of all, though, are your spiritual needs. (Matthew 5:3) For these to be filled, you must also set aside time for personal Bible study, for Christian meetings, and for sharing in the public ministry. True, working and going to school is demanding. But if you must do both, give spiritual matters priority. Pray incessantly to Jehovah God to help you maintain your spiritual balance. If a job, in addition to school, is decided on, he can strengthen you to stand up to the pressures of the situation.​—Isaiah 40:29-31.
[Footnotes]
This article deals primarily with the situation faced by youths in developing lands. Nevertheless, the suggestions set out here are based on Bible principles and will thus prove helpful to young people the world over.
In some lands, after primary school a youth has a choice of entering either a secondary, or high, school (which teaches a wide range of subjects) or a technical school.
[Picture on page 21]
Some African youths work at afterschool jobs. But what are the advantages and disadvantages of doing so?

