What Message Are They Hearing?
IN WHAT kind of world would you like to live? What kind of future do you want for your children? If you could have perfect health and not die, would you choose it?
How would you answer those questions? Most people, regardless of religious or political background, would want to live in a world of peace and plenty. They would welcome a world of perfect justice and harmony, where there would be no corruption; nor would there be one law for the privileged and another for the poor.
And for your children, no doubt you would like to have abundant food, a pleasant home, and a good education. In other words, you would want to guarantee a stable future for yourself and your offspring. And if given the opportunity, you would choose to have perfect health and to live long enough to fulfill all your wholesome desires and ambitions, even to enjoying everlasting life on a peaceful, paradisaic earth.
All of this is not an impossible dream. It is the message of the Bible that Jehovah’s Witnesses are preaching earth wide, including in the countries of Eastern Europe.
The Bible’s Practical Hope for the Future
The Bible’s reliable prophecies recorded many centuries ago foretold the events of our 20th century, our ‘wars and rumors of wars’; our ‘earthquakes and food shortages in one place after another’; our ‘anguish of nations, not knowing the way out, while men become faint out of fear and expectation of the events befalling the earth’; our ‘ruining and polluting of the earth.’​—Luke 21:10-33; Revelation 11:18.
Yet, all these events and many more are a sure sign that God’s promised new world is also near at hand. This involves “new heavens and a new earth,” that is, a new world rulership, a heavenly government, and a transformed earthly society ‘in which righteousness is to dwell.’ It means a new world in which ‘pain, death, and mourning will be no more.’​—Isaiah 65:17-25; 2 Peter 3:13; Revelation 21:1-4.
Obviously, no political system, no matter how sincere and conscientious, is capable of fulfilling such a program. Only the Sovereign Lord of the universe, Jehovah God, has both the will and the power to accomplish this. For that reason his Son, Christ Jesus, taught his followers to pray: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”​—Matthew 6:9, 10.
God’s will is that the earth should be a shining jewel in the universe, inhabited by a peace-loving human family. Soon God will take action to bring that about. It will be a cleansing action to rid the earth of all contamination and contaminators. All pollution, whether physical or moral, will be eliminated from the earth. Who will remain? Jesus said: “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.”​—Matthew 5:5; Revelation 16:14-16.
Do you want to be among those mild-tempered ones who will have God’s blessing? Then contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your neighborhood and request a free home Bible study, without any obligation. Prove for yourself what is the “good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” And then do it.​—Romans 12:2.

