Honesty—By Chance or by Choice?
“THOUGH I am not naturally honest, I am so sometimes by chance.” So says the rogue Autolycus in The Winter’s Tale by William Shakespeare. This illustrates a basic human weakness—our inclination toward wrongdoing, which results from a ‘treacherous heart.’ (Jeremiah 17:9; Psalm 51:5; Romans 5:12) But does this mean that we have no choice in the matter? Is virtuous behavior simply a matter of chance? By no means!
Before the sons of Israel entered the Promised Land, Moses spoke to them while they were encamped on the plains of Moab. He placed before them two clear choices. They could obey God’s commandments and receive his blessing or reject them and reap the bitter fruitage of sin. (Deuteronomy 30:15-20) The choice was theirs.
As free moral agents, we too have a choice. No one—including God—forces us to do good or to do bad. However, some may rightly ask, ‘If our hearts are inclined toward badness, how can we practice what is good?’ Well, a dentist carefully inspects the teeth in order to detect erosion or decay before it progresses too far. Similarly, we need to probe our figurative heart in search of weaknesses and moral decay. Why? Because “out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders, adulteries, fornications, thieveries, false testimonies, blasphemies,” said Jesus.—Matthew 15:18-20.
To preserve a tooth, a dentist must thoroughly root out any decay that is found. Likewise, decisive action is needed to purge “wicked reasonings” and wrong desires from the heart. By reading and reflecting on God’s Word, the Bible, not only do we come to know our Creator’s ways but we also learn to do what is right.—Isaiah 48:17.
Israel’s King David availed himself of a further necessary help in the fight to do what is right. He prayed: “Create in me even a pure heart, O God, and put within me a new spirit, a steadfast one.” (Psalm 51:10) Yes, by prayerfully relying on Jehovah God, we too can overcome our inclination to do what is bad and cultivate a “new spirit” to do good. In this way, we will not leave honesty to chance. It will be a matter of choice.
[Picture on page 21]
As in David’s case, prayer to Jehovah can help us to do good

