‘In God I Shall Take Refuge’
IN THESE “critical times hard to deal with,” temptations and pressures are ever increasing. Our honesty, for example, may be tested in the workplace. Our chastity may be tested among schoolmates. And our integrity is often put to the test by a morally corrupt world.—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
The Bible writer Asaph also lived at a time when wickedness flourished. Some of his contemporaries even boasted about their ungodly conduct. “Haughtiness has served as a necklace to them,” wrote Asaph. “Violence envelops them as a garment. They scoff and speak about what is bad; about defrauding they speak in an elevated style.” (Psalm 73:6, 8) Does this attitude sound familiar?
For those who desire to do what is right, such conduct is very distressing, even discouraging. “I came to be plagued all day long,” Asaph lamented. “It was a trouble in my eyes.” (Psalm 73:14, 16) You may feel similarly, but do not despair! Asaph was able to cope with the wickedness of his day, and you can do likewise. But how?
Asaph came to realize that true justice is nearly impossible to find under the imperfect rule of man. (Psalm 146:3, 4; Proverbs 17:23) So rather than squander his precious time, energy, and resources trying to do away with all the wickedness around him, he focused on his relationship with God. Asaph declared: “As for me, the drawing near to God is good for me. In the Sovereign Lord Jehovah I have placed my refuge.”—Psalm 73:28.
Today, those who engage in corrupt business practices often enjoy material advantages. Many may even boast of their disregard for God’s moral laws. But they will not prevail indefinitely. “Surely on slippery ground is where you place them,” observed Asaph. “You have made them fall to ruins.”—Psalm 73:18.
Yes, in God’s due time, trickery, violence, and corruption, as well as all the other ungodly practices that true Christians must avoid, will be done away with. The Bible promises: “Evildoers themselves will be cut off, but those hoping in Jehovah are the ones that will possess the earth.” (Psalm 37:9) In the meantime, may we echo the words of the psalmist who said: “Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the Provider of escape for me. My God is my rock. I shall take refuge in him.”—Psalm 18:2.

