VOL. XIII. JULY 15, 1892. NO. 14. 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



Pittsburg has been kept prominently before 
public attention for some days past by reason 
of the rioting and bloodshed in the suburb of 
Homestead. While all lament the sad state of 
affairs, great diversity of opinion prevails regarding 
the responsibility, some taking sides 
with the Carnegie Steel Company, and others 
with their former employees who have practically 
taken posession of the works and declare that 
none others than themselves shall operate them, 



and they upon their own terms. 

At first it might appear that not only the law, 
but also justice, is upon the side of the Steel 
Company, since the men admit that the wages 
proffered them are as good or better than is usually 
paid for similar service: namely, from $2.14 
per day for "sweepers" to $9.45 per day for chief 
"rollers." But there is another side to the 
case: although the firm offers no objection to 
their employees being members of "The Amalgamated 
Association," it refuses any longer to 
recognize that union or to be controlled by its 
rules and regulations. This is the real difficulty. 
The officers and members of that association, 
although not claiming that present 
wages are "starvation wages," do claim that, 
had it not been for their organization, past and 
present, wages would be much less than they 
are. And their fear now is that if the dignity 
of their association is permitted to go down, 
in this, the largest works of the country, the result 
would ultimately be to their disadvantage, 
which, no doubt, is true. 

With this brief summary of the situation it 
is the less difficult to appreciate the frenzy exhibited 
in the attack upon the three hundred 
watchmen sent by the Steel Company to take 
possession of and guard the works. It is no 
doubt true that much of the fiendish work was 
done by common laborers whose wages were 
not at all affected by the proposed changes, 
and who are not even admitted to membership 
in the Amalgamated Association. Being mostly 
Hungarians, Slavs and Poles, they, of course, 

R1423 : page 211 

understand the language, laws, etc., of this 
country but poorly, and know no law but force. 
These got the impression that non-resistance 
meant starvation for themselves and families, 
and so fought like savages to keep possession 
of what they would not claim to be their property 
in any sense of the word. 

We mention this matter not to take sides in 
the controversy, not to endorse or to exonerate 
either party; for usually, in all struggles of 
which selfishness is the basis, rights and wrongs 
are to be found on both sides. But we desire 
to remind our readers that this last development 
is exactly in line with what we have 
been pointing out for the past sixteen years as 
the Scripturally predicted evidences, showing 
that we are living in the "harvest" or end of 
the Gospel age, which is to close, and to be 
merged into the Millennial age, with "a time 



of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation."— Dan. 12:1. 
When we reflect that many of these Homestead 

R1423 : page 212 

workmen are professed Christians— Presbyterians, 
Methodists, Catholics, etc.— who not 
only believe that "no murderer hath eternal 
life abiding in him," but who also believe that 
those who were shot down not only departed 
this life, but went to an eternity of torment, we 
ask ourselves— If self-interest and excitement 
lead to such excesses now, what can be expected 
when superstition gives way and Churchianity 
shall fully lose its already vanishing influence 
upon the masses? Then what has just 
shocked the world will seem tame— the Scriptures 
intimating that the scenes of the French 
Revolution were but a prelude to and illustration 
of the coming universal trouble. 

While recognizing in these troubles some of 
the events marking this Day of the Lord, let 
us not be premature. Much remains to be 
done before the great and awful climax of 
these troubles is reached, when human selfishness 
will be fully arrayed against human selfishness 
and equally matched. Then widespread 
anarchy will demonstrate the necessity for the 
reign of the Prince of Peace, whose first work 
will be, in the culmination of this struggle of 
human selfishness, to dash the nations to pieces 
as a potter's vessel, and to rule them with a rod 
of iron— of unbending and just retribution— 
until their pride and their power are humbled 
in the dust, and they shall learn in the depths 
of their humiliation to be still and to recognize 
God, and Christ who will be exalted in the earth 
as king over all the earth, to lift up and bless 
all who love righteousness and peace.— Psa. 2:9; 
Rev. 2:27; Psa. 46:10. 

But first and chiefly the intervening work will 
be the sealing of the servants of God in their foreheads. 
(Rev. 7:3.) And each should ask himself 
—What am I doing to assist in sealing others 
since I received the intellectual sealing of the 
knowledge of the truth? And each should 
resolve that whilst others are battling for earthly 
advantages and willing to lay down their 
lives for the same, "We ought also to lay down 
our lives for the brethren"— in carrying the 
present truth to all who have an ear to hear. 

Without taking either side in the selfish 
struggles which will from time to time come 
with increasing violence, without assuming that 
all the right is with one party, and all the wrong 



with the other, let us have charity for both 

the parties to these struggles— for the rich in 

their morbid selfishness which takes pleasure in 

hoarding millions, while some of their employees 

(laborers at $ 1 .48 per day) have scarcely 

enough for the bare necessities of life for themselves 

and their families;— for the workmen in 

that while they are lately tasting of the advantages 

of education and home comforts, and even 

luxuries, they fear lest they should let slip advantages 

now possessed. They fear lest labor 

should become degraded as in by-gone days, 

or even to the European level of to-day. And 

who could blame them for having these sentiments, 

seeing that selfishness is the law of "this 

present evil world?" 

The entire trouble between labor and capital 
centers in selfishness! The mechanic wants from 
three dollars to nine dollars a day, and thinks 
the laborer well paid at one dollar and a half, 
because of his inferior skill, and yet unreasonably 
expects his employer to act upon different 
principles— to risk capital and invest still 
greater ability on philanthropic principles. 
Like all the rest of the world, he recognizes 
the royal law of Love, which Christ taught, 
and would like to have it in force toward himself, 
but is not ready to exercise its principles 
toward others. The great trouble will be 
gradually precipitated by this very conflict of 
the principles of Selfishness and Love— the 
masses longing for the blessings that would 
flow from the operation of the principle of 
Love, yet unwilling to submit themselves to 
the same, because they see no way of enforcing 
that law upon all. Many, who name the name 
of Christ only in blasphemy, are selfishly ready 
to quote to others the words of the great Teacher: 
"Do unto others as you would that they 
should do to you" and "Love thy neighbor 
as thyself" but are wholly unwilling to obey these 
commands toward others. It will be their attempt 
to realize for themselves their ideal of 
true Brotherly Love that they have not yet 
learned to practice toward others which will, as 
the Scriptures show, eventuate in anarchy— 
"a time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation." 

R1423 : page 213 

How different is and should be the attitude 
of those who, realizing that they were bought 
with a price, have surrendered their own selfish 
wills and plans and committed their interests, 
present and future, to Christ. To such the 



Lord makes known the mystery of his will- 
that though in the world, they should not be 
of it; that they should not seek to amass 
wealth, but rather to spend and be spent in his 
service; that they should not share the world's 
fear, but entrust the entire matter to their 
Lord's overruling providence. To such the 
Lord now gives, as "meat in due season," the 
assurance that he is about to set up in the earth 
the long-prayed-for Kingdom of God, whose 
will, the law of Love, shall be enforced for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth, 
after this trouble is over. Such, while deprecating 
violence and sympathizing with both 
sides of the controversy, are to avoid taking 
any part in the conflict, but rather to counsel 
peace and a reliance upon the Lord for the 
ushering in of the Golden Age in his own time 
and way. 

How long the present spasm of trouble may 
last, and how great the proportions it may yet 
assume, no man can foretell; but that it is merely 
a spasm, and not the final catastrophe which 
will utterly wreck society, we are confident. 
It will probably result in a general back-set to 
labor organizations and to greater confidence 
on the part of the capitalists. But the world 
is longing for a government based upon Love, 
and does not realize that such a condition is 
beyond the grasp of selfish human beings and 
can come about only through the interposition 
of Christ's Millennial Kingdom. Ah! little do 
they realize that their own failures are to be 
used of the Lord as his instrumentality in setting 
up his kingdom— that the pent up fires in 
selfish breasts will eventuate in the destruction 
of society, and that upon its ashes the Lord 
from heaven will establish the Kingdom of 
which the law will be Perfect Love. 

"Go to, now, ye rich men, weep and howl for 
the misery that shall come upon you. ...Behold, 
the hire of your laborers, who have reaped down 
your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, 
crieth...into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth." 
— Jas. 5:1-8. Even though all rich men have 
not done so, even though some of them in 
this our day have been no more selfish and 
grasping than others— perhaps, indeed, much 
more generous, giving liberally for the endowment 
of Hospitals, Colleges, Libraries, Homes 
for the Blind, for the Deaf and Dumb, for Incurables, 
for Orphans, for the Aged, etc., etc.— 
yet they will be judged as a class in this day 
that shall try every man's work— this day of 
trouble which shall "burn as an oven, in the 
which all the proud, as well as all that do wickedly, 



shall be as stubble." The judgment of the 
masses will be that those who possess great 
wealth never justly and rightly obtained so much 
more than their fellows, even though imperfect 
laws and social customs may endorse as honest 
the methods used for its accumulation. And 
upon the wealthy class of this generation shall 
be visited the penalty due to those thieving 
Barons of past centuries who kept their dependent 
neighbors in serfdom and grew rich at the 
expense of those who reaped their fields— of 
much of whose proper wages they fraudulently 
deprived them. This will be on the same 
principle as that of Luke 11:50,51; Rev. 18:5-7,24. 
A realization of the wrongs done 
by the rich toward their poor brethren in past 
times should, under the light of this day, lead 
the same class to the greater sympathy for 
their less fortunate fellows. And if it does 
not, the relentless argument of the masses soon 
will be— Your class defrauded our class in the 
past, and now our class will defraud your class 
to even up matters. 

At present all is quiet at Homestead, with 
the Volunteer State Guard in possession. But 
the socialistic flame is spreading amongst various 
other labor organizations, in all parts of 
the land, some of which have passed resolutions 
of sympathy for the workmen, and some 
have contributed funds to enable them "to fight 
capital." (The Amalgamated Association, 
however, claims to have $250,000 in its treasury.) 
Some Labor Unions propose that now 
they must arm themselves, with improved 
weapons, to defend their rights. Mr. Powderly, 
president of the Knights of Labor, is quite revolutionary: 
he is publicly reported to have said: 

R1423 : page 214 

"This fight is but the rumbling of a coming 
revolution, that is to say whether Wall Street 
[the financial centre] shall or shall not control 
the country. It is the fight of labor; and the 
labor organizations of the country should stand 
firmly at the back of these men who are fighting 

R1424 : page 214 

at Homestead." 

So strong and so rapidly growing is the animosity 
toward millionaires, even though they pay 
better wages and pay more promptly than others, 
that they will "weep and howl"— be in misery 
in this great day of the Lord. But in the outcome 
—when Anarchy shall have blighted all 



human hopes and destroyed all human government 

—the Lord will set up his kingdom under 

the whole heavens; and, under its beneficent 

rule, all shall be blessed and brought to a knowledge 

of good under the law of Love, as they 

now have a knowledge of evil under the law 

of Selfishness. Then, at the close of that Millennial 

Kingdom, will come the final test to all 

—to manifest whether, with full knowledge of 

the two laws and their respective workings, they 

prefer Love or Selfishness. Those who choose 

Love shall be granted life— everlasting. Those 

who prefer Selfishness shall be esteemed unworthy 

of further life and shall die the Second 

Death. 



How wise, and how beneficial in the end to 
all classes, it might prove for the masses to 
adopt a different principle of dealing with this 
question: If they should enact laws providing 
that whenever any man dies possessed of over 
one million dollars worth of money and property 
all the surplus above one million should be divided 
equally between funds for public secular 
education, for the improvement of public highways 
and water-ways and for charitable unsectarian 
hospitals and homes for unfortunates. 

The effect of such a law would be rapidly experienced: 
wealthy men would at once give 
away their surplus millions without waiting to 
have it forfeited at their death. Such a law would 
scatter capital, and, without destroying the 
energy of the world's active minds, would turn 
that activity to good account— for the ambition 
to make a name and leave enduring monuments 
in colleges, hospitals and public benefactions 
would take the place of the ambition 
to be the richest man. 

If necessary the limit could afterward be reduced 
to half a million dollars (as each member 
of the family could hold, and transfer at 
death, an equal sum). And lest some should 
hold their millions until near death's door, the 
law could provide that transfers of property by 
a sick man or woman made within thirty days 
of death should be invalid and void. 

But while some such law would be beneficial, 
we have no expectation of seeing so simple a 
method for all adopted. Both sides will evidently 
fight the matter out to the wrecking of 
the present social system. Thank God for the 
higher than human government, long promised 
and now at hand— even though it come to men 
through a baptism of bloody trouble— the breaking 



of present imperfect systems with the "rod 
of iron."— Rev. 2:26,27. 



R1431 : page 214 

THE FAITHFUL SERVANT. 

[TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN BY MRS. O. VON ZECH. 



Good servant, enter in: 

Thou hast been faithful found 
In righteous stewardship 

O'er the entrusted pound. 
The honor of my house, 

My Kingdom, thou hast sought; 
Thy life thou more and more 

A sacrifice hast brought. 

In nothing hast thou had 

Self-interest for thine aim. 
Naught seemed too small nor great 

To glorify my Name. 
My yoke hast easy called, 

My burden took on thee, 
And every day with joy 

Hast borne it after me. 

Good servant, enter in, 

And faith's reward now share; 
With me upon my throne 

A crown of life now wear. 
For he who, without fear, 

In small the great hast traced, 
O'er few things faithful here, 

O'er many shall be placed. 

A thousand years full soon 

Thou mayest reign with me; 
Thee will I also grace 

With priestly dignity, 
Till all the tribes of earth 

Claim God to be their Lord, 
To whom I then return 

The Kingdom at his word.— J. KUEHN. 



page 215 

STUDIES IN THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 



SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 

READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES, WHERE THESE 

LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 

LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 

PUBLISHED IN ADVANCE, AT THE REQUEST OF FOREIGN READERS. 



R1424: page 215 

PETER AND JOHN BEFORE THE COUNCIL. 



LESSON V., JULY 31, ACTS 4:1-18. 

Golden Text— "There is none other name under 
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.' 
Acts 4:12. 

This lesson continues the narrative of the 
preceding one, and shows how the glorious doctrine, 
of redemption and restitution through 
the death and resurrection of Christ, was received 
by those who heard. We learn that so 
many of the people believed that the number 
of disciples who openly espoused the cause of 
Christ was greatly increased. (Verse 4.) This 
manifestation of power, to influence the people 
to believe in the crucified Jesus and in the doctrine 
he taught, greatly incensed the priests, 
who resolutely refused the truths of the new 
dispensation, and were determined, so far as 
lay in their power, to hinder the people from 
believing them, and thus to retain their own 
former prestige and honors and influence. 

The Sadducees also, a large sect of the Jews 
who denied, not only the doctrine of the resurrection 
and a future life, but also the existence 
of spirit beings, were greatly annoyed by 
this teaching, and joined with the priests and 
the captain of the temple in an effort to put an 
end to it. Then Peter and John were seized 
and put into prison, and afterward brought before 
the rulers and elders and scribes to answer 
for this heresy. 

Evidently they appreciated the privilege of 
thus enduring reproach for the cause of Christ. 
With great boldness Peter again affirmed before 
the rulers that this miracle had been performed 
in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom 
they had crucified. They were so filled with 
the spirit of the glorious message they bore, 
that prisons and persecution and even the possibility 
of sharing their Master's fate did not 



deter them from speaking boldly in his name, 
and of the blessed tidings of his coming kingdom 
and glory. "Be it known unto you all," 
said Peter, "and to all the people of Israel, 
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, 
whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the 
dead, even by him, doth this man stand here 
before you whole. This is the stone which was 
set at naught of you builders, which is become 
the head of the corner [the chief corner stone 
in the divine plan of the ages]. Neither is 
there salvation in any other: for there is none 
other name under heaven given among men, 
whereby we must be saved." 

How differently the truth affects men according 
to the attitude of their hearts with reference 
to it. Here was the man who had been healed 
of his lameness gratefully acknowledging the 
favor of God by accompanying God's accused 
servants to prison and to judgment, bearing his 
witness to the truth thus by his personal presence 
with them, and willingly enduring with 
them whatever of reproach or persecution this 
testimony might bring. And how eloquent and 
convincing was the silent testimony of his presence; 
for these priests and rulers, the enemies 
of Christ and his doctrine, "beholding the 
man which was healed standing with them, 
could say nothing against it." Then there 
were numerous others who openly identified 
themselves with the Church, ready and willing 
to bear whatever of reproach or persecution it 
might bring to them. On the contrary, there 
were those priests and rulers, the professed 
leaders and teachers of the people, forced to 
admit in their own hearts the truth of this 
miracle, yet, blinded by prejudice as to the 
teaching, secretly plotting and scheming as to 
how they might be able to hedge up its course 
and stamp it out, and secretly conferring 
among themselves, saying, "What shall we do 
to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle 
had been done by them is manifest to all 
them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot 
deny it." And they finally decided that it 
would not be advisable to rashly antagonize 
the numerous followers of the apostles who had 
been so impressed by their teaching. And 
therefore they let them go after strictly charging 
them to speak no more in this name. 

To the one class the truth brought peace and 
joy and the blessed hope of everlasting life; 
while to the other class— the prejudice-blinded 
rejectors of God's truth, though professedly his 
chosen leaders and teachers of the people in 
the truth— it brought only condemnation, and 



deepened and intensified their darkness. "Ye 
serpents, ye generations of vipers," said the 
Master, "how can ye escape the condemnation 
to gehenna" [symbol of the second death]?— 
Matt. 23:33. 

Those who cultivate a spirit of opposition to 
righteousness and who plot and scheme to withstand 

R1424 : page 216 

God are trifling with a dangerous propensity 
to evil which will sweep them on to destruction 
with almost irresistible force, rendering 
it next to impossible for them ever to turn 
to righteousness and truth. How great is the 
responsibility, then, of those who hear and 
understand the truth, both toward themselves 
and toward their fellow men. We cannot trifle 
with God's truth with impunity: when it is 
testified to us it is our part to receive it into 
good and honest hearts, to act upon it and to 
let it have its proper effect upon our lives; 
and then, with grateful hearts toward God the 
giver, to bear its precious testimony to others 
in whatever way we can. If, like the man that 
was healed of his lameness, we have no talent 
of eloquence, we can at least company with 
those who love and serve the truth and let 
others see what the Lord has done for us, and 
in simple language we can tell how we who 
were once lame with ignorance and superstition 
and doubt and fear have been healed of 
our lameness and can now run and not grow 
weary, and walk and not faint; and how that 
through faith in the crucified and risen Lord 
Jesus the great work has been accomplished. 

Let all who have heard the blessed gospel of 
redemption and a restitution of all things, and 
of the precious promises to the Church of being 
made co-workers with the Lord in bringing to 
all mankind the blessings of restitution, and of 
being made joint-heirs together with him in his 
kingdom, be faithful to the truth— faithful in 
esteeming it of highest importance, faithful in 
complying with its conditions of life, faithful 
in declaring it to others, faithful in standing up 
with and for those who publicly proclaim it, 
and faithful in holding it firm to the end. 

The Golden Text of this lesson deserves 
more than a passing notice; for too many seem 
to lose sight of its import. As it was "through 
faith in his name"— the only name given, 

R1425 : page 216 

whereby we can be saved— that the impotent 



man was healed, so it is and is to be with all 
men and with all diseases of body and of soul. 
Only through the channel of faith in Christ 
flows the blessing of God. Not through faith 
without Christ, and not through Christ without 
faith, but through faith in him whom God hath 
set forth to be a propitiation [satisfaction] for 
our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the 
sins of the whole world.— 1 John 2:2. 

As men's hearts expand and as they come to 
realize that but a very small proportion of humanity, 
now living or dead, ever heard of the 
ONLY NAME WHEREIN IS SALVATION, they rebel 
against this text and either twist it or deny it, 
because they hold as truth the human teaching 
that the present life ends all probation and all 
hope. On the contrary, how much better it 
would be for them to say with the Apostle: 
Let God be true though it prove all humanity 
to be in error; and, affirming with Peter and 
all the apostles that there is no salvation without 
faith and no other name in which faith will 
avail, they should seek for the Scriptural solution 
of their difficulty. They would find it in 
the words of all the holy prophets and apostles, 
as well as in our Lord's words: that as the 
man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, 
this glorious gospel must be testified to all in 
due time (1 Tim. 2:6), and that this "due 
time" is coming in which the knowledge of the 
Lord will fill the whole earth. Then the eyes 
of the blind shall be opened and the ears of 
the deaf shall be unstopped. (Isa. 1 1:9; 35:5.) 
Then all that are in their graves shall 
obey the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth— and they who then obey him shall live in a 
sense and to a degree that they never lived before 
—an everlasting life.— John 5:25,28. 

R1425 : page 216 

THE APOSTLES' CONFIDENCE IN GOD. 



LESSON VI., AUGUST 7, ACTS 4:19-31. 

Golden Text— "They spake the word of God with 
boldness."— Acts 4:31. 

VERSES 19,20. Here Peter and John called 
upon the rulers and elders and scribes in council 
to judge for themselves whether it would be 
right in the sight of God to obey earthly rulers 
rather than God, and boldly declared their own 
convictions and purpose to continue to declare 



the things which they had seen and heard, notwithstanding 
their command to the contrary; 
for, said they, we cannot do otherwise: we are 
so full of the spirit of this glorious truth that 
we must give utterance to it. The basis of 
their confidence was not superstition, but a 
knowledge of the truth— of the sacrificial death 
of the Lord and the clearly demonstrated fact 
of his resurrection, which was to them a pledge 
of the promised resurrection of all the redeemed 
race of men. "Ye shall know the truth," said 
our Lord, "and the truth shall make you free" 
—free from ignorance and superstition, and 
bold to declare the whole counsel of God. 
These opposers of the truth, be it noted, 
were not professed infidels, nor worldly people: 
they were the greatest religious teachers of their 
day; and one was the great high priest. According 
to God's own arrangement for the Jewish 
nation during the Jewish age, these were the 
appointed guides of the people; but now a new 
dispensation was dawning, and these professed 
teachers, who had been unfaithful to their 
trust, and who had grown proud and self-righteous 
and out of all harmony with the spirit of 

R1425 : page 217 

God, were entirely unprepared for it, so that 
when the glorious gospel of the new dispensation 
reached their ears they could not receive 
it. Their learning and their leisure to devote 
to the study of the divine Word were of no avail 
to them in finding the truth, for their hearts 
were not in the proper attitude of humility before 
God. Consequently the lowly and untitled 
—the humble fishermen, yea, and the publicans 
and reformed harlots— went into the 
kingdom before them. 

And so it has been ever since those days: 
the most determined opposition to the truth 
has always come from the recognized religious 
leaders in whom pride and ambition were fostered 
and cultivated. And these were nearly 
always followed by the multitude, while the 
few who dared to be true to God and his Word 
have always endured persecution from them in 
some form. This is none the less true of our 
day than of the past. It is the clergy to-day 
that offers the most strenuous opposition to the 
truth; and it is only here and there that a few 
faithful souls are found brave enough to believe 
and teach the truth as the Lord is now unfolding 
it to us in the dawning light of the Millennial 
day. 

It is indeed the right and proper course 



to believe God rather than men, to declare 
his truth with humble boldness, and to be 
ready always to give an answer to every man 
for the hope that is in us, with meekness and 
reverence. This we can do if we keep filled 
with the spirit— filled with the truth, and with 
love of the truth, and with the joy and peace and 
comfort that the truth alone can give, and with 
the zeal for God and for the blessing of our 
fellow men which the truth alone inspires. 

VERSES 21,22. So strong was the evidence 
of the truth that the masses of the people disregarded 
the opposition of the clergy; and the 
latter, unable to deny the testimony, were 
obliged to let the apostles go. 

VERSE 23 shows the beautiful bond of sympathy 
that existed among the various members 
of the early Church. They shared each others 
joys and sorrows and comforted and encouraged 
one another to be firm and true to God in the 
midst of the severest trials. 

VERSES 24-30 record their prayer of thankful 
acknowledgment of the favor of God in the 
deliverance of these two faithful witnesses, thus 
showing that they did not attribute their success 
in convincing the people to their own eloquence 
or power, but to the favor and blessing of God. 
As the beloved Apostle Paul wrote (1 Cor. 3:5,6), 
"Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but 
ministers by whom ye believed. I have planted, 
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase." 
All praise is due to God; but we may truly rejoice 
in being honored as servants of his truth. 

The reference in verses 25,26 to David's 
prophecy (Psa. 2) had a proper application, 
not only upon that occasion when Peter and 
John were brought before the rulers, but also 
upon many subsequent occasions all through 
this gospel age. The prophecy, however, has 
special application to the time indicated in 
verse 6, when Jehovah is about to set his king 
upon his holy hill of Zion— when he is about 
to establish his kingdom and set up his Anointed 
as king over all the earth— when, as other 
scriptures show, there will be "a time of trouble 
such as never was since there was a nation." 
We are even now upon the eve of this great 
time of trouble, which will ere long culminate 
in the complete and final overthrow of all the 
kingdoms of the world and the full and permanent 
establishment of Christ's kingdom. 

While the kings and rulers, civil and religious, 
set themselves in determined opposition 
and take counsel together against the principles 
of truth and righteousness that are now 
being brought to the front and urged upon the 



attention of all mankind in the heated disputes 
between capital and labor, between rulers and 
subjects and between the clergy and the laity of 
all Christendom, they little realize that they are 
arraying themselves against the mighty power 
of the Lord of hosts, who will surely lay justice 
to the line and righteousness to the plummet, 
and effectually sweep away every refuge of lies. 
-Isa. 28:17. 

VERSES 29,30 are a petition for special grace 
and courage, in view of the threatenings of persecution, 
that they might not grow faint-hearted, 
but, being filled with the spirit, might 
speak the truth with great boldness, regardless 
of the consequences to themselves; and for 
such miraculous endorsement of their teachings 
as he would be pleased in his wisdom to grant. 

What a sweet, Christlike spirit was manifested 
in this prayer. Mark the love and harmony 
and sympathy among the brethren; the 
love and zeal for the truth which was evidently 
paramount to every other consideration, 
their gratitude and humble recognition of the 
divine favor, and the realization of their own 
weakness and desire for more and more of the 
power from on high and for special aid to enable 
them to endure hardness as good soldiers 
of the cross. Such is the proper attitude of the 
Church at all times; and such a spirit and such 
a prayer are sure to bring to the Church now 
as well as then the same answer of peace and 
joy. It is written that they were all filled with the 
holy spirit, and they went forth from that place 
of prayer and spoke the Word of God with 

R1425 : page 218 

boldness. The place also where they were was 
shaken while the blessing of the spirit came 
upon them. This, like the gifts that were then 
given, was evidently to supply what was then 
needed— an aid to their faith— in an hour of 
trial just at the beginning of their great work. 

R1426 : page 218 

ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA. 



LES SON VII. , AUGUST 1 4, ACTS 5:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Be not deceived: God is not mocked; 
for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap."- 
Gal. 6:7. 



The lesson of this sad narrative is one of special 
warning to the whole Church. It is the 
only case in the Church on record where the 
penalty of wilful violation of a covenant with 
God met with summary punishment. Many 
since that day have doubtless similarly violated 
their covenant and no such results followed. 
With great boldness many have not only done 
so, but they have gone still farther and made 
merchandise of the interests of the truth; and 
still judgment tarries. Nevertheless, the Lord's 
eye is upon every one of the consecrated household, 
and no inequality will be seen in his 
dealings when his work is completed. 

We have seen from the preceding lessons 
that the Lord's dealings with the early Church 
were peculiarly adapted to the needs of the inception 
of so great a cause, and different from 
his dealings after the Church had been fairly 
set upon her course for the prize of her high 
calling. The particular lesson which the Lord 
in this case desired to impress upon the whole 
Church from then till now was the solemn obligation 
involved in our covenant with him of 
entire consecration to his service. 

While this property remained in thy hand 
was it not thine own? said Peter; and after it 
was sold was it not in thine own power? 
Why hast thou conceived this thing in thine 
heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto 
God. The complicity of the husband and wife 
in the deception made very manifest the wilfulness 
and deliberate intention of both; and the 
penalty which followed was a warning of God's 
righteous indignation against all hypocrisy and 
deceit and the holding of the truth in unrightness. 
-Rom. 1:18. 

We are not called upon to decide in this 
case whether the death of these two was the 
final or "second death" or not. If they sinned 
wilfully against sufficient light and ability to 
walk in it, the penalty must have been final; 
for it is impossible to renew in righteousness 
and holiness those who have once enjoyed and 
then abused the full measure of divine favor. 
(Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26.) And indeed these 
words seem to imply that such a deplorable 
condition may be reached before the fullest 
measure of light has been received; but such 
a one must at least have tasted a considerable 
measure of the heavenly gift and of the powers 
or advantages of the coming age. 

We are told that in the Millennium the 
sinner a hundred years old shall be cut off 
(Isa. 65:20) without receiving all the benefits 
of the Millennial reign. Those who are obedient 



and who patiently submit themselves to 
the reformatory measures of Christ's government 
will go on and on until at the end of that 
age they will have reached perfection, when all 
will receive the final testing which will prove 
their worthiness or unworthiness of eternal life. 
But the sinner who dies at a hundred years of 
age will certainly not have enjoyed all of those 
advantages, simply because he refused to avail 
himself of them; and his cutting off from life 
will be because he has so hardened his heart by 
persistent opposition to the law and discipline 
of the Lord that it has become impossible to 
renew him in righteousness and truth. 

If such conditions may obtain in the Millennial 
age, when the world is on trial for life, 
it is equally possible to the Church in this our 
day of trial or judgment. We do not count 
ourselves competent to decide on the case of 
Ananias and Sapphira or any other individual; 
we know not what extenuating circumstances 
God's merciful eye may see in their cases; but 
we would counsel all to take heed that they hold 
not the truth in unrighteousness. If we have 
consecrated all to the Lord let us ever bear in 
mind the solemn obligation of our covenant. 
This is the lesson which God designed to impress 
upon us all, and let us lay it well to heart. 
But while we would carefully heed the lesson, 
let us not fear that God will not patiently and 
tenderly bear with our weaknesses while our 
hearts are right toward him and while we strive 
to overcome them. God is just, loving and 
merciful— slow to anger and plenteous in mercy. 

page 218 

THE APOSTLES PERSECUTED. 



LESSON VIII., AUGUST 21, Acts 5:25-41. 

Golden Text— "We ought to obey God rather than 
men."— Acts 5:29. 

This lesson is a continuation of the narrative 
of the Apostles' faithfulness, even under great 
persecution, and of the desperately evil course 
of the religious persecutors of that day. But 
the circumstances are so similar to those of 
Lesson VI. that further comment is unnecessary. 

May the simple story of the zeal and heroism 
of these faithful witnesses of the Lord be 
emulated by all his consecrated followers. 



R1426 : page 219 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



Tennessee. 

DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER:--! have just 
received my outfit from the WATCH TOWER 
PUBLISHING CO., and shall commence the canvass 
in a few days. Will you please answer the 
following inquiry, which is made in all good 
faith: Is there any organization among those 
who espouse the doctrines and gospel truth as 
taught by you in the DAWN Series? and, if so, 
by what name are they known? I have been 
a minister in the Baptist ranks for about four 
years, and in love with a full Gospel; and with 
the bright light of the DAWNS shining upon me 
I feel like breaking away from all hindrances 
and spreading the truth from platform and pulpit 
and in all other proper ways. Please write 
me and in addition to above inquiry make any 
suggestions you may feel willing. Yours in 
love and work for Christ, A. McHAN. 

REPLY.-DEAR BROTHER: I rejoice to know 
of your growth in the fulness and freedom of 
the truth as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ, 
our Lord. 

To the majority of ministers, used as they 
are to a more or less easy living and to the 
honor and almost reverence of the people, to 
take a step away from these is a great trial. 
But considering that they have had more light, 
more opportunities for study, more advantages 
in every way than most people, it seems but 
reasonable that they should have greater trial 
—on the principle of more light, more responsibility. 
The truth has never been popular, and 
the one who would follow it must leave the approbation 
of the world and the worldly-minded 
nominal church. 

We have, however, no organization into 
which to invite you, dear brother. The only 
one which we recognize is the one to which 
our Lord Jesus is the door, and the members of 
which have their names written in Heaven. It 
includes, probably, some in as well as out of 
all denominations— every consecrated Christian, 
known to us or unknown. We believe 
that you will already recognize yourself as a 
member of this one, true Church— our Church, 
because we are Christ's. But, while recognizing 
many in the denominations of Babylon as 



members of this true Church, it is our duty to 
re-echo the Lord's words, "Come out of her, 
my people!"— and then to assist them as much 
as possible by the truth which affords the necessary 
grace and strength. 

I would, therefore, think it proper for you 
to use any opportunity or talent in any pulpit, 
etc., from which you can gain a hearing, so 
long as you are able to present therein what 
you believe to be the truth; and as long as you 
do not hide your light through fear of offending 
the worldly-wise. As the Baptists are professedly 
less sectarian and are governed more 
by pure Bible principles than most of the other 
denominations, probably your liberty there 
would last longer and your work among them 
prove more fruitful. 

But the method from which, according to 
the experiences of others, best results are to be 
expected, and in which I see it to be your intention 
to engage, is the Colporteur work. As 
at the first advent, work from door to door, instead 
of pulpit preaching, seems to be receiving 
the Lord's special blessing. Then the disciples 
stood at the door with the simple message, 
"The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!"— 
while now with the same message we can present 
literature (which they did not then have) 
showing why and how and when it is to be 
introduced. 

In introducing the Dawns, however, it is 
better not to say much about the doctrines, except 
where a person is found who is ripe and 
ready for it, leaving it for the books to present 
them gradually, in a way not to excite prejudice 
before enough truth has been gained to 
offset it and to give a taste for more with the 
desire to search diligently for it. The suggestions 
already sent you, you will see are along 
this line of wisdom— speaking the truth in love. 

A back number of the Watch Tower has been 
sent, in which you will find more concerning 
the true Church. May the Lord bless you in 
your service for him, and may you become 
more and more in touch with him and his plans. 
I shall be glad to hear from you whenever you 
feel like writing. 

Yours in the Redeemer, —EDITOR. 

R1426 : page 220 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed find 
$6.00, for which please send me 20 copies of 
Dawn, Vol. I., and a quantity of Tracts. 

I would like to give you some experiences of 



our little "church" of three. Last week each 

of us withdrew from the nominal church— myself 

from the Presbyterian, Brother D , 

from the Baptist, and Brother F , from the 

Methodist. Although it was the most difficult 

step I have ever taken, yet the way was made 

very clear, and the Lord has greatly blessed 

me since, because new floods of light have 

come from his Word, and whenever I have occasion 

to speak about it, I always have Scripture 

given to me, to prove wherein I am right. 

How true is that promise that "The path of 

the just shineth more and more unto the perfect 

day." I see it so plainly since I have 

given my will completely to God. 

R1427 : page 220 

Many, many thanks for the Towers sent me 
in regard to Baptism and The Thief on the 
Cross. The proper mode for immersion is now 
very clear, and the light on the other came almost 
instantly upon reading the article. Thank 
God for a receptive mind! 

I have been told that an infidel in this city 
was brought to Christ through one of the 
Dawns that we loaned, so you see the Harvest 
work is going on, and God gives his messengers 
plenty to do. 

My constant companion is the Word of God, 
and his plan of salvation is scarcely out of my 
mind a moment. The light grows brighter 
every day. I received much good yesterday 
from reading the "Tabernacle Shadows." 
Believe me, dear Brother, although never having 
seen you, yet I feel very near to you. 

Yours in Christian love, 

MORGAN T. LEWIS. 

REPLY.-DEAR BROTHER LEWIS: Your enclosure 
is applied as directed. Allow me to 
congratulate you and the other dear brethren 
on your new-found freedom from the Nominal 
Church. "Be not again entangled in any 
yoke of bondage," that you may render all allegiance 
to the one Lord and Master. 

I very much appreciate the spirit of your 
closing remark. I think that is how all who 
truly love the Lord feel toward each other. 
We are one with him, and love binds us more 
and more closely to him and each other as we 
see his spirit, "the spirit of a sound mind," 
manifested in each other and working out in 
the life. 

You have been growing very fast in the 
knowledge of the truth, dear Brother; in just 
a few months you have partaken of much 



"strong meat," in the three volumes of Dawn, 
all the back numbers of Tower obtainable, etc.; 
or, to use another figure, you have been putting 
on the "armor" very rapidly. All this is 
for a purpose: that you may have the strength 
and the proper armor to enable you to 
stand in this evil day; and not only to stand 
yourself, but also to protect and assist others. 
You must use the shield of faith to resist the 
fiery darts of the adversary, coming from many 
directions, and learn to handle skilfully "the 
sword of the spirit," which is the Word of 
God, as well as to have your intellect protected 
by the helmet of salvation. 

Now I suggest that you re-examine your 
armor to see if you have on each necessary 
piece, in its proper place; in order that you 
may not be taken unawares when the battle 
grows hotter. In other words, that you go 
back and read again what you have received, 
so as to make it entirely your own. As in 
armor the shield does not change into the 
sword, or the helmet into the breastplate, or 
the one usurp the particular office of the other, 
so each distinct feature in the plan of salvation 
retains its own place and use in the general 
whole; and as there are only a certain number 
of pieces in a suit of armor, and when you 
have them on you need no more, only to see 
that they fit together and are tightly fastened, 
leaving no crevice for a stray arrow to penetrate, 
so with the truth: once a truth, always 
a truth, and needing only to be properly adjusted, 
secured and used; and no more can be 
piled on without disastrous effects, weighting 
one down with a multitude of pieces of unnecessary 
or poor armor which would permit the 
enemy to overpower and capture. 

It is necessary to consider these things, because 
the Adversary, seeing that you and others 
cannot be hindered from studying the truth, 
transforms himself into an angel of light, and 
tries to lead such beyond the true light into 
realms of unwarranted speculation which in the 
end carries the expectant and eager student as 
far or farther away than the nominal church or 
some less subtle foe could at the beginning of 

R1427 : page 221 

his studies. A time will come when we shall 
know all things, even as we are known; and as 
we approach nearer to the end of our earthly 
course and apprehend more fully the heights 
and depths and lengths and breadths of our 
Father's plan, we must learn to take the same 



pleasure in its completeness that we formerly did 
in searching out "deep things"— just as God 
enjoys the grand and good and finished features 
of his work. 

We should expect completeness now, so far as 
God's revelation is concerned, because such 
was the promise. For instance, Daniel was 
told, "Go thy way, Daniel, for the thing is 
closed up and sealed until the time of the end 
—then (1) many shall run to and fro, (2) knowledge 
shall be increased, (3) the [truly] wise 
shall understand,. ..and (4) at that time 
Michael [Christ] shall stand up. ..and there 
shall be a time of trouble such as never was 
since there was a nation." Here, then, we 
have an assurance that the truly wise will 
understand, or, as the Apostle says, speaking of 
the same class and the present time, "Ye, 
brethren, are not in darkness, that that day 
should overtake you as a thief." And as our 
Lord promised (to his people throughout this 
age), "Ye shall know the truth," and "If any 
man will do my Father's will he shall know of my 
doctrine." Then again, we have the assurance 
that, "In the days of the voice of the seventh 
angel ['seventh trumpet']— when he shall begin 
to sound-the MYSTERY OF GOD [His plan 
and his Church] SHALL BE FINISHED "-matters 
"kept secret from the foundation of the world." 
-Rev. 10:7; Matt. 13:35. 

I mention these points, dear Brother, because 
the tempter will sooner or later bring to 
you as to others suggestions of doubt and uncertainty 
upon the very points which now you 
see so clearly, and for which there is such 
abundant proof in God's Word. These suggestions 
will be human speculations, "May be" 
and "What if" and "Who knows," which 
finally end in the "outer darkness" of agnosticism, 
in which the worldly-wise have always 
wandered, and into which the nominal 
church is fast falling. These doubts will start 
with suggestions that, Perhaps if God is good 
and loving enough to provide a redemption for 
all, and an opportunity for all to escape the 
penalty which came upon all through Adam's 
sin, and to come to righteousness and harmony 
with him through Christ— perhaps he will force 
all to accept of his loving plans and thus ultimately 
force salvation upon all, by taking away 
their choice or free agency. 

When these unscriptural suggestions of the 
Adversary (based upon purely human reasoning) 
come, the test begins. If your faith is 
built upon the wisdom of men, you will begin 
to say: My wisdom is just as good as that of 



Brother Russell or any other man, and I will 
think for myself. Then you will begin to imagine 
how things might be; and the Adversary 
will send you plenty of assistance in turning 
and twisting every Scripture statement seeming 
to interfere with YOUR OPINIONS. At first you 
might be disposed to base all such claims for 
universal, everlasting salvation upon the merit 
of Christ's redeeming sacrifice. But when you 
begin to reason on the subject you will see that 
— (1) God's law has held Adam and his race 
under its penalty, death, for these thousands of 
years; (2) The sinner could be released only 
by the payment for him of the death-penalty 
by the great Redeemer; (3) The new trial of 
all under the new Covenant by Christ the 
Mediator implies a possibility of failure and 
second death, as well as a possibility of success 
which would confirm the redeemed life and 
make it everlasting; (4) Since God's laws never 
alter, it follows that if, after being forgiven— 
justified— from the Adamic condemnation, any 
shall sin wilfully after receiving full light and 
knowledge, and with full desire to do sin, the 
penalty, death (the second penalty— "second 
death"), would come against such as surely as 
it came against Adam at first; (5) Reason then 
urges that as surely as God's law required a 
ransom price to be paid before any could be released 
from the first penalty or first death, so 
the same unchangeable law would require another 
or second ransom before releasing any 
from the penalty of the second trial— second 
death. Reason says that it is scarcely probable 
that Christ would die again to give anyone a 
third chance for life, after he had been granted 

R1427 : page 222 

fullest opportunity under the second. And 
Scripture answers, "In that he died, he died 
unto [or because of] sin [our sin] once," but 
"Christ dieth no more!" 

But the person infatuated with his own thinking 
and bent on making some new light for 
himself cannot be stopped by reason based on 
Scripture. So he is merely stunned by his reasoning. 
He hesitates but a short time, and 
then decides— my thinking must be right: all 
must be saved eternally, and not merely all 
saved from the first or Adamic death and 
granted a trial for life-everlasting. I must set 
aside the doctrine of the fall and its penalty, 
death, and the ransom from it by our Lord's 
death. I must make a new theory on this which 
will harmonize with universal salvation. And 



soon he begins twisting and turning language 
in every conceivable form to get rid of those 
statements so clearly set forth in Scripture, in 
which he at first delighted as the very bulwarks 
of the good tidings of great joy for all people 
—that "Christ died for our sins"— that "he 
died the just one for the unjust" that he 
might "open up for us a new way of life" and 
"bring us to God." He may or may not hold 
to the word ransom and affect to hold to the 
Bible's teaching, but in fact all such deny the 
ransom and the entire plan of salvation which 
God has revealed— whatever of their own or 
other men's wisdom they may adopt instead. 
So, dear Brother, you see my solicitude for 
you and the reason for my urging that you 
study again and very thoroughly the subjects 
presented in DAWN, Vols. I., II., III., looking 
up every passage cited and noting the contexts. 
I would have your faith rest not in the wisdom 
of man— (neither my wisdom nor your own 
nor any other man's) but in the wisdom of God 

R1430 : page 222 

and in the power of God as revealed to us, his 
children, through his Word.— 1 Cor. 1:24. 

May the Lord bless you and your associates 
—"establish, strengthen, settle you," and fit 
you for usefulness in present "harvest" work. 

Yours in our Redeemer, —EDITOR. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel that I want 
to do something in the vineyard of our Lord; 
but fear I may not be humble enough— or 
perhaps I am too ambitious, or may undertake 
"eye" or "hand" work, rather than that belonging 
to members of lower degree in "the 
body." 

My health both physically and spiritually 
leaves me to a certain extent strengthless. Oh! 
how I do realize this— even more keenly spiritually 
than otherwise. The suggestions you gave 
me have found lodgment in my heart. I want 
them to remain there. I want to ponder over 
them. I do not know just what the result will 
be, but I want to loose my hold on business at 
least to the extent that it has overcharged me 
with this world's cares. My first work will be 
partly to regain lost ground. While getting 
business in shape to get more time to devote to 
the Lord's service, I will have time to study 
and exercise my senses, both in getting an 



understanding of, and in defending, the divine 
plan (which embraces the glad tidings to both 
Church and world). 

For want of practice I cannot make as good 
"music" on my "harp" as I could a few 
years ago. Then I had great confidence, so 
that I did not fear to meet and fight with a 
Goliath; becoming rather an expert with the 
two-edged sword. How ashamed I have felt 
sometimes within the past year or two, when I 
realized that I was concealing my light, fearful 
lest some "Philistine" giant might get the 
better of me in discussion, if he saw and accused 
me of being "one of them." I am truly 
glad that I never denied my Lord, nor indeed 
ever denied being one of his disciples; 
but realizing that I had to a great extent lost 
my power to use the Scriptures in defense of 
my views, I often felt it prudent to keep quiet, 
when otherwise I might have improved a good 
opportunity for exposing error, spreading the 
truth, or putting to flight its adversaries. 

How thankful I am for the vivid glimpses of 
truth I had at different times while attending 
the Convention. I do not know to what to compare 
them— unless to what I have seen at night, 
during a terrible thunder storm, as I lay in bed 
looking out of a window. A few flashes of 
lightning divided the heavy, choking darkness, 
and for an instant revealed objects such as 
trees, houses, etc. These glimpses of truth 
seemed very, very distinct, and the impression 
they made remains with me. If the presentation 
of truth to the mind may be compared to 
the brightness of the sun at noon-day, these 
glimpses or pictures seen might be compared 
to the clean-cut flashes of lightning, even more 
dazzling than the brightness of the sun. 

The feeling that always followed was like 
this: Oh, that I could always, constantly, have 
such clear conceptions of truth. Oh, that this 

R1430 : page 223 

bright shining, with the confidence it inspires 
and the love it enkindles in my heart, would 
remain. Then, how I could with confidence 
go into the vineyard, knowing that I would 
succeed— that I could hold fast, that I could 
stand, that I could overcome, that I could win 
the prize and wear the crown. 

How sweet to leave the world a while, to retreat 
from its busy scenes, and to seek the 
fellowship of our Lord and the wise virgins. 

In Christian love, yours, 

WM. C. MACMILLAN. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been in 
the Christian ministry for twenty years, during 
fifteen of which I have studied the prophecies diligently 
—which resulted in bringing me to some 
of the same conclusions you give in Millennial 
Dawn. It would be difficult for any one to imagine 
my delight in reading your books. I am 
profiting by the information thus gained and I 
am talking and preaching it wherever I go; 
and it is wonderful to find so many people 
ready to receive new truth, however much it 
may differ from the old stereotyped systems of 
theology in which they have been reared. I 
was pleased with the copies of Tower sent, 
especially with the one containing your article 
on "The True Church." I intend, by the help 
of God, to proclaim all that I learn from His 
Word, believing it is perfectly safe. I am Pastor 
of the Christian Church here, it is in a prosperous 
condition, and I fancy I have the love 
and confidence of my people; but there is no 
sacrifice too great for me to make for the cause 
of God and humanity. 

I have no doubt that you are asked many 
questions by your many correspondents, and I 
am aware that your time is too valuable to waste 
on those of carping critics; but if it is not asking 
too much I should like to know how you 
harmonize the doctrine of the utter destruction 
of the finally wicked (which I also believe) 
with Rev. 20:10; 22:15. Believe me, dear 
Brother, that I ask this only for information. 
I make no secret of my nonbelief of eternal 
torment, and have a theory in reference to the 
scriptures referred to, but fearing it might not 
be the best I ask your views. [This question 
will be briefly answered soon in a tract— A Rejoinder 
to Mr. Ingersoll.-ED.] 

I am studying these things with a view to 
devoting the remainder of my life to their 
proclamation, as soon as I can master the 
lessons. I am only forty-six years old, strong 
and vigorous, just in the prime of manhood 
and well inured to hard work; and hence I 
think I can do much in the name of Him to 
whom I belong— who bought me with His own 
blood. God bless you in your grand work. 

Fraternally yours, N. G. MURPHY. 



Iowa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The time draws 
near again to send in our "Good Hopes." I am 
glad that I am permitted to help even so little 
in the work, and perhaps, as I long to be useful 
in the Master's service, if I am faithful in a 
little, he will give me more to do. 

I am very much interested in the young boys 
of this neighborhood. There are so many 
temptations to lead them astray. With this 
end in view, of lifting up a higher standard of 
morality and truth, we canvassed the neighborhood 
for means to buy a tent and started a 
Union Sabbath School. We also hold Bible 
readings; but our way is encountered with many 
difficulties, and it is only by prayer and earnest 
zeal that we are enabled to keep up. I 
have a class of young boys which I long to 
start out in the world as little soldiers to battle 
for the right. 

Pray the dear Lord to help us in our weak 
efforts to do good and to guide us aright; and 
may he bless all of the dear workers everywhere, 
and hasten the glad day when all shall know 
and serve him. 

One who is trusting in Him, 

MRS. H. C. P . 

REPLY. --DEAR SISTER: Your enclosure has 
been applied as directed— and appreciated as 
your thank-offering to the Lord and as an evidence 
of your love and zeal. May it be blest 
in the service of our King, and may the sacrifices 
in earthly things, which it has cost you, be 
more than compensated for in spiritual blessings. 

I am glad that you desire to be led of God 
into that service which will most honor him 
and put yourself in more nearly perfect touch 
with his will; yet I am not surprised that in 
the work for the boys of your neighborhood you 
find it very much up-hill. Ordinarily it would 
be a good work— better far than a bad or selfish 
way of spending or wasting the time— and 
accomplishing something for them also; but accomplished 
only with difficulty. And perhaps 
the Lord does not remove the difficulties, as 
you might like, in order to show you a better 
work— good though the present one is, and 
undoubtedly receiving his blessing on account 
of your earnestness and love. 

Have you never thought that the Lord could, 

R1430 : page 224 

very easily, close the liquor establishments and 
other doors of temptation? and that the reason 
he does not do it is that his time has not yet 
come? When his time does come, in the Millennial 



age, humane work of reform will be far 
more successful, because evil will be restrained, 
temptations, etc., removed, and it will be his 
will that all shall be blessed. 

So I want to suggest, as before stated, that 
he may desire to show you what his work is 
now, according to the times and seasons which 
he observes in all his dealings with us. This 
age has been for the selection of the bride of 
Christ, who is to be associated with him in the 
Millennial reign of blessing; and the work of 
the prospective bride now is to make HERSELF 
ready (Rev. 19:7)— not specially the blessing 
of the world, which her Lord designs shall be 
done after she becomes united to him. 

Or, as pictured in a parable, this is the 
"harvest" of the age, when, instead of sowing 
the good seed, as you are trying to do in the 
case of the boys, the time for reaping has come, 
when the wheat (those who have already received 
the word of truth and been developed by it) is 
to be separated from the tares by the sickle of 
present truth. Surely there are many developed 
Christians within your reach in need of your 
sickle lest they be choked under the mass of 
tares.-See DAWN, VOL. III., Chapter vi. 

The Lord said, as represented by the prophet, 
that he was anointed to preach the glad tidings 
to the meek. We, as the members of his body, 
have received the same anointing, and therefore 
must likewise seek THE MEEK. The meek 
are generally not found amongst wild boys or 

R1431 : page 224 

in the slums, but among Christians— those whose 
experiences in life have made them willing to 
seek refuge in Christ— whose hearts have been 
"broken." Surely if your boys were "meek" 
and willing your difficulties would be removed. 
But you are trying to force on them that which 
rightfully belongs to the meek, who are perhaps 
waiting and longing for your message of peace. 

This is only a suggestion, dear Sister, inspired 
by the earnest tone in which you write. 

May the Lord bless you and lead you to His 
praise and the accomplishment of his purpose. 

Yours in our Redeemer, —EDITOR. 

page 224 

Connecticut. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have read 
with great interest and, I trust, profit, the 
double number of TOWER in which you treat 
the subject of the "Trinity." It is a view that 



seems to harmonize with the Scriptures and 
sanctified common sense. I have also received 
the Quarterly giving an epitomized statement 
of the Plan of the Ages. I think this particularly 
good, and will be adapted to prepare the 
way for some busy people, who would not think 
at first that they could read 350 pages of matters 
ethical. I would like to have you send me 
fifty copies of it, and I will try to use them in 
a way that will help the great cause. I enclose 
my check for $5.00, which I think will pay for 
them and leave a little balance, which you may 
use in the Lord's work as you think he desires. 
I think "The Tabernacle and the Better Sacrifices" 
is excellent in pamphlet form. 

Yours truly, R. P. CHAPMAN. 

[Glad to know that our recent publications 
are giving so much satisfaction to you and 
others whose approval and co-operation we so 
much value.-EDITOR.l 



Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I inclose one 
dollar for a year's subscription to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER, beginning with July. 

My wife and I have lately read MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and you will know it has changed our 
whole lives. With my brother in the flesh, 
we had consecrated our lives to the service of 
the Lord in heathen lands, purposing to support 
ourselves with the Lord's help. Now all 
is changed. I have given up my pastoral work: 
the Bible alone must receive my whole attention 
for a time at least. The way is not clear, 
but we trust the Lord to lead us. We pray, 
God bless Brother Russell, as a faithful servant 
in the Lord's house, for the meat he has given 
us "in due season." 

My work, pastoral and evangelistic, has been 
quite remunerative (about $1200 per year); but 
even before I read the DAWN, I felt I could no 
longer work for a salary. I have ordered 12 
copies of the DAWN, and shall use my opportunities 
to spread the light. 

In the hope of immortality, E. R. BLACK. 



page 226 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED TWICE A MONTH. 



TOWER PUBLISHING COMPANY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE" 

ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

C. T. RUSSELL, EDITOR. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 
(INCLUDES ALSO A SUBSCRIPTION TO TWO COPIES 
OF OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS QUARTERLY) 
By Express Order, Postal Money Order, Bank Draft, or 
Registered Letter. Foreign only by Foreign Money Order. 

FREE TO THE LORD'S POOR. 

N.B.— Those of the interested, who by reason of old 
age or accidents, or other adversity, are unable to pay, 
will be supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each 
December, stating their case and requesting the paper. 



R1432 : page 226 

GLEAN CAREFULLY. YET THERE IS ROOM. 



Many new laborers have recently entered the 
ranks of the Dawn colporteurs, and we are 
glad to be able to announce that they are generally 
doing excellent service. One sister who 
gave up a good situation as a school-teacher 
reports that she has been able to average twenty 
books a day, even during the recent extremely 
hot weather. 

Whilst there is still plenty of room for more 
workers in this part of the harvest work, which 
our Master is so abundantly blessing, we are 
impressed with the necessity of making the 
work done more thorough than heretofore. And 
we desire to impress this thought upon all the 



Colporteurs. Make thorough work of every 
town you touch and pass by no town of one 
thousand or more population. Indeed, experience 
is proving that the small places are 
amongst the best, except where affected by 
some local labor-strike. 

In the interest of all and of the work we are 
now laying out specific routes for the colporteurs 
instead of allowing a promiscuous running 
about. Any colporteur not having received 
such an outline route will please correspond 
with us some days before ready to leave his 
present field. 

In view of the fact that we sometimes refer to 
the Colporteur work as the "harvest work" 
some have inquired whether we mean that it 
alone is "harvest work." We answer, No. 
Although it seems to be the work that the Master 
is chiefly blessing and using, in gathering his 
saints into oneness and harmony with himself 
and each other through the knowledge of the 
truth, and therefore the work that all desire to 
engage in who can do so, it is not the only way 
of serving. Some are using their voices publicly, 
some privately. Some are using their pens publicly, 
some privately. Some are using the tracts 
and some the DAWNS— some publicly, some privately. 
Any way that you can best serve the 
Lord and his true sheep by circulating the present 
truth, "meat in due season," is harvest work; 
and if done with a pure, unselfish desire, in 
the name of the Redeemer, it is acceptable 
service. God bless all the co-laborers. Go on 
and on, from grace to grace and from service 
to service! His grace is sufficient for you,— 
each and all. 



page 226 

A WORD TO CORRESPONDENTS. 



Letters containing money or orders should 
be addressed to the Tower Publishing Co. 
Private letters to the Editor may be enclosed, 
sealed, in the same envelope. Make no allowance 
for our remembering previous orders and 
explanations. Make each letter complete in 
itself. When changing your address give the 
old as well as the new one. Remit by Draft, 
Money Order or Registered letter. Give your 
full address at the beginning of each letter. 



TRACTS IN SWEDISH AND NORWEGIAN. 



Tract No. 1, "Do the Scriptures Teach that 
Eternal Torment is the Wages of Sin?" has 
been translated into Swedish, which is Tract 
No. 9; and into Norwegian, which is Tract 
No. 13. We do not send these out except when 
specially ordered. Any who can use these 
judiciously are welcome to order them— freely. 
These, as well as Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 
14, are supplied in quantities without charge- 
out of the Tract Fund. 



R1432 : page 227 
