From Our Readers
International Conventions  I would like to thank you for the series “What Will Unite the World?” (December 22, 1993) I really enjoyed the part about the international conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Eastern Europe. It was encouraging to hear that some Christians in war-​torn areas could attend them.
E. R., United States
My husband and I are both full-​time ministers; so, much to our regret, our budget did not permit us to be delegates at an international convention. Yet, when reading your articles, I was transported into the convention’s ambience. I could even imagine myself heartily singing along with the Christian sisters shown on page 9. The article has encouraged me to persevere.
I. F., France
Communication  After reading the series “Communication in Marriage” (January 22, 1994), I realized that for the 28 years I have been married, I have not been giving my wife the love she needs. Every time she sought anything in that direction, I blindly put it down as immaturity. These articles helped me to understand just how God created women. In the future, I will try to give my wife the love she needs. Thank you for this accurate knowledge.
Y. K., Japan
I cannot tell you how much I enjoyed the series. I was struck by the accurate examination of the emotional and psychological differences between men and women. I was able to take a look at myself and understand myself better. I am not married, but I believe that these articles will help me to be better able to understand other people’s points of view.
D. R., Italy
You say that independence is something precious to men. But I know several women who also value independence. It disturbs me that you portray the thoughts, feelings, and desires of men as being poles apart from those of women.
U. B., Germany
The article admitted that “it is impossible to label any trait exclusively male or strictly female” and that “the elusive ‘typical man’ or ‘typical woman’ may exist only in the pages of psychology books.” The characteristics attributed to the couple “Jerry” and “Pam” served simply to illustrate how individual husbands and wives may differ in communication styles.​—ED.
African Toys  The article “African Toys for Free” (March 22, 1993) was like a wonderful souvenir of my childhood. In our African towns and villages, toys were not available to all children. So we spent our time making our own toys so as to be like the wealthier white children. They did not appreciate our homemade toys, though. At any rate, the article brought me great joy.
A. A., Cameroon
Solving Problems  I am writing to express my gratitude for the many fine “Young People Ask . . .” articles you provide for us. The series is the first thing I turn to when I receive the latest issue of Awake! I especially appreciated the article “Who Can Help Me Solve My Problems?” (December 8, 1993) I am a senior in high school, and I find making decisions that affect my future overwhelming to say the least. My parents and I have always had open lines of communication, yet at times I still feel they don’t understand. This article helped me see how important it is to ask their advice and talk to them about my feelings and concerns.
H. L., United States

