The Stars Do Have A Message For You!
AS SHOWN in the preceding articles, in spite of the glory the stars manifest, man was meant to consider them just for what they are​—inanimate objects placed in the heavens by the Creator for his purpose. They were not to be worshiped. As an integral part of Jehovah’s marvelous creation subject to his laws, the stars were to ‘declare the glory of God’ and at the same time serve as a source of light for man as he carried out the Creator’s purpose for him.​—Psalm 19:1; Deuteronomy 4:19.
In the Bible we read: “There should not be found in you anyone who . . . employs divination, a practicer of magic or anyone who looks for omens or a sorcerer, or one who binds others with a spell or anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead. For everybody doing these things is something detestable to Jehovah.” (Deuteronomy 18:10-12) Isaiah said: “Let [your counselors] stand up, now, and save you, the worshipers of the heavens, the lookers at the stars . . . Look! They have become like stubble.”​—Isaiah 47:13, 14.
What We Can Learn From the Stars
However, the inanimate stars can tell us something if we are willing to listen. Edwin Way Teale wrote: “The stars speak of man’s insignificance in the long eternity of time.” Yes, when we realize that the vast majority of the stars we see with our naked eye on a clear night were seen by our ancestors centuries ago, does it not humble us? Do we not feel reverence for the Majestic One who created them “in the beginning” and who later brought forth mankind? King David of Israel reverently wrote: “When I see your heavens, the works of your fingers, the moon and the stars that you have prepared, what is mortal man that you keep him in mind, and the son of earthling man that you take care of him?” The heavens should humble us and make us question what we are doing with our lives.​—Genesis 1:1; Psalm 8:3, 4.
On one occasion David prayed: “Teach me to do your will, for you are my God.” (Psalm 143:10) The record of David’s life indicates that his prayer was answered. He learned to do God’s will as set out in His Law. He also learned the Creator’s purpose for mankind, and he wrote about it. “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more . . . But the meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace. . . . Turn away from what is bad and do what is good, and so reside to time indefinite. . . . The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” With knowledge of that purpose came a responsibility: “Turn away from what is bad and do what is good.”​—Psalm 37:10, 11, 27-29.
The stars have the same message for all mankind. Without worshiping them or “consulting” them, we can see the Creator’s love, wisdom, and power reflected in them. The study of astronomy, as opposed to astrology, should instill reverence in our hearts. But more than that, does it not implant in us the desire to learn more about God? He has provided his Word, the Bible, for that very purpose. If you have discerned this message from the stars, you can learn what Jehovah has in store for mankind and, more important, how you can share in the blessings he has prepared for them. If you have questions about God and the purpose of life, feel free to contact Jehovah’s Witnesses in your area, or write to the nearest address indicated on page 5.
[Picture on page 8]
The stars can teach us humility

