Questions From Readers
● The belief in the inherent immortality of the human soul is basic in world religions, whether they be Christian or Jewish or pagan. Why do Jehovah’s witnesses believe the soul is not immortal?
Because there is no text in the Bible that says it is, and several that say it is not. The soul that sins dies: “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” Even of the sinless man Jesus it is written: “He hath poured out his soul unto death.” A soul is not some intangible, invisible spirit existence separate from a creature’s body, but “soul” means “life.” Whether man or beast, a creature having life may be said to have soul. Of water creatures made before man the Bible says, at Genesis 1:20, margin: “Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath soul.” Neither animals nor men have immortal souls; both are living souls and become dead souls: “For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity. All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.” It is sheer fiction for religions to say man has an immortal, conscious soul that lives on after the death of the body: “For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.” Death ends man’s consciousness: “His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.”—Ezek. 18:4; Isa. 53:12; Eccl. 3:19, 20; 9:5, 10; Ps. 146:4.
Would Christ’s followers be told to seek immortality if they already had it? Yet they are told: “Seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life,” and, “This mortal must put on immortality.”—Rom. 2:7; 1 Cor. 15:53.
● Mark 9:47, 48 reads: “And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.” Does this not prove eternal torment for the wicked?
For the soul of the wicked to be tormented forever in fire and consumed forever by worms would mean it must be indestructible, immortal. But the previous answer shows the soul is not immortal; it shows that the sinful soul dies and is totally unconscious. In Eden God did not tell Adam that the penalty for disobedience was eternal torment. Rather he said to Adam: “Thou shalt surely die.” Thousands of years later the penalty was still the same: “The wages of sin is death.” Not eternal torment.—Gen. 2:17; Rom. 6:23.
Then what about Mark 9:47, 48, quoted in the question? It is obviously symbolical language, not meant to be taken literally. No one who believes in fiery torment plucks his eyes out when his eyes look with lust or covetousness, yet that is what he should do if he takes this text literally and wants to avoid eternal roasting in fire. If the undying worms and the unquenchable fire are literal dangers to be avoided the saving remedy must be literally applied. But no sane believer in eternal torment chops off a hand or a foot or plucks out an eye because those members are involved in his sinning. The language is symbolical, including the part about the worms and fire.
In the original Greek language it is the word gehenna that is translated as “hell.” It comes from the Hebrew expression gei-Hinnom, which designated a valley that lay to the west and south of ancient Jerusalem. Under the later kings of Judah it was used for idolatrous worship, and to prevent this faithful King Josiah had the valley polluted and it came to be the dumping grounds and incinerator for the refuse of Jerusalem. Sulphur, or brimstone, was added to assist in the burning of the filth. Bodies of dead animals were hurled over into this valley for burning and occasionally the bodies of executed criminals were cast in, if they were thought too vile to have a resurrection. If the bodies landed in the fire it destroyed them, but if they lodged on a ledge of the deep ravine without reaching the flames below worms consumed them. Hence this valley of Hinnom with its sulphurous flames and devouring worms where worthless things were thrown was understood by the Jews of Jesus’ day to symbolize death from which there would be no resurrection. It meant annihilation, “second death,” an eternal destruction or punishment. It was from this literal valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, and from its significance, that the symbol of “the lake of fire and brimstone” was drawn. It was understood to mean death without hope of resurrection: “The lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.”—Rev. 21:8; 19:20; 20:10, 14, 15.
Hence Mark 9:47, 48, when properly understood, does not conflict with the other scriptures that show that the penalty for sin is death. Rather, it supports the death penalty instead of the eternal torment theory.

