
A Century of Advertising the Kingdom!




 1. What were Jehovah’s people encouraged to do nearly a century ago?
1 “Behold, the King reigns! You are his publicity agents. Therefore advertise, advertise, advertise, the King and his kingdom.” With those stirring words spoken by Brother Rutherford nearly a century ago, Jehovah’s people were encouraged to broadcast the Kingdom message far and wide. And that is what we have done! Like the early Christians, we have preached the good news of the Kingdom “in all creation under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) Looking back over the last century, what have we done to advertise God’s Kingdom? How can we continue to advertise it as we approach the 100th anniversary of the Kingdom’s birth?
 2. How has our literature promoted God’s Kingdom?
2 Looking Back: For decades, our literature has promoted God’s Kingdom. Since 1939 our principal magazine has had as its title: The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom. This magazine frequently discusses the Kingdom and what it will accomplish. The Awake! magazine also highlights God’s Kingdom as the only hope for mankind. How fitting that these two magazines are now the most widely translated and distributed magazines in the world!—Rev. 14:6.
 3. What are some of the methods we have employed to advertise the Kingdom?
3 Jehovah’s people have employed various methods to advertise the Kingdom. In the early days, we made use of sound cars, radio broadcasts, and portable phonographs. Those methods helped us to spread the good news to a wide audience at a time when there were relatively few Kingdom proclaimers. (Ps. 19:4) In recent years, we have published information on jw.org, thus proclaiming the Kingdom to millions—including those who live in lands where our work is restricted.
 4. What special initiatives have we engaged in?
4 Jehovah’s people have also engaged in special initiatives to spread the Kingdom message. For example, beginning in the mid-1990’s, we made an effort to augment our house-to-house work by witnessing in public parks, in parking lots, and at businesses. Recently, we have organized special metropolitan public witnessing in large cities around the world. In addition, many congregations are participating in public witnessing in their local territory by using literature carts and tables that are set up near high-traffic areas. Of course, we keep the house-to-house work as the mainstay of our Kingdom-preaching activity.—Acts 20:20.
 5. What opportunities will the new service year offer for many of us?
5 Looking Ahead: With the start of the new service year in September, many will begin serving as regular pioneers. Could you join them? If not, can you enroll as an auxiliary pioneer from time to time? Whether you are able to pioneer or not, Jehovah will surely bless you for any sacrifices you make in order to have a full share in advertising the Kingdom.—Mal. 3:10.
 6. Why will the month of October 2014 be special?
6 The month of October 2014 will mark the 100th anniversary of the birth of the Kingdom. Fittingly, the public edition of The Watchtower that month focuses on God’s Kingdom. Why not make an effort to get this issue into the hands of as many as possible? As we look to the future, may each of us continue “declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God” to all who will listen.—Acts 8:12.




