From Our Readers
Web of Life  I am 11 years old, and I really love animals. When I received the series “Who Will Protect the Web of Life?” (November 22, 2001), I couldn’t wait to read it. I feel so bad for the wandering albatross, pictured on page 7. It is sad that they are drowning because of being accidentally caught on fishing hooks. I also liked the last picture on the page, the freshwater sawfish. Please keep printing articles like these!
S. V., United States
Prisons  Words cannot express how I felt reading the article “Stories of Faith From a Historic Prison.” (November 22, 2001) I have a son who is in prison for bank robbery. This is his second time. I am going to send this article to him. I pray that it will touch his heart and encourage him to accept the love that Jehovah has for all of us. Thank you for the comfort you bring to us.
C. M., United States
Suicide  Thank you so much for the series “Life Is Worth Living.” (October 22, 2001) When I was in middle school, I was under a lot of stress. Jehovah really supported me through the Bible and Christian association. Still, I felt unworthy. When I read the box entitled “‘Will God Forgive Me for Feeling This Way?’” it was as if Jehovah were talking directly to me. It is such a joy to know that Jehovah does not forget people like me!
S. H., Japan
I want to tell you of my joy after reading this series. How happy I was not to be lectured, as I expected to be after reading the cover title! The box “‘Will God Forgive Me for Feeling This Way?’” made me want to cry. Thanks to this article, I was able to talk with a Christian sister about what I am going through. Thank you for handling this delicate subject.
A. F., France
I have read this series eight times. When I was in middle school, I thought about suicide. Death seemed attractive to me. This series helped me to realize that even though I may have an unhappy daily life, it is good to be alive. I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, but for some time I have been reading the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. You people are really wonderful!
S. M., Japan
Battered Women  Thank you for the series “Help for Battered Women.” (November 8, 2001) The title on page 3—“Maybe This Time He’ll Change”—expresses the hope I’ve had for years. I can confirm the truthfulness of what you state on page 4, that all too often sympathy is shown to the perpetrator instead of the victim.
S. M., Germany
This series was so heartwarming. As no doubt many others did, I cried uncontrollably from the very first page because I remembered the hardship and the pain that I at one time endured. I treasure the thought that Jehovah views each one of us as precious. As a full-time evangelizer, I have found that people who live where I preach are eager to read this article, so much so that I have had to request extra copies. Many thanks for providing such valuable information.
K. J., Australia
[Picture Credit Line on page 30]
Butterfly: Butterfly House, Mittagong, Australia

