Expressing Loyal Love to God and His Kingdom Heir
LOYAL love is one of the remarkable traits of Jehovah God. In fact, it might be said that he is the very personification of always-proved loyalty. Ever since he began to create he has been expressing his loyal love toward his righteous principles, toward his faithful creatures and toward the covenants he has made with them. And he has continued faithful in his loyal love regardless of how often and how severely circumstances have put his loyal love to the test.
Thus we note that King David was once overtaken in a set of shocking sins and that the majority of his successors on the throne of Jehovah proved unfaithful. Yet through it all Jehovah kept giving proof of his loyal love to that most important of all his covenants, his Kingdom covenant made with David, so that it could find fulfillment in David’s chief descendant, the King-Priest Jesus Christ. No wonder David was caused to exclaim: “Loyal love belongs to you, O Jehovah.”—Ps. 62:12, margin.a
Jehovah’s loyal love for that covenant has continued to our day. Even though the remnant of Kingdom heirs were overtaken by lack of knowledge, negligence and fear of man during the World War I years, Jehovah’s loyal love did not forsake them but sustained them, even as it was foretold: “It is the acts of loyal love of Jehovah that we have not come to our finish, because his mercies will certainly not come to an end. They are new each morning. Your faithfulness is abundant.”—Lam. 3:22, 23, margin.
Do we appreciate this remarkable, heart-cheering trait of our God Jehovah? If so, then we will be spurred on to make expression of our loyal love to God and his Kingdom Heir. In what ways? First of all by taking advantage of all opportunities to witness to God’s name and kingdom. More than that we will then make opportunities by buying out the opportune time, knowing that the days are wicked and our safety lies in always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.
Let us bear in mind that this message we bring is no joke, neither is it anything stale even though it has been preached for forty years. It is ever new, ever fresh, growing ever grander, for the light on our path grows ever brighter. What increased understanding and appreciation we have gained in just the last twelve months! Likewise what improved instruments to make our preaching ever more effective!
Loyal love to God and his Kingdom Heir also requires us to be on guard against temptations to become materialistic, or to rebel against theocratic rule in the local congregation or to grow lax in conduct. It further requires of us that we stand firm in the faith so as to successfully resist the efforts of opposers to slow us down or to make us prove disloyal to our God and King.
Today Christendom, although having taken Christ’s name, is not expressing loyal love to God and his Kingdom Heir. Instead of remaining neutral, it has taken sides in the East-West struggle for world domination, sharing in this world’s materialism and militarism. It will therefore perish with this old world at Armageddon.
The test is on. To go counter to the whole world is not easy. To do so with success we must lean heavily on Jehovah’s loyal love. For our assurance he has caused to be recorded twenty-six times in Psalm 136 alone that “his loyal love is to time indefinite.” (Margin) But we must do our part, for as we read elsewhere: “All the paths of Jehovah are loyal love and truthfulness for those observing his covenant and his reminders.”—Ps. 25:10, margin.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 1, 1958.

