Assembling With Lovers of God-Given Freedom
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are unique in ever so many ways. They alone speak the “pure language.” (Zephaniah 3:9) Only they are united, having the distinguishing mark of love described by Jesus Christ. (John 13:35) And they alone enjoy the freedom that Jesus Christ said the truth would bring, as recorded at John 8:32: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
Those words that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, directed to his disciples, have proved true. And they are appreciated now more than ever by all those Witnesses of Jehovah who attended the “Lovers of Freedom” District Conventions. The convention program has driven home to them the various aspects of their freedom, how they are to use it, the accountability that goes with their freedom, and how blessed they are to be a free people.
These timely and practical conventions began in the Northern Hemisphere on June 7, 1991, in Los Angeles, California, U.S.A. The program opened at 10:20 a.m. with a musical presentation, followed by a song and prayer. The opening talk was a hard-hitting presentation based on James 1:25. According to The Jerusalem Bible, this verse reads: “The man who looks steadily at the perfect law of freedom and makes that his habit​—not listening and then forgetting, but actively putting it into practice—​will be happy in all that he does.” Just as we look in a mirror to see where we need to make improvements in our appearance, so we need to persist in peering into God’s perfect law that belongs to freedom to learn where we need to make changes in our personality. And we should persist in looking into that mirror.
Next came the chairman’s address, “Welcome, All You Lovers of Freedom.” Jehovah’s Witnesses love freedom, and they want to stay free. The speaker quoted legal authorities who showed that there can be no freedom without law. Yes, Christians are not free to do as they please but are free to do Jehovah’s will. They want to make full use of their freedom but not abuse it. Especially since 1919 have Jehovah’s Witnesses been enjoying increased freedom. The speaker traced the emphasis on freedom in convention themes and Christian publications. All the conventioners would learn more about God-given freedom and how to use it.
Those timely remarks were followed by interviews of lovers of freedom who rejoiced to be there at the convention. Such conventions are times of rejoicing, even as ancient Israel’s three annual festivals were marked by great joy. A number of interviews proved that conventions are spiritually upbuilding times of rejoicing.
Then came the keynote address, “The Purpose and Use of Our God-Given Freedom.” From this talk the conventioners learned that Jehovah alone has absolute freedom because he is the Supreme Authority and is almighty. For the sake of his name and for his creatures’ benefit, however, he sometimes limits his freedom by being slow to anger and exercising self-control. All of his intelligent creatures have relative freedom, for they are subject to Jehovah and are limited by his physical and moral laws. Jehovah has given them freedom for their enjoyment but especially so that they may bring him honor and joy by worshiping him. Because of making good use of their freedom, Jehovah’s Witnesses have gained a worldwide reputation for good conduct and zeal in their ministry.
Friday Afternoon
“Busy​—In Dead Works or in Jehovah’s Service?” was the thought-provoking title of the talk that opened the Friday afternoon session. Dead works include not only those of the flesh but also others that are spiritually dead, vain, and fruitless​—such as money-making schemes. In this regard, honest self-scrutiny is essential to determine if we are putting the Kingdom first in life.
Having much the same thrust was the following talk, “Fulfilling Our Commission as God’s Ministers.” The speaker showed that Christians should not content themselves with mere token service or with just meeting hour quotas. They should want to be effective in all features of their Christian ministry. These points were driven home by means of a demonstration and interviews. All were exhorted to fulfill their ministry to the fullest extent possible.
In the talk “A Free People but Accountable,” the speaker stressed that though Jehovah’s people cherish the freedom the truth has brought them, they should remember that with it goes accountability. They should use their freedom, not as an excuse for bad conduct, but to the praise of Jehovah. As Christians, they are accountable to “the superior authorities” and should also cooperate with congregation elders. (Romans 13:1) Moreover, they are accountable for their dress, grooming, and conduct. Never should they forget that “each of us will render an account for himself to God.”​—Romans 14:12; 1 Peter 2:16.
Then followed a discussion of the need for all Christians to be “Fearless as This World’s End Draws Near.” While mankind is fearful about what the future may bring, Christians need to be fearless to carry out their ministry. Fearlessness is a result of trust in Jehovah, for the more a Christian fears to displease God, the less he will fear creatures. Memorizing comforting scriptures can strengthen a person to be fearless. To be spiritually strong and fearless, God’s servants also need to make good use of all opportunities to associate with fellow believers. Each one also needs to remember the role prayer plays in being fearless. By remaining fearless, Christians will maintain a fine relationship with Jehovah God.
The first day’s program concluded with the very instructive drama Set Free to Promote True Worship. It showed how a modern-day family learned a lesson from Ezra and his band of 7,000, who made sacrifices to return to Jerusalem. It enabled each conventioner to examine his priorities and see how he could increase his privileges of service. This drama had something for old and young alike.
Saturday Morning
After a musical program, song, prayer, and a discussion of the daily Bible text, Saturday morning’s program featured a symposium entitled “Freedom With Responsibility in the Family Circle.” In the first part, “How Fathers Can Imitate Jehovah,” fathers were counseled on the various ways in which they can imitate our heavenly Father. First Timothy 5:8 requires that they provide not only materially but also spiritually. They imitate Jehovah by being fine teachers of their family and by administering loving discipline as needed. These points were illustrated by several interviews.
“The Wife’s Supporting Role” was the next part of this symposium. It started out by stressing that a wife occupies a dignified position in the Christian family, that of being supportive. What does this require of her? That she be in proper subjection, never pressuring her husband to do something that only she wants. She needs to care well for her obligations to her husband and children, and she can derive real satisfaction from keeping her home clean and tidy. And as a Christian minister, she may have many opportunities to engage in the field service. An interview with a family underscored the wisdom of such Scriptural counsel.
Young people received attention in the part “Children Who Listen and Learn.” By training their children to listen and learn, parents bring honor to Jehovah and show love for their spiritual brothers and for their own offspring. A strong bond will exist between parents and children if they spend quality time together. Parents must be equipped to answer their children’s questions and stimulate their thirst for knowledge. Again, interviews showed how this can be done.
Next came the fine counsel “Keep Yourself Free to Serve Jehovah.” How is this done? By keeping free from pursuing worldly careers, time-consuming hobbies, and materialistic goals. Jesus and the apostle Paul set us fine examples by being self-sacrificing. Jehovah’s people need to keep a simple eye, focused on Kingdom interests. When it comes to procuring material things, it is wiser to save now and buy later than to buy now and pay later. Youths must guard against fantasizing about sexual pleasures and worldly careers. An interview of an unmarried pioneer showed the blessings that come when one keeps free to serve Jehovah.
Saturday morning’s program concluded with the talk “Enter Into Freedom by Dedication and Baptism.” The baptismal candidates were reminded that while creation had been plunged into slavery by Adam’s rebellion, the mighty Liberator, Jesus Christ, opened the way to freedom by his sacrifice. The speaker showed what was involved in breaking free to do God’s will and highlighted the obligations and blessings that would be the lot of those being baptized.
Saturday Afternoon
Saturday afternoon’s program began with the soul-searching question “Whose Advantage Are You Seeking?” The world reflects the self-seeking spirit of the Devil. However, Christians are to imitate the self-sacrificing spirit of Jesus Christ. What an example he set! He left heavenly glory and then sacrificed his human life for our benefit. Challenges as to whose advantage we are seeking surface when there are misunderstandings between Christians in business or financial matters, when there are personality clashes, and so forth. Such things test Christian love. But by seeking the advantage of others, a person is certain to realize the greater blessing of giving, and he will gain Jehovah’s approval.
Then followed the closely related theme “Recognizing and Overcoming Spiritual Weakness.” This talk emphasized the need to identify the symptoms of spiritual weakness and then act decisively in the fight to overcome Satan and his snares. Servants of Jehovah must cultivate deep love for him and a hatred for what is bad. This requires that they get to know Jehovah through regular, purposeful personal and family Bible study. They must avoid all forms of entertainment that glorify violence and sexual immorality. (Ephesians 5:3-5) Regular prayer and attendance at meetings are also fundamental to success in overcoming spiritual weaknesses.
Perhaps causing more discussion than any other talk given at the convention was the one entitled “Is Marriage the Key to Happiness?” So many young people think so! But the speaker made it clear that there are numberless faithful spirit creatures who are happy though not married, even as many dedicated Christians are very happy though they are not yoked in marriage. Moreover, many married couples are not happy, as is indicated by the high divorce rate. One just needs to reflect on the many blessings that all dedicated Christians enjoy to realize that marriage, though it can be a blessing, is not the key to happiness.
This was followed by the symposium “Christian Freedom in Our Day.” The first speaker discussed “Evaluating Facets of Our Christian Freedom.” These include freedom from such false religious teachings as the Trinity, immortality of the human soul, and eternal torment. Then there is freedom from slavish bondage to sin. Though Christians are imperfect, they are free from such bad habits as smoking, gambling, drunkenness, and sexual promiscuity. There is also freedom from hopelessness, for they have the hope of Paradise that impels them to tell others about it.
The following speaker asked the question “Do You Personally Cherish Such Freedom?” To cherish means to hold dear, to nurture with care. To do that, a servant of God must guard against being tempted to go beyond the limits of Christian freedom. The world’s freedom is a deceptive lie, for it results in slavery to sin and corruption.
The final speaker in this symposium spoke on the subject “Freedom Lovers Stand Fast.” To do that, Christians must stick close to their celestial parents, Jehovah and his wifelike organization. Jehovah’s people cannot allow themselves to be deflected by apostate propaganda; they must reject those who come with immoral propositions. To stand fast in godly freedom, Christians must be “living by spirit.”​—Galatians 5:25.
The final talk of the day was a real treat. It was entitled “The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.” Jesus Christ was the greatest man, for he affected the life of humankind more powerfully than all armies, navies, parliaments, and kings put together. He was the Son of God, who existed in heaven before coming to the earth. So well did Jesus copy his heavenly Father in what he spoke and taught and how he lived that he could say: “He that has seen me has seen the Father also.” (John 14:9) How well Jesus demonstrated that “God is love”! (1 John 4:8) After dealing at length with Jesus’ qualities, the speaker noted that a series of articles entitled “Jesus’ Life and Ministry” had been published in The Watchtower since April 1985. In response to many requests, the Society was now releasing the new book The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived. It has 133 chapters and is printed in full color. The material in the series has been edited, and all of it is incorporated in the book’s 448 pages. Truly, this convention day ended on an especially high note!
Sunday Forenoon
Early in the Sunday-morning session came the symposium “Serving as Fishers of Men.” The talk “Catching Fish​—Literal and Symbolic” laid the groundwork for the talks that followed. The speaker showed that after Jesus had caused a miraculous catch of fish, he invited the fishermen involved to become fishers of men. For some time, Jesus trained his disciples to become fishers of men, and beginning with Pentecost 33 C.E., they were successful in helping multitudes of men and women to become disciples.
The next speaker dealt with the parable of the dragnet recorded at Matthew 13:47-50. He pointed out that the symbolic dragnet included both anointed Christians and Christendom, the latter because of work done in translating, publishing, and distributing Bibles, although these efforts gathered in vast multitudes of unsuitable fish. Especially since 1919 has there been a separating work, with the unsuitable fish being thrown away, whereas the suitable ones are being gathered into vessellike congregations that have helped to protect and preserve true Christians for divine service.
The third talk, “Fishing for Men in Global Waters,” stressed the obligation of all dedicated Christians to share in worldwide fishing. Now over 4,000,000 are sharing in this work in more than 200 lands, and in recent years over 230,000 have been baptized annually. All of Jehovah’s people were urged to improve their fishing skills, and several particularly successful “fishermen” were interviewed.
In the following talk, entitled “Keeping Awake in ‘the Time of the End,’” the speaker enumerated seven aids to help God’s people stay awake: fighting distractions, praying, sounding the warning about the end of this system, sticking to Jehovah’s organization, making self-examination, meditating on fulfilled prophecies, and keeping in mind that their salvation is closer than when they became believers.
The morning’s program concluded with a discussion of “Who Will Escape the ‘Time of Distress’?” The speaker showed how the prophecy of Joel had a measure of fulfillment in apostolic times, was having further fulfillment now, and will have complete fulfillment in the near future.
Sunday Afternoon
The afternoon program began with the public talk, “Hailing God’s New World of Freedom!” This talk continued the convention’s theme of freedom. It was pointed out that God’s Word foretells a new world where there will be freedom from oppression by false religious, political, economic, and racial elements. There will also be freedom from sin and death. Perfect health will be restored so that people will be able to live forever in happiness on a paradise earth. Thus, lovers of righteousness have every reason to laud the new world’s Maker by exclaiming: “Thank you, Jehovah, for true freedom at last!”
The public talk was followed by something new for district conventions​—a discussion of the week’s lesson in The Watchtower. Then the convention came to a close with the stirring talk and admonition “Lovers of Freedom, Keep Advancing.” The speaker briefly dealt with the high points of the convention’s theme of freedom. He stressed how happy Jehovah’s people are because of their freedom, enumerated ways in which Christians had made progress, and urged them to keep advancing unitedly so as to reap further blessings. He concluded with the words: “As we do this, may Jehovah continue to bless one and all so that we may keep advancing as lovers of freedom.”
“The creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will but through him that subjected it, on the basis of hope that the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.”​—Romans 8:20, 21.
[Pictures on page 25]
A young delegate to the convention in Prague, Czechoslovakia
[Pictures on page 26]
  1. Candidates proceeding to a baptismal site in Prague, Czechoslovakia
  2. Undergoing baptism as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Tallinn, Estonia
  3. New publications brought joy to conventioners in Usolye-Sibirskoye, Siberia
  4. Releasing the “New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures” in Czech and Slovak at the convention in Prague

