Announcements
PUBLISH UPLIFT AND COMFORT FOR THE POOR—Ps. 113:7, 8, AS.
Millions today are in a poverty-stricken condition. The inability of men to improve the lot of the oppressed masses and to lift their burdens makes relief seem unattainable. However, most disturbing is not the lack of material riches, but the spiritual poverty everywhere in evidence. Here the wise words of the Master Prophet come to mind: “Happy are those who are conscious of their spiritual need.” He knew of Jehovah’s promise to raise up the poor out of the dust and to lift up the needy. (Ps. 113:7, 8, AS) Literally millions of such poor people are to be found throughout the earth today. Help them during the month of March by taking the Watchtower magazine to those in your locality, and so publish uplift and comfort for those who hunger and thirst for righteousness. Present the Watchtower offer of a year’s subscription and three booklets for $1.
FAITHFUL TO DEATH
Friends of the truth throughout the earth will be interested to learn of the death of one who played a prominent part in the affairs of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society for many years, Clayton J. Woodworth. An editor and textbook writer before coming into the Society’s service; he first became a member of the Brooklyn Bethel family in 1912, renewing this membership after a necessary interruption August 1, 1919. He was the writer of the commentary on The Revelation contained in the noted The Finished Mystery which the Society published in 1917. For his part in this and other Society matters he was one of the seven brothers, including the Society’s then president, J. F. Rutherford, who were sent to Atlanta Federal Penitentiary on false charges at the climax of World War I in 1918 but were released in 1919 and exonerated thereafter.
Following his release in 1919 Brother Woodworth was made editor of the Society’s newly introduced magazine The Golden Age. He remained editor when the magazine’s name was changed to Consolation in 1937, to carry on as such until 1946. Because of advancing years he was relieved of this when the magazine was given a new change of name to Awake! For years he served as a member and director of the New York Corporation, People’s Pulpit Association and Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, Inc. He continued joyfully active at other duties assigned to him till his illness made this recently impossible. He died at the ripe old age of 81, loyal to the faith and unwaveringly devoted to the theocratic organization, on December 18, 1951, at 4 a.m. Interment of his remains took place at the burial plot of the Bethel family adjoining Radio Station WBBR on Staten Island, New York, at the same time with two other faithful Bethel family members who had died, hours apart, two days previous at the Bethel home. All three professed to be of the anointed remnant, and we rejoice in hope of their realization of Revelation 14:13.
BIBLE TRACTS
Truth-loving persons desire to see others also gain an accurate knowledge of God’s Word. To assist them we have provided some Bible tracts that fit conveniently into one’s pocket or purse. These small 6-page tracts can be kept readily accessible for passing to friends, acquaintances and others with whom one comes in contact in daily life. These tracts are different, enlightening, interesting. They are entitled: “What Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe?” “Hell-Fire,” “Jehovah’s Witnesses, Communists or Christians?” and “Awake from Sleep!” Pithy, revealing thought-arousing, they will serve excellently in setting these important matters straight in the minds of many. Any one of these four attractive and colorful tracts may be ordered in packages of 250 each, at 25c per package. Send order with remittance to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn 1, New York.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of March 16: The Memorial—Are You Entitled to Partake? ¶1-22.
Week of March 23: The Memorial—Are You Entitled to Partake? ¶23-37; also, What About Those Not Partaking?

