Questions From Readers
● May a Christian raise or lower a flag at his place of work?
When such a job assignment is not part of a flag ceremony the individual Christian is free to decide what to do, taking into consideration the local circumstances and his conscience.
It is well known that many persons view their national flag as a symbol meriting reverence. The Encyclopedia Americana states: “The flag, like the cross, is sacred. . . . The rules and regulations relative to human attitude toward national standards use strong, expressive words, as, ‘Service to the Flag,’ . . . ‘Reverence for the Flag,’ ‘Devotion to the Flag.’” Special ceremonies are often held, with the flag being the object of special “devotion.”
Each person is free to determine if he will share in such ceremonies. Jehovah’s Witnesses feel convinced, though, that what the Bible says about refraining from giving devotion to material, inanimate objects has a bearing on the matter. (Ex. 20:4, 5; 1 John 5:21) So, while respecting the rights of others to do what they want, Jehovah’s Witnesses do not share in flag ceremonies. Still, they are exemplary citizens who daily uphold the laws of the land.​—Rom. 13:1.
Often the national flag is displayed at public buildings and assembly places, such as firehouses, municipal offices and schools. In view of their respect for the government and what is used to represent it, Jehovah’s Witnesses have no objection to being in or working at buildings where the national flag is on display. Similarly, a flag might appear on postage stamps, automobile plates or other government-produced items. Yet that does not mean that a person of the public who uses such is necessarily participating in devotional acts toward the flag. What is significant is not the presence of a flag but how a person acts toward it, what he does.
Sometimes an employee at a public building is assigned to put up the flag in the morning and to take it down at the end of the day. This might be part of a special ceremony, with persons standing at attention or saluting the flag. In that case it is understandable that a person who does not share in flag-saluting ceremonies would have conscientious reasons for not raising or lowering the flag, for to do so would be to share in the ceremony. It would be contributing to a ceremony, just as musicians in a band might be expected to contribute by playing patriotic music.
However, in many cases no ceremony accompanies the daily raising or lowering of the flag over a public building. Putting it up, for instance, may simply be part of preparing the building for use, as with unlocking the doors, opening the windows, and so forth. In such instances the flag is simply viewed as an emblem representing the government of the land in which that building is located.
When this is the case, a Christian employee who is asked to handle this duty among other routine tasks is free to decide what to do. The conscience of one person in this situation might move him to ask his supervisor to have some other employee put up and take down the flag. But another Christian might feel that his conscience will permit him to handle the flag as long as no ceremony is involved. Each person faced with such a request on his job should analyze the local circumstances as well as the proddings of his Bible-trained conscience. Then he should make a decision that will leave him with a clear conscience.​—1 Pet. 3:16.

