Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will remember the following points:
● What is the kingdom of God?
It is the heavenly government of God in the hands of Jesus Christ.​—Pp. 4, 5.a
● Why is it impossible for a believer in evolution also to be a true Christian?
Because acceptance of the teaching of evolution requires that one reject the Bible’s creation account and what the Bible says about man’s fall into sin. For a person who does this, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ has no meaning.​—Pp. 50, 51.
● What is meant by the prophecy, “How comely upon the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news”?​—Isa. 52:7.
To distressed people the feet of Jesus’ anointed disciples are a pleasant sight because of the good news of the Kingdom they bring.​—P. 78.
● What is the meaning of the scripture at Revelation 19:10: “The bearing witness to Jesus is what inspires prophesying”?
The whole intent and purpose of all prophecy is to point to Jesus Christ, because Jehovah’s purpose centers around Christ and the Kingdom.​—Pp. 95, 96.
● Will a fine knowledge of the Bible help one toward everlasting life? Will such knowledge guarantee life?
It will help one toward life because the mind can assist the heart in the right way. But knowledge alone does not guarantee life, for the “sources of life” are not out of the head but out of the heart.​—Pp. 137, 138, 146.
● How can it be said that a man has committed adultery in his heart when he keeps on looking at a woman with passion?
Because the heart motivation is there, but opportunity may be lacking or he may refrain because of fear that he cannot ‘get away’ with it.​—P. 142.
● How were the chief opponents of Jehovah’s witnesses clearly identified in modern times, and who were they revealed to be?
Being the chief instigators of the persecution upon God’s people who proclaimed the good news of the Kingdom, the clergy of Christendom revealed themselves as anti-God.​—P. 183.
● How can a Christian wife “save” an unbelieving husband?
By her Christian conduct, her firmness in keeping integrity to God, and her lovingly seeking opportunities to encourage her husband to examine the Bible. If he responds and becomes a believer, he will gain salvation.​—P. 202.
● When is the beginning of the “times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets”?​—Acts 3:21.
Since the “all things” spoken of are the Messianic kingdom and its interests at the earth, those “times” began in 1914 C.E., when Jesus Christ was installed in the heavens as King and began to exercise kingly authority over all the earth.​—Pp. 244, 245.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1971.

