Use All Means to Keep “Healthy in Faith”
What are some of the chief means to keep “healthy in faith”?
The instruction to keep “healthy in faith,” while originally directed to older men in the Christian congregation is applicable to all who would be pleasing to Jehovah God.​—Titus 2:2.a
One of the chief means by which you can keep “healthy in faith” is by studying God’s Word regularly. The need to do this Jehovah emphasized in his instructions to Joshua: “This book of the law should not depart from your mouth, and you must in an undertone read in it day and night.”​—Josh. 1:8.
To keep “healthy in faith” you must also “persevere in prayer,” yes, “pray incessantly.” (Rom. 12:12; 1 Thess. 5:17) By prayer you are strengthened, for by means of it you have communion with the great Rock of strength, Jehovah God.
Another fine aid is regular attendance at the weekly meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses. Also take part in them as opportunity affords.
Just as physical exercise, and not just food alone, is essential to be physically healthy, so too spiritual exercise is necessary to keep “healthy in faith.” As the disciple James so well expressed it: “Indeed, as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.”​—Jas. 2:26.
What kind of works? Activity in the Christian ministry, preaching the good news of God’s kingdom and making disciples by teaching those willing to learn. Other works are also required. To enjoy spiritual health, we must all cultivate the fruits of the spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering and self-control.​—Gal. 5:22, 23.
What can you parents do in order that your children may be “healthy in faith”?
First of all, you must be able to communicate with your children. You must set them a fine example. You must manifest unselfishness, which is love, in dealing with your children.
The special articles appearing in this journal to be read to young children are a case in point. Not written in baby talk, not written condescendingly, yet they are simple enough that young children will be able to grasp their meaning. Parents, if your children are of tender years, are you making good use of this instrument so that your children may be “healthy in faith”?
Additionally, arrange for a regular weekly Bible study in which all the family take part. This should be held as regularly as are the congregation meetings, yes, as regularly as going to work is for father and going to school is for the children. Time can be found, time for it must be found by ‘buying it out’ from less important things.
As a parent, ask yourself: “Am I leaving no stone unturned so that my children will be ‘healthy in faith’?”
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, June 1, 1970.

