Your Recreation​—Controlled Or Controller?
HOW pleasant it is to share in relaxing recreation, a game or mode of diversion that provides refreshment. The forms of recreation are multitudinous. When a person controls the amount of time used for such recreation, as well as his outlook on a game, he may be benefited. In some cases, though, recreation ceases to be controlled and instead becomes the controller of one’s life, consuming an inordinate amount of time and attention.
In St. Kitts in the Leeward Islands, a minister of Jehovah’s witnesses was conducting a free home Bible study with a man who was very fond of playing “draughts” or checkers. Many persons from the neighborhood gathered to watch him play. He was such an ardent player that he sometimes neglected his tailoring business and hence suffered financially. He even allowed his obsession with the game to interfere with his appointments to study the Bible with the minister. Truly, in his case, his recreation was no longer controlled but, instead, was the controller in his life.
Finally the Witness decided to speak frankly with him about the matter, for he was not progressing spiritually in his study of God’s Word. It was pointed out that games such as draughts or checkers are not wrong. When controlled, they can be played with enjoyment and benefit. However, he was shown that dangers exist in regard to recreation. One can allow a game to assume such importance as to lose the spirit of amusement and friendship. Quarrels and fights can result. The ‘stirring up of competition with one another,’ condemned in the Bible, easily arises. (Gal. 5:26) Further, the man was shown how he had been allowing his recreation to interfere with his study of the Bible, something vitally important for all desiring God’s favor and eternal life. (John 17:3) What would he do?
The man decided that, in view of his “addiction” to the game, in his case it would be best to give it up altogether. He gave away the draughtboard or checkerboard. The crowds that had frequented his place drifted away. He had more time to handle his business as well as ample time to study God’s Word in peace. He once again began to make fine spiritual progress. Soon thereafter he was baptized at a large assembly of Jehovah’s witnesses, thus becoming himself an ordained minister of God.
How worth while, then, for a person to examine a sport, hobby or form of recreation and ask himself whether, in his life, it is controlled or is the controller.

