Remember Our Creator Now, Whether Old or Young
SOME three thousand years ago the royal Congregator, King Solomon, under inspiration counseled: “Remember, now, your grand Creator.” (Eccl. 12:1) That is good advice for all, both old and young.a
Among the many ways that we can remember our grand Creator is by manifesting the qualities that he approves, such as the fruits of the spirit listed at Galatians 5:22, 23. Among these qualities or fruits of the spirit is that of goodness.
What is goodness? Goodness is that which is good, that which is suitable and fitting, that which is becoming. Goodness is also virtue, moral excellence. What does goodness include for the Christian? All that Jehovah God approves.
Goodness will help us remember our Creator by keeping us from lying, stealing, committing sexual immorality, overindulging in food and drink. In particular does goodness aid us in the positive virtues. It will cause us to be law-abiding citizens. Goodness will cause married persons to be fully loyal to their mates; children to be obedient to their parents. It will aid members of a Christian congregation to obey those who are taking the lead among them and to be submissive.—Heb. 13:4, 17; Rom. 13:1.
Remembering our grand Creator includes also the virtue of modesty, both as to not having too high an estimate of ourselves and having proper decorum and attire. And the quality of goodness should result in clean Christians, both as to their person and their homes, both as to physical cleanliness and moral cleanliness.—2 Cor. 7:1.
Remembering our Creator also means manifesting goodness by singing his praises. (Ps. 148:1, 12, 13) There are many opportunities for Jehovah’s witnesses to praise him. At the Kingdom Hall as they meet in sweet assembly they can praise him by joining in heartfelt song, by commenting as opportunity affords, by bringing their children and by inviting others to come.
And there is the remembering of our Creator by praising Jehovah in the field ministry: by going from house to house and standing on the street corners offering Bible literature, by making return visits and conducting Bible studies in private homes. Nor to be overlooked is witnessing at other times as opportunity affords.
Truly there are many fruitful ways in which we as Christians can manifest goodness, and thus show, whether we be old or young, that we remember our grand Creator now.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, May 1, 1967.

