From Our Readers
Driving Hazard  Reading the item “Tired at the Wheel?” (“Watching the World,” February 22, 1994) brought back memories of when I was a lorry (truck) driver some 20-​odd years ago. I was driving home after a very long day at the wheel when I fell asleep. Suddenly, a big bump woke me up, and to my horror I was driving on the wrong side of the road. I had hit the curb, but no cars or pedestrians were in sight. I got off scot-​free, but it was a lesson I will never forget. I could have killed someone simply because I didn’t take a break when I needed it. My advice? Read that item in Awake!, and take heed!
M. Y., England
Overweight  I want to say a special thanks for the “Young People Ask . . .” article of April 22, 1994, “Why Am I So Fat?” I am 13 years old and always considered myself to be fat, although the weight charts told me I was average. Because of my attitude, I lost all confidence in myself and suffered from depression. Once I even wished I were dead. It sounds crazy, but that’s how I felt. Thanks to Jehovah and to the article, I can handle my depression better.
C. S., Germany
Young Cancer Patient  Having just read the article “When Life Is Not Easy,” as told by Kathy Roberson, I must say that I am truly touched. (August 22, 1994) I had to write and express my deep appreciation for such a beautiful article. I’m 14 years old and have experienced persecution in school because of being one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. My situation is not as trying as Kathy Roberson’s, but seeing how Jehovah sustained her throughout her trial was an inspiration.
C. G., United States
What a great article! I also became very sick at age nine and eventually spent many months in the hospital. However, I was able to return to good health by the time I entered high school. How difficult it must have been for Kathy Roberson to face recurrences of her illness over and over again. Her attitude and strength have helped me to have a more positive frame of mind.
D. V., United States
Breast-​Feeding  I am due to give birth in three months to our second child. So when I received my August 22, 1994, issue of Awake! and opened up to the article “Breast-​Feeding Basics,” I was overjoyed. It was truly refreshing to read an article that gave due credit and praise to the Originator of life. I don’t understand how anyone could deny that there is a wise and loving Creator when one considers how a mother is so conveniently equipped to nourish her baby.
L. K., United States
I’m sure you will receive many letters of thanks for this article. Looking back, I see what a blessing and what a practical choice breast-​feeding all three of our children has been. I know this article will encourage mothers and mothers-​to-​be.
C. S., United States
Effective Artwork  My heart jumped when I saw the picture of the resurrection in the June 8, 1994, issue. My appreciation for the wonderful resurrection hope was deepened even more. Surely no words will express my joy when I am able to see my younger sister in the future Paradise.
M. U., Japan
Love of Money  Thanks for the article “Love of Money​—A Root of Much Evil.” (March 22, 1994) In my country there is much ransacking, burglary, and public harassment​—all for money. This magazine was thus timely and appropriate, and I found great pleasure in placing this issue with others. In fact, some sellers of bread fought over them when I didn’t have enough copies!
A. F. S., West Africa

