In Search of Orchids in Europe
BY AWAKE! CORRESPONDENT IN THE NETHERLANDS
ORCHIDS fascinate people everywhere. These plants are synonymous with exotic beauty and colorful splendor. Their occurrence in impenetrable tropical forests adds to the mysterious aura surrounding them. Few people realize that orchids are not restricted to tropical areas but they are also found in the more temperate areas of our planet, such as Europe.
Orchid species can be found in a variety of regions, from arctic Iceland to sub-​tropical Greece. About 350 species in all are known in Europe. In contrast with many tropical species, European species are terrestrial, obtaining their roothold in soil. In the Tropics orchids chiefly are epiphytes, obtaining a roothold in trees. Many tropical species produce huge, gorgeous flowers, whereas the flowers of European orchids are much more modest in size.
Venturing out in search of orchids in Europe is a pleasant pastime because many species grow in magnificent environments. Orchids are often indicators pointing to the existence of distinctive environmental conditions. Many species are very particular about the ecological environment in which they exist and only occur in places that meet all their requirements. Swamp orchids such as Dactylorhiza incarnata, for example, grow only in places where subsoil water contains sufficient lime. This explains why some species are rarer than others. An orchid species that makes very specific demands will occur in fewer areas than one that can grow in less restricted conditions.
If we make an imaginary trip across Europe, from the Netherlands down to southern Italy, most regions we travel through contain orchids. Let’s begin with the Netherlands. In this low-​lying country in Western Europe, we still find extensive swamps, moist dune dips, and grasslands. In May and June, some of the terrain is tinted rose and violet by orchids of the genus Dactylorhiza. A lovely, stately species is the Dactylorhiza praetermissa. This plant can reach the height of three feet [1 m] and can contain as many as 60 blossoms. Remnants of peat moors and heather fields also are homes for orchids. In chiefly wet heather fields, large numbers of Dactylorhiza maculata can sometimes be found. In peat moors we would have to make a careful search before finding the tiny green blossoms of the Hammarbya paludosa. This small orchid grows in extremely inaccessible areas.
We travel farther, into the central mountain ranges of Germany. Here, in the midst of a wide variety of deciduous trees, several representatives of the genus Epipactis are found. While some of these grow in the deep shadows, others, such as the Epipactis muelleri, prefer the fringe of a forest. The blossoming of the Epipactis species in late summer and autumn concludes the orchid season in Europe. Located on the slopes of hills rich in lime is a particular kind of arid grassland, lime grassland, which abounds with orchids. During May and June, we might find here dozens of species, among which are the magnificent Orchis militaris and Orchis ustulata.
In the southern part of Germany, we reach the Alps. The alpine meadows are famous for their profusion of blossoms. Orchids often contribute to this environment. Some alpine meadows, such as those of the Dolomites in Italy, are dressed in purple by orchids in the month of July. A profusion of Nigritella nigra occurs here in a broad variety of colors. Nigritella gives off a strong vanilla odor, which reminds us that vanilla is procured from the fruit of a tropical orchid.
Orchids can be found at altitudes of more than ten thousand feet [3,000 m]. It is possible at that altitude to find what is probably the world’s smallest orchid, the Chamorchis alpina. The blossoms of this species measure less than one quarter of an inch [5 mm] across. Because they are green in color, these blossoms do not attract much attention. Yet, this species has its own specific place in the ecosystem of the alpine region.
Having traveled beyond the Alps, we reach the Mediterranean region of Europe. We find more species of orchids here than elsewhere in Europe, and their variety is astounding. The warmth-​loving species that grow here blossom only in early spring. During the dry summer, all vegetation, including the orchid, parches, and practically no blossoming plant is to be found. It is only after the initial autumn rains that fresh green plants reappear.
Orchids react to this rainfall. At that time many species form leaves and survive the winter as a rosette. It is not until early spring that they display their gorgeous flowers. The species of the genus Ophrys are typical of Mediterranean vegetation. For pollination many of these species are dependent on male insects that mistake the flower, which resembles an insect, for a partner willing to mate. Several of the species are named after insects they resemble, such as spider orchid, fly orchid, and bumblebee orchid (Ophrys sphegodes, insectifera, and bombyliflora). Following the pseudocopulation the insect carries the pollen mass and transports it inadvertently to another flower of the same species. Pollination takes place, and the formation of seed can begin. This method of pollination is astonishingly accurate.
Among some of the Ophrys species, distinct races are known. Each is pollinated by a specific insect species. When pollinating insects of one kind are exposed to flowers of a different but similar-​looking race, they refuse to pollinate them. Sometimes “mishaps” occur, and another species becomes erroneously pollinated, resulting in hybrids. Once in a while, these hybrids are able to produce fertile seed and reproduce large numbers of offspring.
Another characteristic Mediterranean genus is the tongue orchid (Serapias). These species are pollinated by insects that spend the night in a tubular cavity within the blossom. By the time the insect awakes, the pollen mass will have attached itself to the insect’s body, so that another flower will be pollinated the following night.
As we traveled across Europe, we saw many magnificent natural areas filled with orchids. Yet, many have vanished. In industrialized, densely populated, and agriculturally advanced Europe, practically every natural reserve stands exposed to a legion of threatening circumstances. Acid rain, drought, maximum cultivation of agricultural lands, tourism, and urbanization, all take their toll on orchids. Many species have become rare. In several countries some species are legally protected.
However, merely declaring that something is legally out-​of-​bounds does not help much. Man ought to treat the creation with respect. In this present, imperfect system of things, where respect for the Creator and his creation is lacking, we do not expect that nature will flourish. Not until God’s new system will it be possible for righteous people to enjoy the harmony of nature. (Isaiah 35:1) It is then that the many kinds of orchids will be properly appreciated for what they are.
[Pictures on page 8, 9]
On these two pages are orchids from (1) Italy, (2) the Netherlands, (3) alpine meadows, (4) lime grasslands, and (5) heather areas. (6) The butterfly orchid

