From Our Readers
Twentieth Century  The December 8, 1999, issue was great! I benefited so much from it, particularly from the series “The 20th Century—Critical Years of Change.” It was very informative and concise. It awoke in me the desire to be more spiritually alert in these last days.
M. V., Philippines
Kidnapping  What a fine message was contained in the series “Kidnapping—Why a Global Threat”! (December 22, 1999) This article came when the whole world was eagerly watching the drama of the hijacking of the Indian Airlines plane on December 24. I wish the authorities would read and apply the suggestions given in your article on controlling kidnapping!
A. S., India
Coma Victim  Thank you for the experience of Michiko Ogawa. (“Sustained by Hope to Endure Trials,” December 22, 1999) Her husband’s accident happened when I was five days old. The thought that he has been unconscious nearly my entire life is overwhelming! She has truly had Jehovah’s help in raising her two boys and in enduring this trying circumstance.
L. N., United States
The article touched my heart deeply. I live alone and recently learned that I have cancer. After reading this article, I wanted to hug Michiko and thank her for being faithful to Jehovah in spite of trials. At first, in my case, I wanted a miracle to occur. But now, like Michiko, I simply want Jehovah’s will to be done.
M. S., United States
Bloodless Medicine  The series “Bloodless Medicine and Surgery—The Growing Demand” (January 8, 2000) was the product of advanced research. I am attending nursing school and gave the magazine to a colleague and to one of my teachers. On previous occasions these individuals have displayed prejudice against Jehovah’s Witnesses. But they were pleased to receive these articles along with other information on Jehovah’s Witnesses.
R. P., Switzerland
Two of my children were involved in an automobile accident in 1998. My son’s leg was crushed. He stated repeatedly that he did not want blood! But the hospital wasn’t equipped for bloodless surgery. He was transferred to another hospital, but the hospital staff were unwilling to operate before his hematocrit reached 35. (It had bottomed out at 8.1.) They developed a laissez-faire attitude, as if they were waiting to see if he would die. However, as they applied bloodless strategies—elevating his leg, administering erythropoietin, and so forth—his hematocrit climbed to 35.8! The surgery was successful, but the delay in treatment left him with much permanent damage. I wish that every doctor, surgeon, and anesthesiologist were required to read these articles.
L. L., United States
It is comforting to know that many doctors are willing to cooperate with Jehovah’s Witnesses. This magazine is going straight to my doctor. I know he will appreciate it.
U. M., United States
The article came right at the time of my scheduled surgery. When my blood count dropped because of excessive blood loss, I used this magazine to explain to the hospital staff and family members why I will not accept blood. Thanks to Jehovah, I have made a full recovery.
C. B., United States

