Are You Too Busy?
1 Paul exhorted that we ‘always have plenty to do in the work of the Lord.’ (1 Cor. 15:58) We are urged to maintain a daily routine for personal study, share regularly in the ministry, attend meetings faithfully, and care for congregation assignments diligently. Added to that, we must assist others who need our help. With so much to do, at times we may feel overwhelmed, thinking that we have to look for ways to cut down on our work load.
2 There are situations that may make it both wise and reasonable to eliminate certain activities or reduce their level. Some individuals feel that they are expected to do everything requested of them by others. A lack of balance in this regard can produce pressure and stress that can ultimately become devastating.
3 Be Balanced: The key to balance lies in applying Paul’s counsel to “make sure of the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10) That simply means that we concentrate on the things that really matter and, if time and circumstances permit, care for some things of lesser importance. Family obligations certainly rank high among those things that are vital. Certain secular responsibilities have to be handled. However, Jesus taught that our priorities should be based on the premise that we seek the Kingdom first. We must first do the things that will allow us to fulfill our dedication to Jehovah.—Matt. 5:3; 6:33.
4 Having this in mind, we will make sure that we cut out of our busy schedule any unnecessary personal pursuits, excessive recreational activities, and nonessential commitments to others. In planning our activity for each week, we will set aside time for sufficient personal study, a reasonable share in service, attendance at meetings, and any other things closely connected with our worship. The remaining time may be divided among other pursuits, depending on how much they contribute toward achieving our primary goal of being balanced Christians who keep the Kingdom first.
5 Even then, we may still feel our load is oppressive. If so, we need to respond to Jesus’ invitation: “Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you.” (Matt. 11:28) Also, look to Jehovah, “who daily carries the load for us” and gives to the tired one power. He promises that he will never allow the righteous one to totter. (Ps. 55:22; 68:19; Isa. 40:29) We can be confident that our prayers will be answered, making it possible for us to persevere in an active life of theocratic activity.
6 While we are sure to be kept busy in pursuing worthwhile Kingdom interests, we can rejoice in knowing that our labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.—1 Cor. 15:58.

