Be Whole-Souled!
1 We have a multitude of reasons to be grateful to Jehovah. These include the things that he has done in the past, is doing right now, and will yet do for us in the future. What should our gratitude move us to do? A psalm of David answers: “I will bless Jehovah at all times; constantly his praise will be in my mouth.”—Ps. 34:1.
2 The Bible clearly shows that we are commanded to preach. This is a work that we perform “whole-souled as to Jehovah.” (Col. 3:23) How much will we do in the ministry if we are truly whole-souled? When we consider the love of Jehovah in our behalf, surely our hearts move us to have a devoted share in telling others about him and his precious purposes! We are moved to do what we can.
3 It would be reasonable to expect that a person who is whole-souled wants to keep his attention focused on sacred service. The psalmist, who obviously felt that way, declared: “Seven times in the day I have praised you.” (Ps. 119:164) Those who share the psalmist’s feelings seek to take advantage of opportunities to praise Jehovah. As their circumstances permit, they serve zealously to the extent possible.
4 We Are Surrounded by Opportunities to Praise Jehovah: We do not have to wait until we are sharing in the door-to-door work to preach the good news. Our workmates, schoolmates, relatives, and acquaintances all need to hear the Kingdom message. When traveling, we can start conversations that may lead to giving a witness to hotel personnel, restaurant workers, service station attendants, or taxi drivers. While at home, we may witness to neighbors or deliverymen. If we are hospitalized, there are nurses, doctors, and other patients to whom we can preach informally.
5 Informal Witnessing Gets Results: Two Witnesses were walking in a park one day and struck up a conversation with a young man who was strolling with his child. Eventually he and his wife embraced the truth. The young man later revealed that only a short time before he first met the two Witnesses, he had prayed to God, asking, ‘If you exist, please let me know you.’ He considers the encounter in the park to be Jehovah’s answer to his prayer.
6 Those who are whole-souled in their desire to help others spiritually experience great joy. They know that such service, “with a complete heart,” pleases Jehovah.—1 Chron. 28:9.

