Service Meetings for May
Week Starting May 6
Song 153
10 min: Local announcements. Review “What Are Your Plans for the Summer?”
15 min: “Be Whole-Souled!” Questions and answers. As time permits, consider “Points to Discuss as a Family,” in the October 15, 1981, Watchtower, page 25.
20 min: “Speak Truth to Your Neighbor.” Questions and answers. Review suggested presentations. Encourage new ones to share in magazine distribution, using brief presentations to get started. Have two demonstrations that include pointing out the statement on page 2 of The Watchtower: “Publication of The Watchtower is part of a worldwide Bible educational work supported by voluntary donations.” We are pleased to accept modest donations from people who enjoy the magazines.
Song 148 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 13
Song 63
 7 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
18 min: “We Never Had It So Good Spiritually!” Questions and answers. Have two or three publishers, including a teenager, mention some of their blessings. Conclude by showing how increased appreciation moves us to zealous activity in sacred service.
20 min: “1996 ‘Messengers of Godly Peace’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 1-17. Read paragraphs 10-11, 16.
Song 193 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 20
Song 126
10 min: Local announcements. Review arrangements for field service activity during worldly holiday on May 27. Encourage all to share in magazine distribution.
15 min: “Keep On Speaking the Truth.” Stress need to make return visits, with the goal of starting studies. Offer six-month subscriptions to those who show genuine interest. Have two brief demonstrations.
20 min: “1996 ‘Messengers of Godly Peace’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 18-24. Read paragraph 18. Review “District Convention Reminders.”
Song 28 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 27
Song 121
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Offering Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life During June. Service overseer first discusses why the Knowledge book was published. He then reviews some of its highlights with two or three capable publishers. Book answers questions about our future, human suffering, God’s Kingdom, godly conduct, family life, and the benefits of prayer. Two different ones in group demonstrate approach that can be used to start a study on either the initial call or a return visit. Service overseer then covers following points. There is a need to conduct more effective Bible studies in a shorter period of time. This book was specially designed for that purpose. It presents the truth in a positive, concise manner. Questions on each paragraph, as well as at the end of every chapter, help us to focus on the main points. The book covers the answers to the questions asked of newly dedicated ones who wish to get baptized. Encourage all to work with the goal of starting studies in June.
10 min: Question Box. Read and discuss with audience.
15 min: “Are You Too Busy?” Questions and answers. As time permits, include comments from the June 8, 1990, Awake!, pages 14-16. Have one or two publishers briefly relate what they have done to cope successfully with a busy theocratic schedule.
Song 155 and concluding prayer.

