We Never Had It So Good Spiritually!
1 Most people yearn for the day when they can say, “We never had it so good!” In their mind, that day will come when they have an abundance of material things, allowing them to ‘take their ease, eat, drink, and enjoy themselves.’ (Luke 12:19) In contrast, right now we are able to say that in a spiritual sense, we are not lacking anything good. (Ps. 34:10) How is that possible?
2 Proverbs 10:22 declares that “the blessing of Jehovah—that is what makes rich.” We who experience such divine favor can truly say that God “furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment.” (1 Tim. 6:17) This makes us the richest people on earth!
3 Counting Our Blessings: Few of us have an abundance of material things. Yet, we are blessed because we are not overly anxious about our daily necessities. Jehovah knows what things we need, and he promises to provide them. (Matt. 6:31-33) His assurance gives us peace of mind that is truly priceless.
4 Our spiritual blessings, however, are even greater. Our lives depend on spiritual food from Jehovah. (Matt. 4:4) Those who look to worldly sources for spiritual sustenance go hungry while we eat and drink to satisfaction. (Isa. 65:13) The ‘faithful slave’ gives us access to an inexhaustible supply of knowledge that leads to everlasting life.—Matt. 24:45; John 17:3.
5 Our precious worldwide brotherhood provides us with the warm fellowship of loving brothers and sisters living in every part of the earth. (John 13:35) The local congregation is a haven of peace, where we can find comfort and refreshment. The elders are keeping watch over our souls, helping us to cope with many kinds of problems. (Heb. 13:17) Our drawing close to our brothers results in an interchange of encouragement, strengthening us to persevere.—Rom. 1:11, 12.
6 Even our work is a blessing. Many secular jobs are tedious and unfulfilling. Sharing the good news brings joy to others and happiness to ourselves. (Acts 20:35) We are truly able to see good for all our hard work.—Eccl. 2:24.
7 Most of all, we have a marvelous hope for the future. (Rom. 12:12) We look forward to a perfect new world of righteousness, where we will live with our loved ones in happiness and peace forever! This hope is a treasure worth more than anything this world has to offer.—1 Tim. 6:19.
8 How Can We Show Our Appreciation? We can never repay Jehovah for what he has done for us. We can only express our appreciation by (1) thanking him every day for his undeserved kindness (Eph. 5:20), (2) demonstrating our love by being obedient (1 John 5:3), (3) sanctifying his name by preaching the good news (Ps. 83:18), and (4) supporting the Christian congregation by our wholehearted cooperation.—1 Tim. 3:15.
9 We have every reason to be the happiest people on earth. (Ps. 144:15b) May our attitude, conduct, and service reflect the joy we feel in our spiritual paradise. We never had it so good!

