VOL. XXXI SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 
A.D. 1910-A.M. 6038 



CONTENTS 



Int. Bible Students Assn. Special Meetings 274 

Views From The Watch Tower 275 

Rich Man Prophesies Panic 275 

Secretary Knox Sees Millennium 276 

The Chautauqua Lake Convention 277 

Largest and Finest Convention Ever 
Held on the Lake 277 

Six Receptions at the Mayville Inn 278 

Restitution Work Begun 279 

What Heaven Is Like 281 

"The General Assembly of the Church 
of the First-Borns" 282 

The First-Borns Passed Over 283 

Bible Students in Palestine 284 

Misimproved Opportunities Taken Away 285 

"Many Are Called But Few Are Chosen" 286 

Without a Wedding Garment 286 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 287 

Some Interesting Letters 287 

page 274 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:— British Branch: 24 Eversholt St., London, 
N.W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Equitable Building, Collins St., Melbourne. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



It is considered desirable that the general public be not 
invited to these meetings— except to the public one, addressed 
by Brother Russell. 

PORTLAND, ME., SEPT. 10-12. 

Portland has been substituted for "Old Orchard." Brother 
Russell's address on "WHERE ARE THE DEAD?" will be 
delivered in Jefferson Theatre, Sunday, Sept. 1 1, at 3 p.m. 

Other meetings have been arranged for in Hoegg's Hall, 
Deering Centre, Portland. There will be three services daily 
and six or eight speakers. Opportunity for Baptism will be 
afforded. Quite reasonably priced accommodations will be 
obtainable. 

The Maine Central Railroad Company announces a rate of 
one fare and one-third for the round trip. Tickets will be 
on sale Sept. 10, 11 and 12, return limit, Sept. 14. 

NORRISTOWN, PA., AUGUST 28 

Morning Rally for Praise, Prayer and Testimony at 10 
o'clock in Historical Hall, Penn St. and Public Square. 
Discourse for the public at 2.30 o'clock by Brother Russell in 
Grand Opera House, Main St., above De Kalb St. Topic, 
"Hereafter." Visiting friends heartily welcomed. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., SEPT. 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 o'clock, 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, 13-17 Hicks St. The evening 
meeting at 7:30 o'clock will also be in the Tabernacle. Discourse 
for the Public at 3 p.m. in the Brooklyn Academy of 
Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. Felix St. Topic, "Messiah's 
Coming Kingdom." 

DETROIT, MICH., SEPT. 18 

Morning Rally, 9:30 o'clock at Vermont Hall, Grand River 
and Trumbull avenues. Discourse for the Public by Brother 
Russell at Light Guard Armory 2:30 p.m. Topic "Hereafter." 

KNOXVILLE, TENN, SEPT. 24, 25, 26. 

Railroads have granted the very low rate of one cent per 
mile during the Appalachian Exposition now being held in 
Knoxville. This rate is open to all and good for the dates of 
the convention. 

Many of the friends throughout the South who could not 



go to Jamestown because of the great distance, will rejoice 
to know of a convention so much nearer home. For particulars 
as to lodging, meals, etc., address Brother R. A. Parham, 
5 Maloney avenue, S. Knoxville, Tenn. 

Brother Russell's topic for the Public discourse will be 
"Hereafter." It is expected that Brothers Stevens, Bohnet, 
Raymond and Rutherford will also be speakers. 



R4671 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
RICH MAN PROPHESIES PANIC 



A MULTI-MILLIONAIRE sugar manufacturer 

of California, Mr. Rudolph Spreckels, recently 

returned from a European trip. In 

New York City he was interviewed by a 

newspaper reporter and is quoted as having 

made the statements below. Without endorsing 

his conclusions, we state them. His 

large wealth gives him opportunity for information 

respecting monetary affairs, 

which would not be open to ordinary men 

of small capital and lesser influence. We quote the interview 

from the Springfield Union of July 31st, as 

follows:— 

TERRIBLE TIMES BEFORE US 

"The financial control of the country is today centered 
in the hands of two great interests. When the two men 
in control of these interests engage in battle with each 
other for the supremacy a revolution, the most destructive 
the world has ever seen, will follow— a revolution that 
will not only paralyze or wreck many of our great 
industries and overthrow unnumbered financial institutions, 
but will imperil the safety of the Government itself. 
The only force that can prevent such a disaster is the 
people themselves, whose good sense and patriotism on 
many occasions heretofore have rescued the country from 
threatened destruction. 

"I have been engaged in business since I was 17, and 
have noticed year by year a gradual reduction in the 
number of firms handling large industries or engaged in 
banking, until today the reduction must excite alarm. It 
is a significant commentary on business conditions that 
two men have it in their power to embarrass the United 
States Government. The concentration of wealth is the 
great evil of modern times, for it places in a few hands 
the power to precipitate panics and control legislation. 

"Each time one of these panics has occurred certain 



interests have come forward to relieve the situation by 

the releasing of large amounts of money. If men can 

break a panic by bringing forward their hoarded millions, 

it is evident they can cause a panic by withdrawing from 

circulation a few hundred millions of dollars. From observations 

made in the last few months I am convinced 

that certain great financial interests now are perfecting 

plans for the precipitation of one of these business upheavals 

this fall. 

"The panic of 1907 was 'organized,' if I may use the 
term, for the purpose of discrediting Theodore Roosevelt 
and his administration. The panic of 1910 is being hatched 
to furnish material for the approaching political campaigns. 
Those who are engineering it do not care how 
many enterprises may be wrecked, how many men may 
be thrown out of employment, or how many suicides may 
follow, so long as they succeed in their purposes. If 
stocks are hammered down to the bottom, they stand ready 
to make millions out of the necessities of those who are 
driven to sacrifice their holdings." 

Spreckels announced that he proposed to devote the 
rest of his life to the reform of "conditions that already 
are intolerable," in order to head off, if possible, the impending 
revolution. Asked as to the remedy for the evils 
complained of, he said:— 

"The elimination of dishonesty in corporate matters, 
the quickening of business conscience, the banishment of 
graft, the readjustment of capitalization by the squeezing 
out of water and the adoption of the Golden Rule as a 
fundamental principle of business. How these reforms 
can be effected is the important question of the times. 
What is needed today is a quickening of the conscience 
of the great wealth holders. One trouble with the trusts 
is that the men whose capital is invested in them are not 
sufficiently concerned to take an active interest in their 
management. So long as they continue to receive large 
dividends they wink at practises in a corporation that 
they would not countenance in their own personal 
business." 

Without endorsing Mr. Spreckels' prophecy we can 
say that it is well-known amongst financial institutions of 
the country that all our banking interests are 
practically in the hands of a very few wealthy men. It 
is not, however, generally believed that the interests of 
these men would be better served by panics. On the contrary, 
the general estimation of business people is that 
these capitalists are conservative and that in seeking to 
guard their own interests against catastrophe they are 
really protecting others from financial disaster. Some of 
these very people have boasted of late that their hold upon 
the financial situation is so strong that panics will henceforth 
be impossible. 

R4671 : page 276 

Nevertheless selfishness and ambition are the foundation 



of the present structure of society. And Mr. 

Spreckels may be right in his assumption of a great 

financial duel between our financial potentates. It was 

just such a duel that produced our last panic. One combination 

of capitalists attempted to take by the throat 

another combination, but failed and was crushed. The 

public was not made to suffer more than was necessary 

in the matter; but, so powerful were the antagonists, that 

the entire financial world received a shock which brought 

loss to many far removed from the principals and the 

scene of their conflict. 

But aside from Mr. Spreckels' prophecy respecting a 
panic this year our readers know from the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES to expect ere long the fulfillment of the great 
Redeemer's words, "There shall be a time of trouble such 
as never was since there was a nation— no, nor ever shall 
be after." (Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:21.) That awful trouble, 
however, we do not expect before October, 1914. Whatever 
may come in the interim will be but the rumblings 
preceding the great climacteric shock, before which will 
fall all earthly institutions; as St. Paul declares, Everything 
that can be shaken will be shaken. And the only 
thing that cannot be shaken will be the Kingdom which 
God's faithful ones will receive about that time.— 
Heb. 12:27,28. 

Meantime we advise that no attempt be made by any 
of our readers to alarm the world. Humanity will be 
alarmed enough in due time. Rather it should be our aim 
to console, to comfort, to bind up the broken-hearted, to 
pour in the oil and the wine, to show the good things 
which God has in reservation for the saints and the 
restitution blessings which then will begin to be dispensed 
to Israel and to all the families of the earth through 
Israel. 

Mr. Spreckels is to be admired for his courage. He 
fully demonstrated it some years ago in his attack upon 
financial corruption and graft in the politics of San Francisco. 
The above interview shows the man's fearless 
courage as he looks into the future. He hopes to be able 
to stem the tide of political and financial corruption. He 
hopes for the establishment of the Golden Rule in business 
and in politics. We admire his courage and hopefulness, 
even while we know that his expectations will all fail. 
The world is not getting nearer to the Golden Rule. Our 
great institutions of learning are turning out infidels by 
the thousands— turning them into influential and predominant 
strata and currents of life— financial, political 
and religious. They fear neither God nor the devil. They 
scorn the Bible and its precepts as "old wives' fables." 
They have a standing of honor and a business integrity, 
but it is not of the Golden Rule kind. It is of the kind 
that merely keeps within the lines of legal requirement, 
and not always that, as was evidenced by the court exposures 
of illegalities in connection with some of the great 
insurance companies a few years ago and railroad mismanagement 
and land frauds and bribery by bankers, etc. 



Nor should we be harsh in our judgment of millionaires 
as a whole, nor even of those who have been convicted of 
financial briberies. Rather our moderation should be 
known to all men. As peacemakers we should sympathetically 
point out on proper occasions that much of 
the difficulty arises from the fact that individual responsibility 
is overwhelmed by corporation associations— by 
the seeming necessity of an unlawful act to accomplish 
an end believed to be wise, benevolent or just. In other 
words, we are living in the day controlled by systems, of 
which individuals are merely atoms, even when they 
occupy influential positions in the systems. 

How glad we are that, as Bible Students, we are 
obtaining from the Divine Word "meat in due season," 
which not only nourishes us, but makes us strong in the 
Lord to know and to do his will and to be assistful to all 
with whom we are in contact. Let us not forget that if 
we belong to the Lord we are of the "royal priesthood" and 
that now is the time, in the dawning of the great antitypical 
Jubilee, when all the priests are to blow upon the 
silver trumpets, making known to the world the riches of 
God's grace about to be revealed in Messiah's Kingdom, 
for which still we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven." 



SECRETARY KNOX SEES MILLENNIUM 

P. C. Knox, Secretary of State in President Taft's 
Cabinet, in concluding a stirring address before the graduating 
students of the University of Pennsylvania, speaks 
as follows: 

"We have reached a point where it is evident that the 
future holds in store a time when wars shall cease; when 
the nations of the world shall realize a federation as real 
and vital as that now subsisting between the component 
parts of a single state; when by deliberate international 
conjunction the strong shall universally help the weak, 
and when the corporate righteousness of the world shall 
compel unrighteousness to disappear and shall destroy the 
habitations of cruelty still lingering in the dark places of 

R4672 : page 276 

the earth. This is 'the spirit of the wide world brooding 
on things to come.' That day will be the Millennium, of 
course; but in some sense and degree it will surely be 
realized in this dispensation of mortal time." 



JEWISH PERSECUTION 

Shocking reports are coming from Russia about the 
expulsion of the Jews in masses. As lightning out of a 



clear sky, thousands of Jewish families are being turned 
unexpectedly out of their homes, and as often brought to 
the beggar's staff. From a suburb of Kiev there have 
been banished Jews who have lived there for decades. 
This, however, does not hinder a part of the Jewish 
"upper-crust" from holding its hand over Russian bonds 
with a view of protecting themselves. If all the rich 
Jewish financiers in Germany and France possessed 
enough feeling of honor to oppose this Jewish persecution 
in Russia by a campaign against Russian stocks, then the 
Barbaric vassals of the Czar would soon be brought to 
fear in this, their "religious fervor." By this it is not intended 
to be said that every respectable person has not a 
duty to boycott Russian bonds, until Russia has adapted 
herself to the ways of civilization. But we do mean to 
say that Jewish capitalists should be in the lead with their 
good example. They are certainly, in the end, the closest 
to the situation.— From the German Press. 



NEED FOR THE KINGDOM 

Doctor MacGillvary, Professor of Etymology in Cornell 
University, lecturing recently, said, "Insects at the moment 
have an enormous influence on the life and health 
of mankind. The number of species of insects which are 
known to science at the present time is estimated at one 
hundred millions. Knowledge of the place of insects in 
disease is of recent acquisition. Not until 1880 was it 
known that malaria was produced by a parasite. Not 
until fifteen years later was the part which mosquitos play 
in its spread discovered. Not until 1 890 was yellow fever 
known to be an insect-carried disease." 



R4672 : page 277 

THE CHAUTAUQUA LAKE CONVENTION 

THERE has just been concluded, under the title 

of International Bible Students Association 

Convention, a most interesting and profitable 

meeting of the Lord's people. Not only 

were there one thousand more in attendance 

than ever before, but the sweet Spirit of the 

Lord was more abundantly manifest than 

ever— which is saying a great deal, for all 

of our conventions have been excellent in 

this very particular. It is but what we 

should expect, however, that each year would develop the 

Lord's people more fully in the fruits and graces of his 

holy Spirit— in meekness, gentleness, long suffering, brotherly 

kindness, love. The attendance was surely in excess 

of four thousand, but how many more it is difficult to 



determine, as not all could be present at one time. The 
Bible Students crowded the accommodations along both 
sides of the lake from Jamestown to Mayville— twenty-five 
miles. The boat rides were found very restful and 
very advantageous for Christian fellowship and a more 
intimate acquaintance amongst the friends. An opportunity 
was afforded also for witnessing to the truth in 
the Chautauqua Lake region. 

The friends in general preached an appreciated sermon 
in their deportment, tone of voice, kindness, patience, 
helpfulness. The people took knowledge of them that they 
had been with Jesus and learned of him. We have friends 
all around that lake now. Before our arrival some ministers, 
in disregard of the Word and Spirit of the Master, 
slandered us— falsified in their endeavor to awaken opposition 
amongst their people. Things resulted, however, 
to the contrary. One lady who had contracted to entertain 
six of our friends was visited by her minister and 
told that she should have nothing to do with these Bible 
Students, etc. In perplexity she counseled with her husband 
how she could get rid of them, seeing she had accepted 
in advance payment on account of their entertainment. 
He replied, "Wait a little while; I will run up 
to the Auditorium and mingle with the people and let you 
know." He returned shortly, saying that he had heard 
our opening address of welcome and mingled some with 
those attending, and wished his wife could get forty into 
the house, instead of six. 

The Chief of Police of Celoron remarked to one of 
the brethren that if everyone in the world were like the 
people who were attending the convention there would 
be no need of a police department, and that saloonmen 
would have to look for another job. He remarked that 
he had not noticed even one of the conventioners using 
tobacco. The policeman stationed at the front of the 
Auditorium said that his wife was a Christian, but that 
he had never taken much interest in religion, thinking 
it mostly a profession. He said, "I am forcibly impressed 
that the people attending this convention live their Christianity. 
My wife is away on a vacation, to be back in 
about two weeks, but I have sent her word to come 
immediately, as I am sure she will want to get acquainted 
with these people." 

LARGEST AND FINEST CONVENTION EVER HELD ON 
THE LAKE 

Celoron, where the Auditorium is located, is a worldly 
place, of course, a small "White City." Its inhabitants 
are composed chiefly of those who purvey to worldly tastes 
and appetites. They were disappointed that so large a 
throng of people should bring so little patronage to their 
merry-go-rounds, shooting galleries, etc. They all acknowledged, 
however, that the conventioners were kind, 
considerate, and minded their own business, and that 
that business evidently was to hear the speakers of the 



Convention. One of the showmen, never before interested 

in religion, attended services on the first Sunday. 

He was deeply impressed, and said that the message appealed 

to him as reasonable. He is reading the books. 

The principal owner of the place was very considerate 

of our interests and quieted the music in the vicinity of 

the Auditorium while our services were in progress. 

Altogether we had a glorious season of spiritual refreshment 

and have reason to believe that the Truth, through 

its representatives, made an indelible impression along the 

shores of Lake Chautauqua. We are most earnestly urged 

to come again next year, and the suggestion was made 

that, if we would do so, an auditorium away from the 

amusement section would be erected for our use. 

The Jamestown newspapers devoted much of their 
space to the Convention, declaring it the largest that had 
ever visited them. On the Saturday before the Convention 
closed, one journal gave about two columns of space 
and another nearly three pages. Those attending the Convention 
bought many copies of the newspapers and mailed 
them to their friends in every direction. We understand 
that one paper sold more than 25,000 extra copies. Those 
papers in turn will carry considerable of the good tidings 
to people all over the United States and Canada. 

Our arrangements for baptismal services were not all 
that could have been desired; nevertheless we had much 
to be thankful for. Doubtless the accommodations were 
much better than those of our Lord's day. We had two 
baptism discourses and two opportunities for symbolical 
immersion, at which, according to official account, 354 
adults were immersed. 

In our petitions the dear ones at home were earnestly 
remembered— that they might have an equal share in the 
blessing. And we believe that many will get the blessing: 
(1) Those who submissively bowed to the Divine Providence 
which hindered their attending the Convention, are 
sure to learn the lesson of patience and faith. (2) Those 
who attended the Convention will surely carry back to the 
stay-at-homes a share of our rich feast, which will overflow 
in all directions. 

Many "poor" attended; some assisted in part or in 
whole by "better-off" brethren and sisters. Some stayed 
at home and earned money to permit others to come to 
the Convention and get a spiritual feast. Surely all thus 
earnest were richly blessed by the great Shepherd. 

We have already remarked that some of the dear 
friends, on arrival, were not kindly received by those who 
had contracted to entertain them, and to whom money 
on account had been paid. This was vexatious and quite 
a test of patience, and faith in Divine Providence, and 
brotherly love. Yet we believe that the friends conquered 
through the Spirit of the Lord. Should we ever 
return to Chautauqua Lake we would have the very best 
and kindest of attention from every quarter. Here is one 
case as an illustration: The man of the house met the 
visitors at the door, and, in a challenging manner, said, 



"We are United Brethren," intimating that he did not 
want any conversation on religious subjects, and that it 
was questionable if he would receive the friends, even 
with this assurance. They accepted the situation graciously, 
determined not to talk religion where it was not 
wanted. However, in the house a little boy lay dying 
and unable to eat. One of the friends told the child about 
the glorious restitution, how he would come back from 
death in the resurrection, and how the entire world would 
then be Edenic. Next the child was presented with a 
copy of the Heavenly Manna, with the suggestion that 

R4673 : page 278 

that kind of food he could always take with a relish. Before 
we left all were fast friends, and the guests were 
urged to come again. 

Although we tried to make the matter plain, some of 
the dear friends, we fear, did not fully grasp the financial 
part of the arrangement for their comfort. The committee 
on arrangements undertook to furnish all in attendance 
at uniform prices, although the cost of entertainment 
would necessarily vary a great deal. To illustrate: The 
friends lodged at the upper part would have been obliged 
to pay $1.00 a day on the electric car or fifty cents on the 
boat to reach the Convention and return. Those lodged in 
the Chautauqua grounds would have had the same boat 
fare and eighty cents on the street car, and the boats do 
not stop there on Sunday. Additionally the Chautauqua 
Association charges 40 cents per day admission fee to 
their grounds, which for the ten days amounts to $4. 
We secured a concession, but paid $2 a head for all who 
lodged within their gates. Those lodged at Jamestown, 
of course, had less expense— 5 cents each way daily. 
Our committee averaged the matter and charged all alike, 
including a noon luncheon. 

It was our intention to serve the friends without 
profit, and our accounts show a shortage of $3,000. This, 
however, includes the transportation and entertainment 
of the Bethel family of more than 76. A little 
idea of the cost of the noon luncheon may be had 
from a statement of the daily food supply— fresh milk, 
1,000 quarts; lemonade, 600 quarts; sandwiches, 4,000; 
buns, 4,000; sweet cakes and crackers, 6,000; ice, 2,000 
pounds; bananas, 3,300; cheese, 135 pounds. This was our 
daily provision. It was served by 120 volunteer brethren 
at each meal. Fourteen dear friends spent nearly three 
weeks in securing the accommodations, while others 
labored day and night in making the assignments. 

While we paid a uniform rate for all rooms, they were 
not all alike. They were graded A, B, C and D by those 
who examined and engaged them. Then those who made 
the assignments gave the A grade to the $14 orders, the 
B grade to the $11, and the C and D grades to the $9 
orders. They may not all have been correctly graded, 
but we feel sure that all got excellent value for their 



money; for those who paid $14 for nine days, paid only 
about $1.50 per day for food, lodging and transportation. 

We assure all who attended that whatever was lacking 
of perfection came short through imperfection of judgment 
or matters beyond the control of those looking after 
their interests. We can certainly say that had 4,000 
people arrived there without previous arrangements for 
their comfort they would have been a sorry lot, and would 
have paid all kinds of prices for entertainment or would 
have wandered around the streets tired and hungry. Nevertheless, 
should we return to the same place another time 
we could do much better for all, because open opposition 
has disappeared. As several gentlemen of Jamestown remarked, 
"The only people here who do not seem to have 
enjoyed your Convention are the preachers and 
saloonkeepers." 

The Convention was every way an interesting one. 
The presence of Brother Hemery of the British Branch, 
Brother Lundborg of the Swedish Branch, Brother Luttichau 
of the Danish Branch, and Brother Lindqvist of the 
Norwegian Branch, added materially to the interest of the 
occasion. The list of speakers, as shown on the programme, 
which many of you have, numbered twenty-four, 
besides about twelve who took part in the symposium at 
the last session. On account of the large crowds it seemed 
unadvisable to attempt to have a Love Feast of the usual 
type. We therefore arranged that twelve of the Pilgrim 
brethren should be stationed at the outlets of the various 
aisles, both on the lower floor and in the gallery of the 
Auditorium. The friends greeted these as they passed 
from the Convention Hall on the last Sunday night. At 
the conclusion all declared, "It has been our very best 
Convention." 

LODGED AT THE MAYVILLE INN 

We knew that, on account of the Convention, the letters 
and orders coming to the Brooklyn office would be 
fewer than usual. We therefore took practically the entire 
office force to the Convention, there to continue the necessary 
features of the work in all departments. The Editor, 
as President of the I.B.S.A., felt it proper that he 
should be in attendance throughout the entire 
Convention. 

Nevertheless, as it was necessary for him to keep up 
his literary duties, it was advisable to isolate himself to 
some extent from the glad hands and loving hearts of the 
4,000 plus, each of whom desired a few minutes' conversation 
and to shake hands every time they came within 
reach. Isolation seemed cruel, but necessary, in the interest 
of the King's Business. Accordingly we rented the 
Mayville Inn, which was vacant but furnished. There 
about fifty of the friends were entertained, with the understanding 
that Brother Russell must not be intruded 
upon, and could be visited only at meal times and at the 
evening Receptions. We spoke at the Auditorium five 



times:— 

(1) At the opening session. 

(2) On Sunday morning, July 31. 

(3) A special address to the Pilgrim brethren and to 
Elders and Deacons from everywhere on Thursday evening, 
Aug. 4. 

(4) To Colporteurs on Saturday morning, Aug. 6. 

(5) To the Convention and to the public on Sunday, 
Aug. 7. 

On the latter occasion the house was crowded and an 
overflow meeting of about 700 was held in the adjoining 
theater, addressed by Brother John Kuehn. 

SIX RECEPTIONS AT THE INN 

In view of the impossibility of personal contact with 
any but a very few at the Auditorium, we arranged for 
six Receptions at the Mayville Inn, with admission only 
by cards. We had 3,600 of these cards printed, and additional 
permits were granted for the last Reception on 
Saturday evening, Aug. 6. The tickets were good only 
for the date they bore, so that the chartered steamer 
which took the friends twenty miles to the Inn and back 
might not be overcrowded. We desired that all should 
have a view of the beautiful lake and the opportunity for 
fellowship enroute. We are assured that the arrangements 
were enjoyed to the full and were seasons of refreshing 
fellowship and praise. 

At the Inn the crowds each evening were received in 
the large parlors and halls and verandas and spacious 
lawns. We used a corner of one veranda for a pulpit, 
and, after greeting the dear friends, spoke a few words 
along spiritual lines to assist in making the occasion one 
to be remembered from the standpoint of spiritual refreshment. 
Then, while hundreds sang some of our sweet 
hymns, other hundreds were invited into the large dining 
room, where with zeal they were served by loving brethren 
and sisters (recruits chiefly from the Colporteur ranks) 
with a little ice cream, cake, etc., soon exchanging places 
with the singers. We feel sure that these six receptions 
added to the comfort and joy and spiritual refreshment 
of all who participated. The numbers attending furnished 

R4673 : page 279 

a good gauge of the total number attending the Convention. 
Yet there were probably nearly 1,000 who, for one 
reason or another, did not get to the receptions— some of 
them refrained from attending, fearing that there would 
not be room, and that they would crowd out others. 
There was, however, room for all, and more could have 
been entertained. 

Reports of the Receptions were published in the Jamestown 
papers. Thinking that they may be of interest we 
include them in this report:— 



THE GREATER AND ETERNAL EDEN 
GOD'S FOOTSTOOL TO BE MADE GLORIOUS 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTION 
AT 
THE MAYVILLE INN 



August 3.— Last evening the second installment from 
the Bible Students Convention, numbering nearly six hundred, 
visited Pastor Russell and were addressed by him 
on the lawn and porches of Peacock Inn. The twenty 
miles' ride on our beautiful Lake Chautauqua feasted 
their eyes. Their hymns of praise wafted to the cottages 
on the shores led many to surname these International 
Bible Students— "The Happy People." Pastor Russell 
spoke briefly and informally. Referring to the beautiful 
scenery of the lake, he remarked:— 

"It turned my mind back to the Garden of Eden, reminding 
me of the Divine provision for our first parents 
before sin came to mar the Divine likeness in which Adam 
and Eve were created. Then my mind went forward into 
the future, guided by the Divine lamp— the Word of God. 
In its light there arose before my mental vision Paradise 
restored— not a garden merely, but the entire earth made 
beautiful, gorgeous, fruitful, sinless, happy. 

"I called to mind the inspired promise so familiar to 
us all— There shall be no more sighing, no more crying, 
no more dying— for the former things of sin and death 
will have passed away, and the great King of Glory shall 
announce, 'Behold, I renew all things.' (Rev. 21:5.) 
I recalled also St. Peter's words of assurance respecting 
these glorious 'times of restitution of all things which 
God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began.' (Acts 3:20,21.) St. Peter adds 
that this restitution of earth to its designed perfection- 
typed in Eden— and of man's restitution to God's likeness, 
delays until the second advent of the Redeemer. And 
other Scriptures, dear Brethren, assure us that the coming 
of our Master as the King of Glory is timed by God to 
take place as soon as the elect Church shall have been 
called and chosen and tested and found faithful. 

RESTITUTION WORK BEGUN 

"The Divine purpose will not be thwarted by the permission 
of sin to mar the original. The sacrificial death 
of Jesus is the complete offset to the penalty pronounced 
on Adam and his race. Restitution to perfection and Divine 
favor will result in God's 'due time.' And we believe that 
time near at hand. 

"Do we not see the promised blessing coming? What 
are our vast irrigation schemes by artesian wells and by 
aqueducts but fulfillments of the prophecies pertaining 
to the reign of Messiah and the blessing of the earth? 
Hark to the message: Streams shall break forth in the 



R4674 : page 279 

desert; and the wilderness shall bloom as the rose.— 
Isaiah 35. 

"Burbank and others are under Divine guidance working 
miracles in horticulture, just as Edison and others 
have been the instruments of Providence to give us electrical 
devices. What beautiful fruits and flowers are the 
result! It is difficult to imagine greater perfection either 
in Eden of old or in the world-wide Eden to be restored! 

"Referring to the 'times of restitution' of Messiah's 
reign the Prophet declares, 'The earth shall yield her increase.' 
(Ezek. 34:27.) Behold preparations for the fulfillment 
of this promise: About three years ago a Virginia 
farmer found one abnormal bunch of 120 stalks of 
wheat from one root— the offspring of one grain of wheat. 
Under the name of 'miracle wheat' it is now being developed 
slowly in various parts— the average yield appears 
to be about 1,200 grains from one kernel. And this very 
year the same peculiarity in oats has been found— a bunch 
growing wild by the roadside. 

"Additionally the same Divine providence is guiding 
our chemists to economical methods of extracting nitrogen 
from the atmosphere for the feeding of the soil and 
thus to the 'increase' of earth's blessings and in fulfillment 
of God's promise that he will make the earth (his footstool) 
glorious. 

DELIVERING THE CAPTIVES 

"But, my friends, the most important piece of restitution 
work relates to man. The hard, stony selfishness of 
heart which is world-wide is not God's likeness nor to 
God's glory. 

'"Man's inhumanity to man 
Makes countless thousands mourn.' 

"Nineteen centuries of preaching shows that the cure 
of this malady is not in our power, and that only the few 
even desire or seek for the Lord's spirit of gentleness and 
tender-heartedness. The great King of Glory is also the 
Good Physician. He only can cure the disease of sin and 
its results. Through him God's promise to Israel will be 
fulfilled: 'I will take away the stony heart out of your 
flesh and give you a heart of flesh.' (Jeremiah 31:31.) 
And this work will proceed from Israel to all the families 
of the earth— uplifting all the willing and obedient out 
of sin and death to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
at Calvary. And, thank God, the unwilling and 
disobedient will not be consigned to endless torture, but 
to 'the Second Death'— 'everlasting destruction.' 

"After some light refreshments the 'happy people' departed 
on the boat for their lodgings along the Lake and 
at Jamestown, singing enroute." 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS 
CALL UPON 
PASTOR RUSSELL 

Nearly 600 Addressed on the Lawn of the Late Judge 
Peacock's Residence. 

A third detachment of Bible Students, after the day's 
services, took steamer for the upper end of the Lake to 
attend Pastor Russell's reception. The Lake journey was 
an enjoyable one along spiritual lines. The students, rendering 
various well-known hymns effectively, discussed 
the Convention topics of the day. They were as happy a 
crowd as ever passed over our beautiful Lake. 

At Peacock Inn the visitors crowded the lower floor 
of the house and the extensive lawn. Pastor Russell, after 
greeting each visitor, addressed them as a whole. He 
welcomed those already well known to him, as well as 
others whom he had not met previously. He congratulated 
them upon the wonderful day in which we are living; 
upon the wonderful Bibles from which we may study concerning 

R4674 : page 280 

the great Divine Plan of the Ages. With an Oxford 
Bible in his extended hand he remarked, "I fear 
that even we fail to appreciate the value of this great Book 
which has exerted more influence in the world than all 
other books combined." He remarked that few preachers 
realize that the Bible has been in the hands of the public 
for only about one century. "Our oldest Bible societies 
are this very year celebrating their centennial. When they 
were organized Bibles were possessed only by the rich. 
Now they are to be found in the homes of all— obtainable 
free by the destitute. Many are learning the value 
of Bible references and the usefulness of Bible Concordances 
in Scripture studies. 

"Furthermore, we are too apt to forget that general 
education has only now reached the masses. It is not yet 
thirty years since free schools were established in Great 
Britain. It is only about ten years since education has 
been made compulsory in all the most civilized lands. 
Thus God has favored our day in a two-fold manner, not 
only by giving us the Bible, but by giving the masses the 
intelligence necessary to its study. 

"But, alas, just as these precious opportunities are in 
the hands of the masses; just as these blessings were 
given to humanity; just as Christendom was prepared for 
Bible study, the Lord allowed the Adversary to bring 
forward a most subtle influence in opposition to it. The 
foul-mouthed infidelity of the past has been supplanted by 
a far more dangerous enemy to Christian faith— the infidelity 
known as Higher Criticism. It is dangerous because 
of its insidious character. It has entrenched itself 
in all the colleges and in all the theological seminaries. 
While all of our churches of all denominations 



ostensibly stand as defenders of the Bible, the citadel of 

faith is being captured by the great Adversary of God 

and the Truth— Satan— who is deceiving, estranging and 

misleading the hosts of Christendom through the very 

theological professors and D.D.'s to whom they have been 

led to look for spiritual light and direction and whom 

they had supposed to be staunch defenders of the Bible 

as the inspired Word of God. This is a severe arraignment, 

but it is a generally truthful one, as each may demonstrate 

to himself. Most regretfully I am persuaded that 

four out of every five of all the ministers and Sunday-School 

superintendents of Christendom have ceased to believe 

in the Bible as the Divinely inspired revelation of the 

Will and Purposes of the Almighty. Some of these, nevertheless, 

claim to be earnest followers of Jesus as the Son 

of God, and of Divine origin. Yet how weak is their position! 

If Moses did not write the Law and if it was not 

inspired, nor the prophecies inspired, what could we think 

of Jesus and his Apostles accepting those prophecies as 

inspired and founding all of their teachings thereupon? 

Most evidently, Higher Critics who still believe in Jesus 

as the Divine Son of God have not thought logically on 

the proposition, and will reject everything pertaining to 

the Scriptures upon further reflection. 

"I congratulate you, my friends, that while sorrowfully 
we behold the fulfilling of the Scriptures in the falling 
away of these, our friends, we are not compelled by 
anything in reason nor in the Scriptures to suppose that 
their fate for such infidelity will be eternal torment. I 
congratulate you that, as Bible Students, we are growing 
stronger in our faith day by day while, in fulfillment of 
the Scriptures, a thousand fall at our side and ten thousand 
at our right hand. (Psa. 91:7.) I congratulate you 
that the study of the Bible, with the assistance which God 
is now providing, is clearing up the mysteries which have 
perplexed us all our lives and is bringing to us greater 
appreciation of his glorious purposes and greater loyalty 
to him and more earnest desire to serve his Cause of 
Righteousness and to lift up the standard of the Cross 
of Christ. 

"Truly, as the Lord through the Prophet expressed it, 
'Our feet have been kept from stumbling,' and instead 
the stumbling-stone of greater intelligence of our day 
has lifted us to a higher plane of devotion and appreciation 
of 'the heights and depths and lengths and breadths 
of the Love of God which passeth all understanding.' 

"Do not misunderstand me to be speaking harshly or 
unkindly of our dear friends who are stumbling over the 
educational opportunities of our day. On the contrary, I 
sympathize with them. Once I stood exactly where they 
stand. Once I, too, repudiated the Bible as the Word of 
God. I was as honest then as I am today, and feel 
bound to give credit for equal honesty. They are blinded 
by the dazzling glare of the earthly science of our day. 
If they ever knew, they have forgotten and dropped the 
light, the science which comes only from above. Some 



of them may be recovered from the snare of the Adversary, 
as I was. There is this difference, however: The 
majority of them seem to exult in their unbelief and to 
pride themselves and plume themselves on their opposition 
to the Bible; but my position was the very contrary 
of this. I deplored the necessity for abandoning the Bible. 
I considered it the rational thing to expect from the 
Supreme Creator some Revelation of his purposes respecting 
mankind— the object of our creation; the purpose to 
be attained; and how and why. 

"I have no doubt that many of you have had experiences 
similar to my own. Many of you have told me so. 
Let us hope that, as we have been recovered from the snare 
of the Fowler, so also may others be. Let us be prompt 
to lend the helping hand and an encouraging word. Let 
us realize that to the honest-hearted the loss of the Bible 
must be a disaster to faith and hope, as it was in our own 
cases. Let us trust that there are many others honest as 
ourselves who will yet be recovered. Let us be encouraged 
to help them by a remembrance of how great a 
blessing came to us through the proper understanding of 
the Word of God." 

"SOME BETTER THING FOR US" 
"OUR HEAVENLY CALLING" 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTION NO. 4. 

The Mayville Inn and its spacious lawns, with Pastor 
Russell of Brooklyn Tabernacle as host, entertained the 
fourth contingent of Bible Students, about six hundred, 
last night. The numbers each night are regulated by 
cards of invitation. Like its predecessors, the occasion 
was an enjoyable one long to be remembered with pleasure 
and profit. Again the songs of "The Happy People" 
of the International Bible Students, coming and going, 
gladdened and cheered the dwellers at the Lake-side 

R4675 : page 280 

homes, who will not soon forget this Convention. In 
connection with his greetings Pastor Russell said:— 

"To the gathering of Bible Students who visited me 
here last evening I remarked the increasing beauties of 
nature as foregleams of the great 'restitution' promised 
in the Bible and which we believe is now nigh at hand. 
We then considered the world's hope, based on the great 
sacrifice at Calvary and the Bible's testimony respecting 
its far-reaching results. Tonight let us consider briefly 
the future of the Church's hope. 

"Like many of our Christian friends, for a long time 
we did not understand how to 'rightly divide the Word 
of Truth.' (2 Tim. 2:15.) We did not comprehend 
that God's Plan provides first a heavenly salvation for 

R4675 : page 281 



the Church and then an earthly salvation for mankind in 
general. The study of our Bibles along dispensational 
lines clears away all of our difficulties. It shows us that 
the promise that the redeemed shall sit every man under 
his own vine and fig tree and long enjoy the work of 
their hands (Isa. 36:16) is God's provision for Israel 
restored to Divine favor, and for all the families of the 
earth; but not for the Church. Of the true Church, the 
Bride of Christ, it is declared that her members shall in 
the resurrection be like unto the angels— heavenly or 
spiritual beings. 

"St. Paul distinctly says of these, 'Flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of God.' (I Cor. 15:50.) Jesus 
tells these that he has gone to prepare them a place in the 
Father's house on high. But the place for man, the earth, 
already provided from the foundation of the world, is a 
very different one from ours, of which we read, 'Eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him.'— Isa. 64:4. 

THE SPIRITUAL CALL 

"Now we understand why it is that from Genesis to 
Malachi there is not one suggestion of a heavenly or 
spiritual hope for anyone. Every promise is earthly. In 
Abraham's case, for instance, we read, Lift up now 
thine eyes and look to the East, West, North, and South; 
for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, 
and to thy Seed after thee.' 

"St. Paul refers to this difference between the hopes 
of the spirit-begotten Church founded at Pentecost and 
the hopes of all others. Pointing to the faithful of the 
past he declares that although they had God's testimony 
to their faithfulness, nevertheless they received not the 
promises, 'God having provided some better thing for us, 
that they without us should not be made perfect.'— 
Hebrews 11:38-40. 

"As soon as we get our 'better thing,' our higher reward 
of 'glory, honor and immortality' in joint-heirship 
with our Lord as figuratively his Bride, then the worthy 
ones of ancient times will get their reward of resurrection 
to human perfection. Then, under Messiah's Kingdom, 
those perfect men will be the 'princes in all the 
earth.' Then from the spiritual to the perfected earthly 
ones, the blessings and instructions for the world will 
descend to the poor, ignorant, selfish and superstitious 
world— to help them; to uplift the obedient to the perfections 
illustrated by the perfected worthies. 

WHAT HEAVEN IS LIKE 

"We have all heard of the Sunday-School teacher who 
told her class about heaven— about its pianos, harps, organs, 
horses and carriages, fruits and flowers, etc. We 
see that she was merely thinking of the blessings God 



has provided for the faithful and obedient of the world, 
'in due time.' She had no conception of the heaven of 
heavens promised to the faithful followers of Jesus in the 
narrow way. 

"The great Teacher explains that it is impossible to 
describe heaven and its beauties and charms. He said to 
Nicodemus, If I have told you of earthly things and ye 
believed not, how would you believe if I should tell you 
of heavenly things?'— John 3:12. 

"In line with this the Bible makes no attempt to describe 
heaven itself, nor its inhabitants. We are merely 
told that God is a Spirit 'dwelling in light which no man 
can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can 
ever see' personally. Man must discern God in his works, 
the noblest of which is the perfect man, made in 
Jehovah's moral likeness on the earthly plane— a little 
lower than the angels on the spirit plane. The most that 
the Word declares of our heavenly inheritance is that 
'Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered 
into the heart of man, the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him.'— I Cor. 2:9. 

"But while refusing to inform us of the heavenly 
conditions, God does give us a soul-satisfying portion. 
Through the Apostle he declares, It doth not yet appear 
what we shall be, but we know that when he (the glorified 
Jesus) shall be revealed (at his Second Advent, in 
power and great glory) we shall be like him, for we shall 
see him as he is,' while others not thus 'changed' from 
human to spirit nature by the 'First Resurrection' power 
will not see him as he is, but only as he shall be revealed 
in his providences and judgments, which every eye shall 
recognize. 

"How satisfactory! How far beyond all that we 
could have asked or thought! 'Like Him.' What more 
could we ask? 'Like him,' whom 'God hath highly exalted, 
far above angels, principalities and powers'! We 
stand amazed at such grace! Moreover, we can realize 
that he who called us to become 'partakers of the divine 
nature' and joint-heirs with the Redeemer in his Mediatorial 
Kingdom has provided for our every comfort and 
joy in that heavenly state, the details of which we may not 
now grasp. Prophetically of these it is written, I shall 
be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness.'— Psa. 17:15." 

ALL BIBLE STUDENTS 
SHOULD BE 
BURNING AND SHINING LIGHTS 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S ADDRESS TO THE FIFTH DIVISION OF 
CONVENTIONISTS 

Nearly six hundred more Bible Students from the 
Convention visited Pastor Russell at The Mayville Inn.— 
More "happy people".— More hymns of praise.— Another 
delightful ride on our beautiful Lake going and returning. 
—Pastor Russell welcomed all most heartily.— In the 
course of the evening he gave a little address as on 



previous occasions.— He said in part: 

"One of old was declared to be a burning and 
shining light. There is force in this expression. 
Some lights are cold, austere, unsympathetic; but the kind 
approved by the Master was the burning kind— warm, 
glowing, sympathetic, helpful, intensive. The Master 
himself furnishes the best of all illustrations of the principle 
enunciated. He was the light which came down from 
heaven— undimmed, resplendent, shining forth to the utmost 
the light of Divine Truth. Not a cold, forbidding 
recluse was he, holding himself aloof from the people 
with a haughty and disdainful spirit, telling coldly 'wonderful 
words of life.' 

"On the contrary, his entire life was sympathetic, 
whole-souled. One of the charges brought against 
him by the cold Pharisees was, He receiveth sinners 
and eateth with them. Even his disciples were 
shocked that he should converse with a woman of Samaria. 
But the common people heard him gladly. While 
recognizing that he was far above their plane— while beholding 
in him the glories of an only-begotten of the 
Father, they nevertheless were drawn to him because he 
was the burning as well as the shining light. And they 
declared of him, 'Never man spake like this man.'— 
John 7:46. 

R4675 : page 282 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SO SHINE" 

"Bible Students are all Christians, though, alas, all 
Christians are not Bible Students. True, God's Book 
may even be read through by some who are unbelievers. 
And it may be scanned critically by opponents who seek 
to find fault with it and to entrap it, as they sought to 
find fault with the Master. But these are not Bible 
Students in the proper sense of the word. Only those who 
have made a consecration of their lives to the Lord and 
who are anxious to know the Divine will, that they may 
conform their lives to it, and who, to attain this end, have 
entered the School of Christ to be taught of him— only 
these are Bible Students from our standpoint— searchers 
after the secrets of the Lord, because they love him and 
are appreciative of his glorious plans and desirous of 
understanding them fully. Such Bible Students— including 
you, dear friends, and myself, I trust— should be 
burning and shining lights in the world and amongst our 
fellow-Christians of all denominations, many of whom, 
alas, have much of the spirit of the world and are lacking 
in the spirit of the Truth because of insufficient knowledge 
of the Truth itself— because they are not sufficiently 
Bible Students. 

"Let your light so shine before men that they may 
see your good works and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven.' We are not enjoined to make a show of carrying 



our Bibles everywhere in an ostentatious manner. 

We are exhorted to show forth in our daily lives the 

lessons we learn from its precious pages. As the Bible 

is our lamp provided by the Lord to all those who walk 

in his footsteps, so each of these in turn is a lamp which 

should shed forth upon others the light, the knowledge, 

the spirit of Truth for their edification. In other words, 

the holy Spirit is not poured out upon the world of mankind, 

but merely upon the Lord's servants and handmaidens. 

It is an anointing for these and upon these, 

evidencing to them that they have been begotten again 

to the new nature and making of them light-bearers for 

the benefit of others— burning and shining lights, sympathetic 

and helpful lights, 'that they might show forth the 

praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 

his marvelous light.' 

"THE LIGHT SHINETH IN THE DARKNESS" 

"While keeping the lamp trimmed and burning, while 
seeking to glorify God as burning and shining lights in 
the world, we must not forget that the Bible assures us 
that we will be no more successful in converting the 

R4677 : page 282 

world than was our Master. His great light shone in 
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. And 
the religionists of his day instigated his crucifixion. The 
Master's prophecy respecting his followers will prove 
true to the end of the Age: 'The darkness hateth the 
light'; 'Marvel not if the world hate you. Ye know that 
it hated me before it hated you.' (I John 3:13.) It is 
altogether a mistake, therefore, to suppose that you or I 
or any other person or all of the Lord's consecrated people, 
letting their lights shine faithfully before men, could 
convert the world. Such was not God's intention. It is 
the Church, and not the world, that is being tested at the 
present time. The opposition of the world and all the 
powers of darkness serve to test us as New Creatures— 
to test our loyalty to God and to his Truth. Whosoever 
receives the light of Truth intelligently must rejoice in it, 
and, rejoicing in it, he must let it shine out upon others, 
or, by covering his light with a bushel, he will demonstrate 
his lack of courage, lack of appreciation, lack of 
zeal, which the Lord is now specially seeking for 
amongst those whom he has invited to be sharers with 
Jesus in the glories of the Mediatorial Kingdom about to 
be established amongst men. It is important, therefore, 
that we let our light shine before men. It is important 
that we be willing, nay, glad if need be, to suffer for our 
loyalty to the Lord and to his message. And we have 
his word for it that he that is ashamed of him or of his 
Word now, of such he will be ashamed by and by and 
not own them as members of his Bride class, not accept 
them as assistants with him in his glorious Throne. 



"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD IS JESUS" 

"This is the light which lighteth every man that cometh 
into the world.' (John 1:9.) Thus far Jesus has not 
been dealing with the world, but merely with the blessed 
ones who have the eye of faith and ear of faith. 'Blessed 
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears for they hear.' 
(Matt. 13:16.) The time for the enlightenment of the 
world will be after the special call of the elect. Then the 
Church, as the Bride, will be with the heavenly Bridegroom 
in his Throne. Then all now found faithful in the 
matter of letting their light shine will be associated with 
the great Light, Jesus, as members of his Body. Altogether 
they will constitute the great Sun of Righteousness 
which will then arise with healing in its beams for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear.' 
(Matt. 13:43.) He that hath a desire of heart, let him 
be obedient, and thus make his calling and election sure 
to this glorious chief salvation." 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S RECEPTIONS 
CONCLUDED SATURDAY NIGHT 
The Sixth Section of the Convention Hosts, About Six 
Hundred, Visited the Mayville Inn Saturday Night. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S ADDRESS 

In order not to crowd the chartered boat, no more 
than six hundred were permitted to attend Pastor Russell's 
reception on any one evening. The restriction was effected 
by means of visitation cards, not more than six hundred 
of which were issued for any one of the six evenings. 
Last evening marked the conclusion of the receptions. 
The steamer was crowded, but "The Happy People" maintained 
their equilibrium of spirit and let their songs 
abound, giving good evidence that they were singing and 
making melody in their hearts unto the Lord. They evidently 
enjoyed the scenery of the Lake, but the eyes of 
their understanding seemed to take in still more beautiful 
Elysian fields. It was the same on the return journey. 

The Mayville Inn was illuminated throughout, as were 
also its verandas and lawns, the Chinese lanterns giving 
a gala effect. 

The crowd was welcomed by Pastor Russell, who 
greeted each one personally. He subsequently addressed 
them from the veranda, following which a light collation 
was partaken of. The address in part was as follows:— 

"THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF 
THE FIRST-BORNS" 

"My dear friends, our Convention nears its close. To 
me it has been a very enjoyable one. So far as I can discern, 



it has been the same to all in attendance. It is a 
delightful and blessed experience that so many of the 
Lord's people, by his Providence, have been permitted to 
turn aside from the busy cares of life to spend ten days 
in Bible study and in fellowship with each other in spiritual 
things. We have thus been remembering the inspired 

R4677 : page 283 

exhortation, 'Forget not the assembling of yourselves 
together,... and so much the more as ye 
see The Day draw nigh.' The nearer we come to the 
great Day of the Lord, in which the Church will be 
glorified with the Bridegroom, and in which the great 
work of blessing the world at large will begin, the more 
precious are our opportunities for Christian fellowship. 
And more than this; they daily become more important 
to us for our strengthening and upbuilding in the faith 
once delivered to the saints. 

"As we think of the closing of this Convention, let 
our minds go out toward the Great Convention promised 
in God's Word. At it will be gathered all of God's people 
—all 'Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile.' That Convention, 
like this one, will be unsectarian, interdenominational. 
Presbyterians, Methodists, Congregationalists, 
Baptists— the holy, the saintly out of each and all of these 
will be at that Great Convention. St. Paul styles it the 
'General Assembly of the Church of the First-born ones.' 
How grand to think of such a reunion, without a creedal 
fence between any of the participants and all of them 
surrounded and safeguarded by the 

Love Divine, all Love excelling,' 

and the Wisdom and Power Divine! Do you desire to 

be present at that Convention? The question is an unnecessary 

one. It is the hope, the desire, the aim of 

every one of us to be there— to make our calling and our 

election sure; to so run that we may obtain that great 

prize of participation in the 'First Resurrection.' Of that 

resurrection we read, 'Blessed and holy is he that hath 

part in the First (chief) Resurrection; on such the 

Second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 

God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 

years'! (Rev. 20:6.) Let us have this in mind, dear 

friends, that our participation with our Lord in the glories 

of his Kingdom is dependent upon our faithfulness here 

in following him through evil report and through good 

report, through honor and through dishonor in the bearing 

of the cross along the narrow way of self-denial. 

THE FIRST-BORNS PASSED OVER 

"I remind you that when God brought typical Israel 
out of Egypt, the first-borns had a peculiar salvation or 
preservation first. The night before the deliverance all 



the first-borns were in danger of death, and were saved 
only when under the blood of the Passover Lamb. We 
see, dear friends, the significance of this beautiful type. 
St. Paul tells us that Christ is our Passover Lamb, slain 
for us. We each have appropriated his flesh, his human 
nature, which he sacrificed on our behalf. We recognize 
his sacrifice, the blood of atonement. We see that this 
entire Gospel Age is the antitype of that night. We are 
hoping to belong to the first-borns begotten of the holy 
Spirit who, during this night time of sin and death, will 
be passed over and, on account of the blood without and 
the Lamb within, be accounted worthy of being passed 
over— accounted worthy of eternal life on the spirit plane 
as members of the 'Church of the First-born'— participants 
in the 'First Resurrection' to glory, honor and immortality 
with our Lord— like him. 

PRIESTS AND LEVITES-WHICH? 

"I remind you that all of these first-borns, passed over, 
typified all of the Lord's people of all denominations and 
outside of all denominations who are now passing from 
death unto life. I remind you, however, that in the type, 
the first-borns of every tribe were exchanged for the one 
tribe of Levi— the priestly tribe, which thereafter typified 
the 'Church of the First-borns'— the 'household of faith.' 
But I remind you further that the Lord divided that tribe 
into two classes. A little handful were made priests and 
occupied a special position of favor and relationship and 
nearness to God, and the remainder of that tribe were 
honored in being used as the assistants or servants of 
the priests. This is an allegory or type. 'The Church of 
the First-borns' will consist of two classes, a 'little flock' 
of priests and a 'great company' of the 'household of 
faith' and typical Levites who will serve. I remind you 
that the 'little flock' of priests do their sacrificing now 
and, if faithful, will shortly be made a Royal Priesthood, 
a reigning priesthood, joint-heirs with the great King of 
Glory and High Priest of our profession— Jesus. I remind 
you that the 'great company,' typed in the ordinary 
Levites, will not be in the Throne, but serve before the 
Throne. They will not be living stones of the Temple, 
but serve God in the Temple. They will not wear crowns 
of glory, though they will be granted palms of victory. 

"What places will you and I occupy in the resurrection, 
in the General Assembly of the Church of the First-borns? 
Will we be of the Royal Priesthood, or of the less honorable, 
but still blessed, servants? Will we be of the Bride 
class or of the less honored virgins, her companions that 
follow her? It is for us, dear friends, now to make our 
calling and our election sure by our zeal, our earnestness, 
our devotion to the great King and his Cause. He has 
called us to the highest place. It rests with us, under his 
wonderful and gracious arrangements, to determine 
whether we will be passed over or not passed over, and, 
if passed over, to determine whether we will accept the 



place to which we are all called or the inferior place 
which will be granted to those who do not keep their 
garments unspotted from the world and who, therefore, 

R4678 : page 283 

must come through great tribulation to enter into the 
Kingdom at all. 

ENCOURAGED TO LEAVE BEHIND A SWEET FRAGRANCE 
OF THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD 

"I exhort you, dear friends, that we strive to be present 
at the Great Convention, 'the General Assembly of the 
Church of the First-borns,' and that we strive to make 
our calling and election sure, that we may be of the 
Bride class, the Royal Priesthood class, the members of 
the Body of the great Prophet, Priest and King of Glory! 
It is to this end that we have come to this Convention— 
that we might encourage each other and be encouraged 
to maintain the good fight of faith and to gain the victory, 
so far as our hearts are concerned, over the world, the 
flesh and the Adversary. I trust that we shall all go away 
from this Convention strengthened by Divine might in the 
inner man. I trust that we shall leave behind us a sweet 
fragrance of the Spirit of the Lord in every cottage and 
hotel in which we have been lodged. I trust that we shall 
go to our homes so filled with the Spirit of the Truth, 
the spirit of meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness and love that we shall carry a blessing 
to those of our homes, that they may take knowledge 
that we have been with Jesus and have learned of him 
and that the blessing may thus overflow and abound to 
many hearts. I doubt not that such will be the blessed 
results and that this Celoron Convention of Bible Students 
will be a marked epoch in the Christian careers of 
many, marked with blessings from on high and mutual 
refreshment of spirit amongst all those who have 
participated." 

"Chosen in Christ ere the dawn of creation; 

Chosen for Christ to be filled with his grace; 
Chosen to carry the streams of salvation 

Into each thirsty and desolate place." 



R4676 : page 284 

[There is a full page picture here with the following title and caption: 

BIBLE STUDENTS IN PALESTINE 

This photograph was taken April 24th, 1910, 
on the slope of the Mount of Olives, facing 
Jerusalem, near the Garden of Gethsemane. 



Behind the group is the Valley of Jehoshaphat 
and the brook Kedron, 
beyond which on the top of the farther 
slope is the wall of Jerusalem. 
Behind the wall is seen the City. 



R4678 : page 285 

MISIMPROVED OPPORTUNITIES TAKEN AWAY 

--MATTHEW 21:23-46.-SEPTEMBER 4- 

Golden Text:— "Therefore say I unto you, The 
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you." 

IN this Study the Great Teacher in two parables 
portrays the mistake made by the religionists 
of his day. The understanding of 
these parables gives a clearer insight into 
the cause which led to the rejection of Israel 
for a time from Divine favor. Incidentally, 
too, we are to remember that nominal fleshly 
Israel was a prototype of nominal Christendom. 
Hence we may look for somewhat 
similar conditions and dealings now in the 
"harvest" time of this Christian Age. 

To get the force of the Lord's teachings here and 
everywhere it is necessary to remember that the Jewish 
people had been promised the Kingdom of God, of which 
David's Kingdom was a type on a small scale. For centuries 
they had been expecting a great King, Messiah, 
whose coming would exalt them and bring them into 
prominence as God's Kingdom. John the Baptist, when 
he came to introduce Messiah, told the Jews that unless 
they would repent and come back, to the extent of their 
ability, into harmony with God and the Law they need not 
expect to share in the Messianic Kingdom. Jesus told the 
people that unless their righteousness should exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, they should 
in no wise enter into or become members of the long-waited-for 
Kingdom. (Matthew 5:20.) The two parables 
of this Study illustrate what stood in the way of the 
majority. 

WORK TODAY IN MY VINEYARD 

The Jewish people professed to be God's people, willing 
to do him service. They were treated, not as mere slaves, 
but, rather, like sons. All were told to go and work in 
God's vineyard; but they divided into two classes, represented 
by the two sons, in our first parable. One of these 
sons represented the outwardly religious, pious, who said, 
Yes, we will serve God. However, they did not really seek 
the Divine service, but rather the service of their sects 



and parties and their own personal aims, honor, influence 
and preferment. The other class of Israelites, represented 
by the other son of the parable, made no pretense of serving 
God, and were branded as publicans, sinners, harlots. 
Nevertheless, when Jesus appeared, when John's message 
went forth, and afterwards the teachings of Jesus and the 
Apostles, these same publicans, sinners, harlots, were the 
ones ready to receive him, while the religious, finding that 
his message was in conflict with their teachings, repudiated 
him. Thus one of the charges against Jesus was, "He receiveth 
publicans and sinners and eateth with them." 

"Friend of Sinners was his Name" 

The second parable represents God as the owner of a 
great Vineyard, in all respects well appointed and furnished 
for his purpose. This Vineyard represents the Jewish 
nation and the Divine promises made to that people— 
the Law and all the arrangements of the Law Covenant, 
for their development. This Vineyard the owner let out 
to husbandmen, whose duty it was to care for the vines 
and the fruitage and to render to the owner the results, 
except a portion which they might keep for themselves. 
These husbandmen were the prominent religionists, of 
whom Jesus said, "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' 
seat. All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, 
that observe and do." (Matt. 23:2,3.) The owner properly 
required returns on his property and sent servants to 
receive his share of the fruitage. But the husbandmen, 
instead of giving them what was due their Master, abused 
them by beating, killing and stoning them. 

These servants were the prophets of old, sent to Israel. 
They should have received the kindest treatment and an 
abundance of fruits of meekness, gentleness, patience, etc., 
but, instead, they were treated as intruders by the leaders 
of Israel. Some of them were stoned, some beaten, some 
murdered, some sawn asunder. Some wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins and dwelt in dens and caves of 
the earth, because not appreciated. They were not treated 
as representatives of the owner of the vineyard. Finally 
the owner sent his Son, saying, "They will reverence my 
Son." But these same husbandmen, the religionists of our 
Lord's day, took counsel to kill him and to seize his inheritance. 
They somehow got the impression that they 
could lord it over God's heritage and that anybody reproving 
them or showing up their hypocrisies or liberating the 
people from subservience to them, whoever he might be- 
even the heir— they were at liberty to kill. They crucified 
him. 

What may we presume the owner of that Vineyard 
would do to those wicked husbandmen who, forgetting the 
ownership of the vineyard, were using it as their own, 
mistreating his servants and crucifying his Son? The 
Great Teacher put the question to his hearers, and the 
answer promptly came that the owner would destroy those 
wicked men and let out his Vineyard to others who would 



render him its fruitage. 

This is just what happened. The scribes and Pharisees 
and Doctors of the Law who were using God's promises 
and blessings and their opportunities selfishly and in disregard 
of the Almighty— these were dispossessed. Their 
government was destroyed and Divine favor and privileges 
as God's mouthpieces, which they once enjoyed, were 
taken from them and given to others— to the Apostles 
and their associates, during this Gospel Age. 

However, as fleshly Israel was a type or picture of 
nominal Spiritual Israel, we may not have to look far to 
find a very similar condition of things today. Today also 
we see some high in official position as representatives of 
God and his Word using their positions to entrench themselves, 
to hold power over the people, to carry out their 
own schemes. These are inclined to speak harshly, yea, to 
"murder" any who come amongst them meekly, humbly, 
in the name of the Lord. They do not literally kill them 
nor "shoot them full of arrows," but they do behead them 
in the sense of ostracism. And they do shoot out at them 
the arrows of bitter words, slanders, etc. 

What will the Husbandman do with such servants? 
The answer is again that the opportunities which they 
have enjoyed will be taken away from them. Thank God 
that the next step in the programme will be that the King's 
Son and all of the misused servants associated with him 
will constitute the new "Kingdom of God's dear Son" 
"under the whole heavens." Matters will be no longer entrusted 
to any but the tried, proven, faithful. 

Jesus, the rejected, "is become the chief corner-stone" 
of the great Temple of God, which is the Church. As the 
privilege of being God's embryotic Kingdom was taken 
from the Jews and given to Christ and the Church, so 
presently his embryotic Kingdom will be taken from earth 
entirely— his faithful will be received to the heavenly 
plane and power and great glory. 

Whoever stumbled over Jesus suffered loss in the sense 
of being broken, but not beyond possibility of repair. "But 
upon whomsoever this stone (Messiah) shall fall, it will 
grind him to powder" in the Second Death.— Matt. 21:44. 



R4679 : page 286 

"MANY ARE CALLED BUT FEW ARE CHOSEN" 

-MATT. 22:1-14.-SEPTEMBER 11.- 

MANY of us have not in the past sufficiently discerned 
that none of the lessons of the 
Great Teacher were given in literal language 
—that they were all symbolical; as we read, 
"Without a parable spake he not unto them." 
-Matt. 13:34. 
In today's Study we have another beautiful 



parabolic lesson respecting the Kingdom. 

We might inquire why the Bible is so full 

of these lessons concerning the Kingdom? 

Is it not because the Kingdom of God is the only hope of 

the world? Are we not learning this more and more? Faith 

in the coming Kingdom of God under the whole heavens 

began to grow dim within less than two centuries after 

the death of the Apostles. Instead of longing, hoping, to 

become the Bride of Christ, to be associated with him in 

his glorious Kingdom for the overthrow of Sin and Satan 

and Death, and for the uplifting of mankind during a 

reign of a thousand years, a new faith and a new hope 

came in, contrary to the Scriptures. This unscriptural 

hope instructed Christians that they should expect an 

earthly Kingdom of their own establishment, in which the 

popes would reign as representatives of Jesus and the cardinals 

and bishops as representatives of the apostles and 

the "little flock," to whom the approaching Kingdom is 

promised. 

Thenceforth the work of the Church, to "build one another 
up in the most holy faith," gave place to the unscriptural 
course of neglecting the Church and laboring 
for the world, under the unwarranted assumption that it is 
the duty of the Church to convert the world. As to how 
much injury has thus been done it is difficult to estimate. 
For the sake of numbers standards have been lowered and 
worldliness has been recognized, until today Christendom 
is in a sad plight as respects true doctrines and high moral 
standards. 

THE MARRIAGE FESTIVAL 

As Messiah is to be the Great King of earth during the 
period of his Mediatorial reign, it is the Father's good 
pleasure that he should have a "Bride." And this Gospel 
Age is set apart for the finding and development of this 
Bride class of many members. The Kingdom is the great 
prize which the Father is to bestow upon his Son— to be 
shared by the Church, the Bride of Christ. The parable 
of today's Study outlines the call of this Bride class or 
Kingdom class from Jesus' day down to the completion 
and glorification of this company. Nowhere is Jesus represented 
as calling his own Bride. This is foreshown in 
Abraham, who typified the Father, and Isaac, who typified 
Jesus; and Abraham's servant, sent to call Rebecca to be 
the Bride of Isaac, typified the holy Spirit, whose work 
during this Gospel Age is bringing to Christ the Bride 
class— "the very elect." 

So this parable shows that the King sent forth the call 
to the Marriage. The Jewish people, the children of 
Abraham, according to the flesh, had been invited to this 
high honor from the time of the giving of the Law Covenant 
at Sinai. Century after century they waited for the 
announcement to be made to them, that the nuptial feast 
was ready. Finally, when Jesus came, the announcement 
went to them, All things are now ready! Come to the 



feast! Meantime, they had become overcharged with the 
cares of this life— business, politics and religious schemes 
of their own concocting. They manifested no interest in 
the announcement and even beat some of the servants, the 
Apostles and others, who sought to help them, and to draw 
their attention to the Great Feast, which was their special 
privilege. 

GO YE THEREFORE INTO THE HIGHWAYS AND 
BRING THEM TO THE MARRIAGE 

The Almighty was wroth and sent the Roman armies 
and "destroyed those murderers and burned up their City," 
Jerusalem, in A.D. 70. Then the King said to his 
servants, The wedding must take place even though those 
who were bidden were not worthy. Go ye therefore into 
the highways and as many as ye find bring to the marriage 
feast. As the city represented the Jewish nation, so the 
highways represented the world in general— the Gentiles 
—to whom the message of the Kingdom was sent after 
fleshly Israel had first enjoyed the offer and but partially 
improved it. Another statement of the parable shows 
three different classes:— 

(1) The Jewish rulers who rejected him. 

(2) Those called from among the streets and 
lanes of their city and gathered to the spirit plane by 
Jesus and the Apostles. 

(3) Then the report was given, "We have done as thou 
hast commanded and yet there is room." Then the message 
went forth to go everywhere among the Gentiles 

and urge them to come in, until the house should be filled 
—until the elect number for whom the feast was provided 
should be found. Our Study states that the wedding was 
furnished with guests— good and bad. In other words, 
the offer of a share with Christ in his Kingdom has attracted 
some naturally very fallen, as well as some better 
favored by nature. But the arrangements of the Great 
King are such that the "wedding garment" covers all the 
blemishes of the most imperfect as well as those of the 
least imperfect. 

WITHOUT A WEDDING GARMENT 

The latter part of our Study shows a discrimination 
and judgment ultimately to take place amongst those invited 
to the wedding and accepted. As none were permitted 
to enter in without a wedding garment— without an 
acknowledgment of the merit of Christ's sacrifice— so none 
will be permitted to remain and participate in the wedding 
festival except those who maintain their standing of confidence 
in Christ. 

Any who take off the "wedding garment" will be 
sure to be expelled from the privileges enjoyed and 
will go out from the light and blessings afforded to 
this favored class, into the "outer darkness" of the world 
and of nominal Christianity, in which shortly there will 



be a great time of trouble, symbolically represented by the 
"weeping and gnashing of teeth." 

Are we not even now in the time of this inspection of 
the guests? And are not all Christian people who cast 
away their confidence in the sacrifice of Christ and who 
accept Evolutionary theories and Higher Criticism taking 
off "the wedding garment," and will they not all eventually 
find themselves in outer darkness, in confusion, in bewilderment? 
And will they not be sadly distressed in the 
great time of trouble which the Scriptures declare to be 
near?— Daniel 12:1. 

"We see the marriage splendor, 

Within the open door; 
We know that those who enter 

Are blest for evermore; 
We see our King, more lovely 

Than all the sons of men; 
We haste, because that door, once shut, 

Will never open again." 



page 287 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study III. -The Call of The New Creation 
OCTOBER 2 

(31) When the Lord comes in the close of this age, who 
only will be accepted as his Bride? P. 75, par. 1. 

(32) Quote several comforting and encouraging Scriptures 
which declare the Divine supervision over even the humblest 
member of the New Creation. P. 75, par. 2. 

(33) Explain in detail the illustration of natural birth in 
its relation to the spiritual birth of the New Creation. 

P. 76, par. 1. 

(34) Show briefly how the Scriptures clearly distinguish 
between the New Creatures and the human family in general, 
especially with respect to (1) the Atonement Sacrifice, and 
(2) to the trials and difficulties of life. P. 77, par. 1. 

(35) What will be the test of membership in the New 
Creation? P. 78, par. 1. 

(36) In order to abide in Christ, what more than the mere 
making of a consecration is necessary? Explain fully. 

P. 78, par. 2. 

OCTOBER 9 

(37) Why are the five senses of humanity in general not 
sufficient for the New Creation in matters of judgment? 
P. 79, par. 1. 

(38) Explain the so-called "sixth sense," or complete set 
of additional spiritual senses, granted these New Creatures. 



P. 80, par. 1. 

(39) By what name should the New Creation be known? 
P. 80, par. 2. 

(40) What manner of spirit has prompted Christians to 

take sectarian names in the past, and when did it first manifest 
itself? P. 81, par. 1. 

(41) To whom especially belong the chief praise and 
honor for the blessings that have come to us through the 
Apostles and other servants of the Lord? P. 82, top. 

(42) What should be our attitude toward the present division 
into various denominations? Pp. 82, 83. 

(43) In conclusion, what names should we avoid, and 
why? P. 83, par. 2, first part. 

(44) What names should we recognize and answer to, as 
consecrated Christians? P. 83, par. 2, last part. 

OCTOBER 16 

(1) Was the opportunity to become members of the New 
Creation offered to mankind in general? P. 85. 

(2) Was the "calling" of the natural Israelites a "high" or 
"heavenly calling"? If not, to what were they called? P. 85. 

(3) Where are the terms of the High Calling set forth? 
P. 86, top. 

(4) Why could the Ancient Worthies have no part or lot 
in this New Creation? P. 86, par. 1. 

(5) Give another reason why this High Calling could not 
begin before the death of our Lord Jesus. P. 86, par. 2, 
first part. 

(6) What was the standing of the Apostles before the 
death and resurrection of Christ? P. 87, top. 

(7) Explain the difference between calling men to repentance 
and inviting them to the High Calling. P. 87, top. 

OCTOBER 23 

(8) Do the introductions to the various Epistles emphasize 
the exclusiveness of the Heavenly Call? P. 87. 

(9) Upon what conditions shall we be made joint-heirs 
with Christ? P. 87, par. 2. 

(10) Why are not many great, wise or learned called? P. 88. 

(11) Why are the conditions of acceptance more attractive 

to the more fallen members of the human family? P. 89, par. 1. 

(12) Upon what two graces of character is God especially 
placing a premium in connection with the New Creation? 
P. 90, par. 1. 

(13) To what high standard of character are the New 
Creatures called? P. 90, par. 2. 

(14) Is the Lord dealing with the imperfect flesh or with 
the new minds of these New Creatures? P. 91, top. 

(15) What should we expect the new mind to accomplish 
in controlling our mortal bodies? P. 91, par. 1. 

OCTOBER 30 

(16) What are some of the specifications and limitations 



as respects character in the New Creation? P. 91, par. 2. 

(17) Explain the difference between the "law of liberty" 
of the New Creation and the bondage of Israel to specific 
laws. P. 92, par. 1. 

(18) Is it an easy path that leads the New Creation to 
"glory, honor and immortality"? P. 92, par. 2. 

(19) Are there several different calls during the Gospel 
Age? Quote Scripture to prove position taken. P. 92, par. 3 

(20) Will there be a call to the World in the next age? 
P. 93, top. 

(21) Are any called to be of the Great Company referred 
to in Rev. 7:9-14? P. 93, par. 1. 

(22) Will these be members of the New Creation? If 
not, why? P. 93, par. 1. 

(23) Is this special call of the New Creation limited in 
time? and when did it begin? P. 94, par. 1. 

(24) When will this "acceptable time" come to an end? 
P. 94, par. 2, first part. 



R4679 : page 287 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
GOOD EFFECTS OF THE VOW 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A contemplation of the Lord's providences respecting 
the Vow, as they have been exemplified repeatedly in the 
past year, in the cases of individuals, and of various congregations 
of the Lord's people, have gradually softened 
the antagonism I felt against it, and I took it some days 
ago, as unto the Lord, believing it to be his will. 

I wish to say that I have taken the Vow, not as an 
oath, not as a guarantee that I will keep it perfectly 
(apart from the Lord's merit) and not as a protection, 
in any sense, except that it will help to keep certain parts 
of my original consecration vow prominently before my 
mind. I am sure I do not keep my consecration vow perfectly, 
and will doubtless fail occasionally in some items 
of this statement or a portion of it, but I shall do my best 
to keep it perfectly, and I am sure that is all the Lord 
expects. 

I have always fully assented to every principle contained 
in the Vow, and the true explanation of the extreme 
prejudice I have had against it is that the 
Adversary was undoubtedly trying to get me to fight 
against it and thus draw me away from the Truth and its 
service. 

Your Brother in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

CELORON CONVENTION APPRECIATED 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER:-- 



As I think over the blessed season we had at the 
Jamestown Convention, my heart goes out in joy and 
thanksgiving to our dear Lord and Heavenly Father for 
the abundance of love they have showered on us all in 
these last days. The love of our Elder Brother was 
manifest in all the arrangements and the love shining 
from the faces of the dear friends showed plainly that 
they had been with Jesus and learned of him. 

I wish to express my thanks and appreciation to you, 
dear Brother, for your loving zeal and untiring endeavor 
to serve the Lord, the Truth, and the Brethren. All the 
arrangements at the Convention spoke of that great love, 
the carefully planned accommodations for all. I can say 
that for the little sum ($14) I received accommodation far 
above my expectation. The Lord surely was in our midst, 
working all things for the good of his people. It was 
more than I anticipated, and I want to thank you, and all 
those who labored with you, for the love thus shown for 
the Brethren, and especially for the reception at The 
Mayville Inn. It was good to be there. It made me think 
of the Lord's words when he said, "I go to prepare a place 
for you." Yes, everything was prepared for us to come 
and receive a blessing, and we surely did receive one. 

Your brother in our Redeemer, JOHN ENQUIST. 



page 290 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 
"MILLENNIAL DAWN" 

SERIES I., The Plan of the Ages, gives an outline of the Divine 
plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.). 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., The Time is at Hand, treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., Thy Kingdom Come, considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter of the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., The Day of Vengeance, shows that the dissolution of the 
present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 



SERIES V., The Atonement Between God and Man, treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-1/2.) 

SERIES VI., The New Creation, deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY 