Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“With God All Things Are Possible”
THE above words, found at Matthew 19:26, proved to be true for a young woman in Venezuela. After she learned to put full trust in Jehovah, she was able to overcome a serious problem. She relates:
“My grandmother was very kind and loving. Sadly, she died when I was just 16 years old. Her death was a terrible blow to me. I became unbalanced, not even wanting to go out of the house to the yard. I ended up being almost a total recluse.
“I did not go to school, nor did I have a job. I just stayed in my room. Lonely and without any friends, I suffered from severe depression. I felt totally worthless and wanted to die and end it all. I kept asking myself, ‘Why do I exist?’
“My mother used to receive the Watchtower and Awake! magazines from a young Witness named Gisela. One day my mother spotted Gisela as she was passing by our home and asked her if she could help me. Gisela agreed to try, but I refused to see her. This did not dissuade Gisela. She wrote me a letter and told me that she wanted to be my friend and that someone far more important than her wanted to be my friend too. That person, she said, was Jehovah God.
“This touched me, and I answered her letter. For three months we corresponded. Only after much prodding and urging by Gisela did I finally find the courage to meet her. At our first meeting, Gisela studied the Bible with me, using the book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. After the study, she invited me to attend a meeting at the local Kingdom Hall. I was taken aback. I had not been out of the house for four years, and the thought of being on the street was terrifying.
“Gisela was very patient with me. She assured me that there was nothing to be afraid of and that she would accompany me to the meeting. I finally consented. When we arrived at the Kingdom Hall, I began to tremble and perspire. I could not greet anyone. Nonetheless, I agreed to continue attending the meetings, and Gisela faithfully called for me each week.
“To help me overcome my nervousness, Gisela took me to the meetings very early. We stood by the door and greeted everyone as they arrived. That way I faced only one or two people at a time, instead of a whole group all at once. When I felt I could not stand it, Gisela quoted to me Matthew 19:26: ‘With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.’
“Although it was not easy, eventually I was able to attend an even larger gathering of people at a circuit assembly. What a huge step that was for me! In September 1995, I plucked up the courage to speak to the elders about engaging in the door-to-door ministry. Six months later, in April 1996, I symbolized my dedication to Jehovah through water baptism.
“When someone recently asked me how I found the courage to do this, I replied: ‘My desire to please Jehovah is greater than my fear.’ While I still have occasional bouts of depression, my joy is enhanced by my serving as a regular pioneer. Looking back, I have to agree with Gisela. I now have a Friend who is interested in me and who ‘imparts power to me.’”​—Philippians 4:13.
[Pictures on page 8]
“My desire to please Jehovah is greater than my fear”

