VOL. XXXI JANUARY 15 No. 2 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

Covenant Relationship with God Essential 

to Life Everlasting 19 

Israel's Covenant Relationship Actual 19 

The Covenant of Sacrifice 20 

Distinction between Keeping and Fulfilling 

the Law 22 

That Feature Fulfilled by Christ's Death 23 

Death and the Resurrection 23 

Adamic Death Scrip turally Called Sleep 24 

Earthly Phase of the Resurrection 25 

Quietly Minding One's Own Business 26 

Busybodying an Evidence of Unbelief 26 

"Yet There is Room" 27 

Abraham and the Hebrews 28 

God's Call to Abraham 28 

Children of Abraham 29 

Abraham Was Very Rich 29 

Riches Often Bring Trouble 30 

God's Blessing Makes Rich 30 

Interesting Letters 30 



page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5170 :page 18 

1913-OUR YEAR'S TEXT-1913 

We have gotten out a motto card bearing this year's text, 
with a pretty design of grapes, the cup and the loaf, and with 
our text, "What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits 
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and will 
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the 
Most high." 

We believe that nearly all of our readers will want one or 
two copies of this motto for their own use. Some will want 
a copy in each room. We suggest that so far as possible, 
Classes order these together, thus saving packing and carrying 
charges. The price singly will be 5c, by the dozen 30c, 
postpaid. 



R5165 :page 18 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S MORNING RESOLVE 



MY EARLIEST THOUGHT I DESIRE SHALL BE: 

"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward 
me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the 
name of the Lord [for grace to help]. I will pay my Vows 
unto the Most High. "-Psa. 116:12-14. 

Remembering the Divine call, "Gather My saints together 
unto Me; those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice" 
(Psa. 50:5), I resolve that by the Lord's assisting grace 
I will today, as a saint of God, fulfil my Vows, continuing 
the work of sacrificing the flesh and its interests, that I may 
attain unto the Heavenly inheritance in joint-heirship with 
my Redeemer. 

I will strive to be simple and sincere toward all. 

I will seek not to please and honor self, but the Lord. 

I will be careful to honor the Lord with my lips, that my 
words may be unctuous and blessed to all. 

I will seek to be faithful to the Lord, the Truth, the 
brethren and all with whom I have to do, not only in great 
matters, but also in the little things of life. 

Trusting myself to Divine care and the Providential overruling 
of all my interests for my highest welfare, I will seek 
not only to be pure in heart, but to repel all anxiety, all discontent, 
all discouragement. 

I will neither murmur nor repine at what the Lord's providence 
may permit, because 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 



R5162:page 19 

COVENANT RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD ESSENTIAL 
TO LIFE EVERLASTING 

GOD IS NOT in covenant relationship with the 
brute creation; for to them He has made no 
promises, although He has made a general 
provision for their needs. But we may understand 
that with all His intelligent creation 
He has a covenant, or agreement, to the 
effect that so long as they will do His will 
they shall possess life. Because of violation 
of that arrangement, the fallen angels were 
cast off, "reserved in chains of darkness 
unto the judgment of the Great Day" (Jude 6), to receive 
their final punishment. When Adam and Eve were disobedient, 
they violated this covenant, and came under the 
sentence of death. "They like men [Heb. Adam], have 
transgressed the covenant; there have they dealt treacherously 
against Me."— Hos. 6:7, margin. 
Because of Adam's transgression, the world is not in 



covenant relationship with God in any sense of the word. 
On the contrary, they are aliens, strangers, foreigners. 
(Eph. 2:11-13.) To some extent God brought Abraham 
back into covenant relationship, but not fully so. To the 
nation of Israel He made certain promises in the form of 
a Law Covenant, to the effect that whoever kept that 
Covenant would thereby demonstrate his worthiness to 
receive God's blessing promised to Abraham— that through 
him should all the families of the earth be blessed.— 
Gen. 12:3. 

The Law Covenant was given to the Jewish nation; 
Moses was the mediator, for it was impossible to make 
the Covenant with Israel directly. Although they were 
unable to keep that Covenant because of inherited weaknesses 
of the flesh, yet it brought them a measure of blessing, 
as St. Paul points out. (Rom. 7:7.) While it lifted 
Israel above the degradation into which the Gentiles were 
falling, nevertheless it did not bring the blessing for 
which they longed. It did not remove the death penalty 
—it did not give them life. 

In the clear light now shining for the people of God, 
we see that the Law Covenant was only a type of a better 
Covenant to be made with Israel after the Church of 
Christ has been glorified; that Moses himself was only 
a type of a better Mediator; that the sacrifices of the Law 
were only types of the "better sacrifices" mentioned in 
Heb. 9:23, and that their priesthood was a type of the 
Royal Priesthood of the Gospel Age.— Heb. 7:27. 

In the Scriptures, the words covenant and promise are 
used synonymously. The children of Israel were under 
the Abrahamic Covenant long before they entered into the 
Law Covenant. They are still under those Covenants. 
St. Paul says, "God hath not cast away His people whom 
He foreknew." (Rom. 11:2.) Then he proceeds to say 
that after the Elect Church has been gathered from 
among the Gentiles, the favor of God will return to Israel; 
for they are still beloved for the father's sake. The 
fathers of Israel are the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob. The Jews are, therefore, under the Abrahamic 
Covenant— Rom. 11:25-28. 

ISRAEL'S COVENANT RELATIONSHIP ACTUAL 

An actual covenant relationship is one that is fully 
established— not merely suggested, or proposed, but accomplished. 
As Israel approached Mt. Sinai, God proposed 
to make a covenant with them. When all was in 
readiness, the Covenant was made through Moses as the 
mediator. The work of mediation was twofold; the first 
part was the sprinkling of the Law, representing the satisfaction 
of Justice; the second part was the sprinkling of 
the people, representing the bringing of the people into 
covenant relationship with God. That Covenant was then 
fully made, and has remained in operation ever since.— 
Exod. 24:3-8. 

With the Israelites, God was making a covenant which 



was to last for centuries. It was good for only one year 

at a time, however. For the first year the people were in 

harmony with God, but at the end of that time the cancellation 

of sins ceased; for the blood of bulls and of goats 

cannot take away sin. The whole arrangement was only 

a type. At the end of that first year, the Day of Atonement 

was inaugurated, and sacrifices were made for another 

year. The fact that the Atonement Day sacrifices 

were repeated year by year shows that they were efficacious 

for only a year at a time, and so never really took 

away sin.— Heb. 10:1-4. 

After the Day of Atonement, the people made various 
kinds of offerings. Some of these seem to typify the presentation 
of the worshiper himself to God, as an indication 
that he wished to do the will of Jehovah. Others were 
for sin-offerings, indicating that the worshiper realized 
that there had been a measure of wilfulness in his conduct. 
So rigid are the requirements of the Law Covenant that 
only one Jew, the Lord Jesus Christ, was able to keep 
them. This He could do because He was perfect, and the 
Law is the measure of a perfect man's full ability. 

That the Israelites were in covenant relationship with 
God through Moses, the mediator of their Covenant, is 
demonstrated by the fact that Moses said, "He hath declared 

R5163 : page 20 

unto you His Covenant, which He commanded you 
to perform, even the ten commandments." (Deut. 4:13.) 
Therefore the Jew is bound by the Law so long as he 
lives. (Rom. 7:1.) Although the Law Covenant is not 
intended to be an everlasting arrangement with the Jew, 
yet the only ones who have been able to get from under 
it are those who have come into Christ; the remainder 
cannot rid themselves of it. But the days draw nigh 
when the Lord God will make a New Covenant with them 
through a new Mediator, The Christ, who will assist them 
to keep the Law satisfactorily and thus to be delivered 
from the evil features of their Covenant. 

At the close of the Babylonish Captivity, the Prophet 
Daniel asked the Lord for an explanation of the 
prophecies relating to his people. The answer to his 
prayer is given in detail. "Seventy weeks are determined 
upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the 
transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make 
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting 
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy and 
to anoint the Most Holy. "-Dan. 9:24-27. 

For an elucidation of this prophecy, the reader is referred 
to STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II, Study III. 
All these things were to be done in those seventy weeks. 
Of this period of time, we find that the seventieth week 
was the most critical, for it was the week during which 
Messiah was to confirm the Covenant. In our Study III, 
we show that this week began October, A.D. 29 and closed 
October, A.D. 36— from the beginning of our Lord's 



ministry until the conversion of Cornelius, the first Gentile 
to receive the Holy Spirit. 

THE COVENANT CONFIRMED FOR ONE WEEK 

During that period of seven years, God bestowed special 
favor upon the Jews. At the beginning of that week 
of years, our Lord, who was then thirty years of age, 
presented Himself to God as a sacrifice. This presentation 
was the first feature of the antitypical Atonement 
Day work, and corresponded to the sacrifice of the bullock 
in the type. Our Lord began the antitypical sacrifices; 
as St. Paul says, "Then said He, Lo, I come to do Thy 
will, O God.' He taketh away the first, that He may 
establish the second." (Heb. 10:9.) Our Lord there began 
to take away the type and to establish the antitype. 
It was necessary not only to begin the work with the 
antitypical bullock, but to complete it and to take His 
place as the antitypical Moses, so to speak. This He did 
not accomplish until after His death on the cross. 

Many other features of that antitypical Atonement 
Day work are not yet completed. It was a part of the 
Atonement for the High Priest to offer the Lord's goat 
and to take its blood into the Most Holy and to sprinkle 
it there. It was also a part of the Atonement Day work 
for him to come out and confess the sins of the people on 
the scape-goat, and a still further part for him to bless the 
people. During our Lord's ministry, He fulfilled various 
features of the types. At Calvary His work of sacrificing 
Himself was finished, and the Divine acceptance of that 
sacrifice was manifested. 

The Prophet's statement that in the midst of the week 
Messiah would cause the sacrifice and the oblation to 
cease, implies that our Lord would there terminate the 
efficacy of the typical work for Israel as a people, and 
that they were rejected from Divine favor at the time 
that they crucified Him. A few days before His death, 
our Lord had said, "Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate." (Matt. 23:38.) This rejection seems to have 
been symbolized when the veil of the temple was rent in 
twain from the top to the bottom, an indication of a breaking 
down, rather than of an opening up. 

This rejection of the Jewish nation does not indicate 
the end of their Law Covenant. To the Church of Christ, 
who have been given the privilege of understanding the 
deep things of the Spirit of God, it appears that the 
efficacy of the typical sacrifices, which were offered year 
by year continually, ceased at the death of our Lord; and 
that since that time, as a nation they have had no Divine 
favor; but that the only ones who have had favor since 
then are those who have come out of Moses into Christ. 
The typical sacrifices continued until the time when Christ 
died, for the reason that Jesus Himself was under the 
Law, a part of which He fulfilled, and no feature of which 
can pass away until all has been fulfilled.— Matt. 5:17,18. 

After our Lord's ascension, it was possible for greater 



work to be done than ever before. Under the Lord's 
blessing, thousands of Jews were gathered into the Gospel 
garner within comparatively a few days. The work of 
our Lord was cut short nationally, but it increased the 
opportunity of the Jews individually. There were only 
five hundred Jews who believed on Jesus until after 
His death, when there were thousands added to 
the number. (1 Cor. 15:6; Acts 2:41.) During the three 
and a half years following our Lord's death, God did not 
recognize the Gentiles, for He had said that He would 
give seventy weeks to the Jews, and therefore He allowed 
no favor to go to the Gentiles until that period had expired. 

After the expiration of the seventy weeks of years 
set apart for Israel, the Gospel began to go to the Gentiles, 
to gather from among them "a people for His name." 
(Acts 15:13-18.) During this Gospel Age, the antitypical 
Atonement work has been progressing. Our Lord has 
already offered the antitypical bullock in the sacrifice of 
Himself. Since Pentecost, He has been offering the antitypical 
goat— the Church class. This work has been in 
progress for more than eighteen hundred years. As soon 
as it shall have been finished, the blood will be taken into 
the Most Holy, to sprinkle the Mercy-Seat and to "make 
atonement for all the people," as in the type. 

THE COVENANT OF SACRIFICE 

The Abrahamic Covenant, as it was given to Abraham, 
is a complete covenant, whose provisions include all mankind; 
for it reads, "In thee and in thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12:3; 28:14.) 
Its promise is to THE SEED: (1) Jesus; (2) The Christ, 
Head and Body; (3) the earthly seed through them. Its 
provisions extend to all who have the faith of Abraham. 
The promise of God was that a blessing shall come to all 
the families of the earth. This promise was confirmed 
by an oath on the part of God, so that by two immutable 
things— the oath and the promise of God— the heirs of the 
promise may be sure of its fulfilment— Heb. 6:13-18. 

The Seed of Abraham, which is to bless all the families 
of the earth, was intended to be a Spiritual Seed. 
Since Abraham and his posterity were natural men, the 
only way by which they could become the Spiritual Seed 
was by the sacrifice of the earthly nature and the attaining 
to the spirit nature. The opportunity for making this 
sacrifice was first given to our Lord Jesus. By carrying 
out His covenant of sacrifice, He became the Head of the 
Seed which is to bring the blessing.— Psa. 50:5; 40:7-10. 

During the Gospel Age, Jehovah has been selecting the 
members of this Spiritual Seed, that they may lay down 
their human life and earthly interests in order to attain 
to the spirit nature. The selection of this Seed has been 
the work of the Gospel Age. Soon the Seed will be all 
gathered; then the work of blessing the natural seed will 
begin, and through them the blessing will subsequently 
spread to all nations, as these shall accept the Divine favor. 



The Church will always be in covenant relationship 

R5163 : page 21 

with the Father. The fact that He calls them sons implies 
that they are bound to Him. (John 1:12.) Every 
father is in covenant relationship with his children, and 
they with him. Every child has a responsibility to its 
father, and the father to the child. The fact that God 
has received the Lord Jesus and the Church as sons (Heb. 3:6) 
signifies that they are in covenant relationship with 
Him. St. Paul says, "We are the children of God; and 
if children, then heirs." (Rom. 8:16,17.) His statement 
not only implies that relationship, but proves it; for the 
sons have a right to the things which the father has 
provided for his children. 

All who hunger and thirst after righteousness (Matt. 5:6), 
all whose souls long for God "as the hart pants after 
the water brook" (Psa. 42:1), and who, having found 
Him, have consecrated themselves to Him— these have 
received the anointing of the Holy Spirit, witnessing with 
their spirit that they are sons of God. (Rom. 8:14-16.) 
As anointed sons these can discover in themselves the 
worthy traits of true sons— loyalty, zeal, energy, discretion, 
faithfulness, obedience. 

There are, however, conditions attached to this covenant 
of sacrifice; there are certain requirements which 
must be fulfilled. All must become partakers of the sufferings 
of Christ, if they would participate with Him in 
the glories to follow. But the arrangements for keeping 
our contract are complete in Christ. Therefore if we put 
ourselves under His care, this covenant will be everlasting 
with us, and we shall have "the sure mercies of David."— 
Isa. 55:3. 

COVENANT RELATIONSHIP TO BE RE-ESTABLISHED WITH 
HUMANITY 

In Jer. 31:31-33, we read, "I will make a New Covenant 
with the House of Israel and with the house of 
Judah... after those days." The expression, "those 
days," we understand to refer to Israel's "seven times" of 
punishment, promised by the Lord for the violation of 
their Law Covenant. This New Covenant is to be made 
with Israel alone; for God never purposed to make a 
covenant with the Gentiles. The New Covenant will 
properly be so called because it will take the place of the 
old Law Covenant, which God made with Israel and which 

R5164 : page 21 

was broken by them. After Israel shall have been fully 
established under their New Covenant, all other nations 
will be privileged to come into this relationship after the 
manner set forth in the Law. All the world will eventually 
be blessed thereby. 



The New Covenant, then, is to be made with such of 
Abraham's descendants as are able to receive it. Since 
the people are not worthy to enter directly into relationship 
with God, that Covenant must have a Mediator. The 
Mediator is the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Church, His 
Body. The Scriptures indicate that the Mediator is nearly 
completed. 

The Word of God distinguishes between a covenant 
and its mediator. A covenant does not go into operation 
until after it has been fully mediated. When Moses 
mediated the Law Covenant, he first offered sacrifices; 
then he took the blood of the animals and, dividing it 
into two parts, sprinkled both the Book of the Law and 
the people. (Exod. 24:4-8; Heb. 9:19-24.) After he had 
done this, the Law Covenant was in force; and it will continue 
until superseded by its antitype, the New Covenant. 

The Mediator of the New Covenant will be The Christ. 
For more than eighteen hundred years, our Lord has been 
offering the great antitypical sacrifices of Himself and His 
Church. As soon as He will have finished making application 
of the blood, He will have made satisfaction for 
the sins of the world. This act will correspond to the 
sprinkling of the Book by Moses. Divine Justice having 
accepted this arrangement, the Mediator will antitypically 
sprinkle the people; that is, he will show them how to 
come back into full accord with God. 

The New Covenant will begin to swallow up the old 
Law Covenant as soon as the Kingdom is established. 
The Scriptures indicate that the first to receive it will be 
the Ancient Worthies. Raised from the dead to human 
perfection, they will form the nucleus of the new arrangement 
in the earth. Next in order will be those who have 
been known as Christians, but who have not been consecrated 
to death, and Jews who have been consecrated to 
the Law, but who have been blinded. Gradually the light 
will come to all who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 
Sprinkled from all sympathy with evil, they will make 
their declaration of full loyalty to God. In due time this 
light will spread to all kindreds and tongues and nations. 

CHANGE OF HEART IN THE MILLENNIUM 

The Prophet Jeremiah, speaking of the New Covenant 
(31:34), says, "They shall know Me, from the least of 
them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will 
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no 
more." The sins and iniquities of Israel will no longer 
be remembered against them. Christ will have appeared 
on their behalf and made satisfaction for their sins. They 
will then be as free from original sin as the Gospel Church 
are. The Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ is the 
sufficiency for all. — I John 2:2. 

The Prophet Ezekiel tells us that during the next Age 
the hearts of mankind will be changed. He says, "Thus 
saith the Lord God;. ..A new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will 



take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will 
give you an heart of flesh." (Ezek. 36:22-27.) This 
change of heart is entirely aside from the making of the 
New Covenant. It will take a thousand years to remove 
the stoniness out of the hearts of mankind and to make 
them stand without a Mediator. Those who receive everlasting 
life must attain this condition; for all of God's creatures 
who would live forever must keep His Law perfectly. 

During the Millennium, God will not recognize the 
people, because of their imperfection, their weakness; but 
all of their dealings will be through the Mediator, until 
they shall have been brought up to perfection. At the 
end of the thousand years, they will be delivered up to 
the Father, unblamable before Him. (I Cor. 15:24.) 
God will then receive them as sons, heirs of the earthly 
blessings which He has provided for mankind— the things 
given to Adam. The very moment when the merit of 
Christ is applied for the world is the same moment when 
they will be turned over to the Mediator. Then they will 
be in covenant relationship with God, but only through 
the Mediator, until they shall have reached human perfection 
and shall enter into this relationship directly with 
the Father. 

The New Covenant will continue everlastingly; and 
as it is proper to say that Moses mediated the Law Covenant, 
so we may say that Christ will mediate the New 
Covenant. But it would not be proper to say that Moses 
is now the Mediator of the Law Covenant; for a covenant 
does not need a mediator after it has been mediated. So 
the New Covenant will need no Mediator after the thousand 
years. But the title "Mediator" may belong to 
Christ to all eternity, just as one who has been a judge, 
ever after receives the title of "Judge." 

At the end of the thousand years, when the Messiah 

R5164 : page 22 

will have accomplished His work of Restitution, He will 

cease to act as Mediator. But the Covenant will continue 

to stand; for if that relationship with God were to 

be removed from the people, they would have no blessing 

of everlasting life. That blessing depends upon covenant 

relationship with God. Under the favorable conditions 

of the New Covenant, whosoever will may have an opportunity 

to become the children of The Christ, the Seed 

of Abraham. 

At the conclusion of the thousand years, the willing 
and the obedient receive the commendation, "Well done," 
and will be accepted as fit for the condition of everlasting 
life on the human plane. Those who prove to be unworthy 
of life will be destroyed in the Second Death. 



R5164 : page 22 



DISTINCTION BETWEEN KEEPING AND FULFILLING THE LAW 

THE QUESTION, Did the keeping of the 

Law Covenant require the death of Christ? 

is a peculiar and very deep one. On one 

side it might be argued that the death of 

Christ was sacrificial, that no law would 

be just which would require the death of 

an innocent person; that since God's Law is 

just, it did not require the death of an 

innocent man, and that therefore it was not 

necessary for Jesus to die in order to fulfil 

the Law. But this is only one side of the question. 

The other side of the argument is that our Lord 
Jesus, who loved His God with all His heart, soul, mind 
and strength, and who had consecrated His life to do the 
Father's will, must do that will and avoid everything 
contrary to it, in order to live in harmony with His 
consecration. As soon, therefore, as He learned that it 
was God's will that a redemption price of a perfect human 
life should be paid for Adam and the world of mankind, 
He would present Himself in consecration and faithfully 
carry out all that is implied in that consecration, because 
He loved God with all His heart, soul, mind and strength. 

It would be reasonable, also, to expect that if our 
Lord knew that the hundreds of millions to whom He 
had become "neighbor" by becoming human were in great 
difficulty and could be delivered only by a sacrifice on 
His part, He would, if He loved His neighbor as Himself, 
want to do something for their relief. This desire would 
lead Him to make the sacrifice. 

If to this we add the thought that God would not 
permit our Lord to perish, but would restore Him to life 
and glory, and that Jesus had in mind the promise that 
He would not be suffered to remain in death, we at once 
perceive that He would be willing to die for His unjust 
neighbor, because He loved His neighbor as Himself. 

These two views, so directly opposite, nevertheless 
coincide in that it was left open for our Lord to will what 
He would do. The Father gave Him an opportunity 
and set before Him a great reward; the Father did not 
entrap our Lord into an engagement from which He could 
not draw back. When we come to view the subject 
from this standpoint, we see the reasonableness of the 
whole arrangement. 

In His consecration at baptism our Lord had said, 
"Lo, I come.. .to do Thy will, O God" (Heb. 10:7); 
I will keep nothing back that You require. Such obedience 
would have been as much as the Law could require 
of any one. On the other hand, Justice would not require 
a sacrifice, for Justice could not demand it. Willingness 
to do anything that Justice would demand constituted His 
keeping of the Law. This point is so fine that it is almost 
impossible to explain it in language. We can know, however, 
that the Father set before Jesus the great reward, 
and that for the joy set before Him He endured the 



cross and despised the shame.— Heb. 12:1,2. 

GOD'S WILL EXPRESSED IN THE TYPES 

There is a distinction between fulfilling the Law and 
keeping the Law. The Jews did neither. They partially 
kept the Law and endeavored to do still further than they 
were able to do. But they could not fulfil the Law; for it 
is so great that it is beyond the power of man to fulfil 
all of its requirements. 

The Law consists of two different parts. The one is 
a regulation of the morals— the duty of all toward God 
and toward fellow-men. In this sense of the word, the 
Law stands for justice— for what is right. The Jews endeavored 
to do right and thus to keep the Law, but were 
unable to do so on account of hereditary weaknesses. 

Our Lord Jesus, however, kept the Law in this sense. 
By so doing He earned the right to everlasting life on 

R5165 : page 22 

the human plane. This the world will do in the next Age. 
They will be enabled to keep the Law and will get everlasting 
life, the reward of obedience to the Law. But 
Jesus did more than keep the Law of Justice. He also 
fulfilled that part of the Law which was applicable to 
Him, and He is still fulfilling the Law. 

The other part of the Law consists of the ceremonial 
features, which constitute the types and shadows mentioned 
by St. Paul. (Heb. 10:1.) These prophetic features 
of the Law represent the Divine will in respect to 
the means by which mankind will be restored from the 
plane of degradation, sin and death to Divine favor. This 
prophetical fulfilling of the Law consisted in the carrying 
out in antitype of one important feature— the Passover 
institution. The killing of the lamb, the sprinkling of 
the blood and the eating of the flesh, were prophetical- 
typical. 

Jesus fulfilled His part of the type when He was put 
to death. It was only by virtue of His sacrifice of His 
will entirely to the Divine will that He was able to fulfil 
the prophecies, for these were not commands to mankind 
in general. In these was a suggestion of things which 
were not commanded, but which God desired to have accomplished 
at some time through some one, and through 
which the Redemption of the human race and the Restitution 
of all things lost by Adam would be effected. 

In the performance of the Atonement Day sacrifices 
the blood was taken into the Most Holy and typically 
made satisfaction for sin. Jesus accomplished a part of 
this work. Since then He has ascended on High and 
made satisfaction for us, the Church class, by means of 
which we may walk in His footsteps by consecration. 
(Heb. 9:24.) All down through the Gospel Age He has 
been accepting this class, and eventually will accomplish 
their sacrifice. This was typified by the killing of the 



Lord's goat. 

Jesus, we see, has been fulfilling the Law during these 
eighteen hundred years, as well as during His ministry. 
This work will not be finished until the end of the Age. 
Jesus said that He came not to destroy, but to fulfil the 
things of the Law (Matt. 5:17); and He will continue 
the fulfilment of the types of the Law during the thousand 
years, until all is fulfilled at the close of the Millennial 
Age. Some of these things are future; such as the 
sprinkling of the blood of the antitypical Lord's goat, the 
sending away of the antitypical scape-goat, and the appearance 

R5165 : page 23 

of the antitypical High Priest to bless the people. 
It will take the entire thousand years of Christ's reign to 
get back all that was lost through Adam's disobedience 
and that is to be restored to mankind through the merit 
of Christ. 

THAT FEATURE OF THE LAW FULFILLED BY CHRIST'S 
DEATH 

The moral Law— the Ten Commandments— and the 
Covenant, of which it is a part, promised life to those 
who would keep its requirements. Jesus could have had 
that everlasting life by doing everything that the Law 
required, for the Law demands no more than justice. He 
could have obeyed every command of the Law without 
sacrificing any of His rights. But the prophetic features 
of the Law could not have been fulfilled unless some one 
had sacrificed his life, and the one who would do this must 
be the equivalent of the one who had sinned. Since the 
one who had sinned was perfect, in the image 
of God, the one who would be a corresponding price to 
fulfil the Law and to bring out all those blessings to the 
world that the Law prophesies, must be one who could 
fully keep the Law. Only such a person would be competent 
to make the sacrifice and thus to fulfil the prophetic 
features of the Law. 

This requirement was fully met by Jesus, who was 
"holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners"— 
everything that Justice could expect. He gladly kept the 
Law, and did even more. He proposed to do everything 
written in the Book; for He had said, "Lo, I come to do 
Thy will, O God" (Psa. 40:8)— everything that had been 
written. His consecration went beyond the moral Law 
and embraced everything that God had written prophetically. 
All this He fulfilled. As a result He is the Savior, 
"able to save to the uttermost" all that come to the Father 
through Him.-Heb. 7:25. 

We cannot think that God would be offended with any 
one who came up to the requirements of the Law, but who 
did not go beyond. Since God had said, "If any one 
keep all this Law, I will do My part and give him everlasting 
life," Justice could ask no more. If such a one should 



not go forward to sacrifice, Justice could not be offended, 
for it could not demand that he do so. 

In fact, the Father does not require the righteous of 
this Age to sacrifice, nor will He expect the world to do 
so in coming to the plane of human perfection. But if 
God should set before any of the human family an opportunity 
to offer their lives in doing the Divine will, they 
should esteem this a privilege. The Father would not 
consign one to death, however, who should fail to do 
this. But every one who loves the Lord should think, 
"Here is my opportunity to show my trust, my loyalty to 
God." In this respect the example of Jesus will stand out 
for all eternity to angels and to men, so that if ever God 
gave even a hint of what His will would be, they would 
hasten to do that will and not hesitate for any 
consideration. 

There is a lesson also of love in the matter. We are 
not to content ourselves with saying, "I did not lie; I 
did not steal; I did unto my neighbor as I would wish 
done unto myself." We are not to stop with this as a 
sufficiency; no one will get life on any plane if he does 
no more than this. Our privilege is to anticipate God's 
will through watching the types of the Law and the words 
of our Lord and Head. We are to count all things as 
loss and dross in comparison with this opportunity which 
we have. Nothing else should be counted so great a 
privilege as that of following in the footsteps of Jesus. 



FOR CHILDREN OF BELIEVERS 
MORNING PRAYER 

Dear Father, hear a little child 

Who offers thanks to Thee; 
Through all the darkness Thou hast kept 

A watch-care over me. 
O Father, keep me through this day, 

I would to Thee belong; 
May love control my little hands, 

May kindness rule my tongue. 
Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done 

Upon this earth again; 
Dear Father, hear my little prayer 

For Jesus' sake. Amen. 

EVENING PRAYER 

Dear Lord, before sweet slumber comes 

To close my weary eyes, 
Up to Thy Throne of Heavenly grace 

My voice in prayer would rise. 
For all the blessings of this day 

I give Thee thanks and praise. 
Forgive me, Lord, for Jesus' sake, 



For all my naughty ways; 
And as I lay me down to sleep 

Do Thou an angel send 
To watch beside me all the night 

For Jesus' sake. Amen.— Rebecca F. Doney. 



R5166 : page 23 

DEATH AND THE RESURRECTION 

DEATH IS NOT a sleep; it is destruction. 

Dead bodies decay because the work of destruction 

is progressing in them. We say 

that mortification sets in; that is, the destruction 

of the tissues goes on until everything 

that had life in that body has perished. This 

process of decay is common to both man and 

beast, and also goes on in the vegetable 

world. As the Scriptures say, "That which 

befalleth the sons of men befalleth the 

beasts; even one thing befalleth them; as the one dieth, 

so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that 

a man hath no pre-eminence above a beast. ..All go 

unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust 

again."— Eccl. 3:19,20. 

Very few people seem to realize what is meant by the 
term "soul." The Scriptural teaching is that man IS a 
soul, not that he HAS a soul. In Gen. 2:7 we read, "And 
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man BECAME 
a LIVING SOUL." The Word of God speaks of 
both man and beast as souls. (See Num. 31:28.) Body, 
soul and spirit are in combination in a living organism. 

A dog has a body; a dog has a life— a vitalizing principle; 
and aside from this life-principle and organism, a 
dog has a personality. One dog differs from another; 
one may be a bulldog, another, a lap-dog in a fashionable 
family. Each animal has his own joys and sorrows; but 
whatever he is, these things go to make up the experiences 
by which a dog would recognize himself. 

So it is with a human being. There is a body and a 
life principle, the union of which makes the soul. His experiences 

R5166 : page 24 

—his home-life, his education, his environment, 

his travels, his finances, his private affairs— all go to make 

up his personality. It is not his body, but his soul that has 

these experiences. As two dogs under different experiences 

would have very different personalities, so with 

human beings. All the different experiences of life 

help to make them happy or unhappy, learned or ignorant, 

wise or unwise. 



IN DEATH WHAT PRE-EMINENCE HATH A MAN? 

What is the difference between a brute soul and a 
human soul? The human soul has a higher organization 
of body and brain, which constitutes him an individual of 
a higher order; and not only has he a better brain by 
Divine appointment, but he was not made like the brute 
beast to die after a brief period of years. Man was made 
to live forever. 

In Eden, man came under the sentence of death, as the 
penalty for disobedience. The entire race has been 
born in a dying condition. Each human being receives 
a spark of life from his parents, without which the 
body would return to dust. When man dies, his personality, 
which is the result of his hereditary and prenatal 
influences combined with his experiences, perishes; for it 
cannot exist without a body. As the Scriptures declare, 
"In that day his THOUGHTS perish"; for "the dead 
know not anything"; "There is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest." 
-Psa. 146:4; Eccl. 9:5,10. 

The question then arises, Does man die in the same 
sense that the brute creation does? We answer that so 
far as man himself is concerned, he would be as dead as 
is the beast, if God had not made an arrangement by 
which humanity will have a future life. God intends to 
restore to life, not the body, but the soul that died. The 
soul that went into death is the soul that was redeemed by 
Jesus. --Psa. 49:15. 

Through the resurrection, God has arranged to show 
His love for the world. It is written, "When the fulness 
of time was come, God sent forth His Son" (Gal. 4:4); 
"Who gave Himself a Ransom for all" (I Tim. 2:6)— 
"for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) Every man has gone into 
death or is going there; and unless a redemption had been 
provided, there could be no resurrection. So the Apostle 
Paul explains that, "since by man came death, by man 
came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam 
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every 
man in his own order."— I Cor. 15:21-23. 

This making alive will be the resurrection of the dead 
—not of those particles of matter which have gone to 
fertilize a tree and then through its fruit become a part of 
another organism, but the resurrection of the being— the 
soul. In the resurrection, "God giveth it a body as it hath 
pleased Him." (I Cor. 15:38.) To the individual, it does 
not matter what particles compose his new body. What 
he is interested in is the resurrection of his soul— his being 
—his personality. That restoration is the all-important 
part of the resurrection. 

God has given the assurance that He is able to restore 
mankind; and we who believe His Word do not think of 
man as dead in the same sense as is the brute. On the 
contrary, we allow the beast to pass into oblivion, but we 
think of man. For our dead we raise a memorial, remembrance, 
of the body which represented the personality 



dear to us. Our faith assures us that the personality is not 
extinct, but that it will have a resurrection. The respect 
which we show to our friends and loved ones in their 
sepulchers indicates our faith in their future life through 
a resurrection of the dead. 

ADAMIC DEATH SCRIPTURALLY CALLED SLEEP 

In the Scriptures, God sets forth the thought that the 
dead are asleep. Since He is the One who has the Power 
and the Purpose to raise the dead, He can speak of them 
in this way. Their bodies have indeed gone to dust, but 
they as individuals are known to God. To raise men from 
the dead and to give them back the very thoughts which 
they had before death will be a stupendous work, which 
only the Wisdom and Power of the Almighty God can 
accomplish. Those alone who have confidence in the 
promises of God can speak of their loved ones as asleep 
in death. 

The Scriptures speak of the Ancient Worthies as 
asleep. We read that "David slept with his fathers." (I Kings 2:10.) 
The same statement is made of all of the 
kings of Israel, whether good or bad. St. Stephen, stoned 
to death, "fell asleep." (Acts 7:60.) St. Paul says, 
"Them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with 
Him. ...We which are alive and remain unto the coming 
of the Lord shall not prevent [precede— go before] 
them which sleep... and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first."— I Thess. 4:14-16. 

In the morning of that glorious Day when the Sun of 
Righteousness shall rise with healing in His beams, all 
that God has promised for that blessed time will come to 
pass. (Mai. 4:2.) Meantime, the dead are awaiting that 
Day during which "all that are in the graves shall hear 
His voice [the voice of the Son of Man] and shall come 
forth." (John 5:28,29.) In this sense of the word, therefore, 
we speak of the dead as asleep. Our Lord Himself 
used this word in speaking of Lazarus. He said, "Lazarus 
sleepeth." When by their reply the disciples showed that 
they did not understand, Jesus said unto them plainly, 
"Lazarus is dead."— John 11:11-14. 

HEAVENLY PHASE OF THE RESURRECTION 

From one standpoint, all mankind fall asleep to wait 
for the morning of the great Millennial Day, when the 
Sun of Righteousness shall arise. The resurrection will 
come to every member of the human race; but as no two 
individuals have been in the same degree of degradation, 
some will rise more rapidly than will others. The Scriptures 
seem to indicate that there will be several classes 
in the resurrection. One of these is designated the "First 
Resurrection," that is, the chief, or most important; and 
it will consist of those who are to be associated with our 
Lord in His Throne. "Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the First Resurrection; on such the Second Death 



hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of 
Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years."— 
Rev. 20:6. 

This description excludes the Great Company and applies 
merely to the Little Flock, "partakers of the Divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) Other Scriptures seem to show 
us that the Great Company class will attain to spirit perfection 
in their resurrection; and therefore we might 
think of theirs as a second resurrection— second in order, 
in glory and in preference. These two classes compose 
the "Church of the First-borns, which are written in 
Heaven." (Heb. 12:23.) The difference between them 
is merely that the Little Flock were zealous to go forward 
and perform what duties and privileges they saw, while 
the Great Company were less zealous and less loyal in 
sacrifice, although they would suffer death rather than 
deny the Lord or His Truth. 

This distinction is set forth in the typical arrangement 
of the Law Covenant. As the tribe of Levi was called 

R5166 : page 25 

out from among Israel for a special work, so the Church 
of the First-borns are called out from among mankind, as 
the antitypical Levites. The priestly tribe of Israel was 
divided into two classes, the priests and the Levites, and 
likewise the Church is composed of two classes. Of these, 
only the "more than conquerors" (Rom. 8:37.) will become 
"partakers of the Divine nature" and have the preeminence. 
The Great Company will not attain to this 
honor. 

We are not able to distinguish who are the "more than 
conquerors." The Great Company are identified with the 
Little Flock both here on earth and also in Heaven. Both 
classes are of the "First-borns." As the Apostle James 
says, we are "a kind of first-fruits of His creatures." 
(James 1:18.) To illustrate this thought, let us consider 
a bed of strawberries: These berries are among the first 
fruits of the season, yet even among them we find that 
some berries ripen sooner than the rest of the crop. These 
early-ripe berries may be said to be the first-fruit of the 
first-fruits. So with the Little Flock. 

R5167 : page 25 

EARTHLY PHASE OF THE RESURRECTION 

In the Scriptures, a third class of faithful servants of 
God are mentioned. Many of these are called by name 
in the Epistle to the Hebrews. We refer to the Ancient 
Worthies, who lived and were found faithful before the 
coming of our Savior. These did not have the opportunity 
of walking in the footsteps of our Lord and so did not 
have the "high calling." These are said to receive "a better 
resurrection" than will the rest of mankind (Heb. 11:35) 
—better, not in the sense of belonging to the spirit 



plane, but in that it will be an instantaneous raising to 
human perfection, whereas the remainder of the race will 
require a thousand years during which to come back 
gradually to the original condition lost by Adam. 

At the beginning of the reign of Christ, the Ancient 
Worthies will come forth perfect human beings— mentally 
and physically— that their bodies may correspond with 
their moral development. If they had scars, these will be 
theirs no longer; if they had blemishes, these will have 
disappeared. It is not easy for us to picture to ourselves 
a perfect man, for we have never seen one, and all around 
us are various degrees of imperfection. But we know 
that a perfect human being will be perfect in form, feature, 
voice, sight, hearing, taste, and in all other organs, 
as well as in mind. 

Last of all, "the residue of men" will come forth, 
"every man in his own order." (I Cor. 15:23.) Their 
awakening will merely bring them forth from the tomb 
in the condition in which they entered it; for in the grave, 
"there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom." 
(Eccl. 9:10.) This awakening is not the resurrection, 
but merely the preliminary step toward it. The 
Greek word rendered "resurrection" is anastasis, and 
means literally "a standing up again." Adam fell, and 
ever since "the whole world lieth in wickedness"— literally, 
"in the wicked one." (I John 5:19.) The standing up 
again is, therefore, a return to the perfection lost in Eden; 
for the world of mankind the resurrection is the Restitution. 
-Acts 3:19-21. 

During the thousand years of Messiah's reign, the 
resurrection of the world will be in progress. The work 
will not be done by the Father directly, but will be committed 
to the Lord Jesus (John 5:28,29), and will require 
the whole thousand years for its completion. At the end 
of that Millennial reign the world of mankind will be 
perfect, as was Adam in his creation. All God's work is 
perfect. -Deut. 32:4; Gen. 1:31. 

As previously stated, the Ancient Worthies, as a reward 
for their faith in God, will come forth to a better 
resurrection than will other men. The remainder of the 
race will come forth in practically the same condition in 
which they went into death. They will know nothing 
more, nothing less than when they died; their personality 
will be the same. As for their bodies, we cannot suppose 
that these will be perfect, for if mankind were thus 
brought back from death, they would not know each other. 
If all should be brought forth of one color, or if all should 
have the same style of features, they would not be recognized. 
On the other hand, they will come forth, neither 
gasping for breath, nor in fragments, as if blown to pieces 
by an explosion or eaten by an animal, but in what 
formerly was their usual health. 

Mankind recognize each other by certain physical traits 
as well as by mental and moral characteristics. If in the 
awakening a man were given a perfect form or a properly 
balanced brain, he would not know himself on coming 



forth from the tomb. His very thoughts would be different; 
there would be nothing by which memory could 
identify him. Humanity will be raised from the tomb in 
the condition suggested by our Lord when He said to the 
man with a withered hand, '"Stretch forth thine hand!' 
And he did so; and his hand was restored whole as the 
other" (Luke 6: 10)— complete— not in the full sense of the 
word, but enough so to have a new start in the new life. 

SHAME AND CONTEMPT WILL BE PURGED AWAY DURING 
THE MILLENNIUM 

The Savior makes an atonement for the sins of mankind 
for the very purpose of giving them a trial for life, 
an opportunity to demonstrate whether, under the favorable 
conditions of the Messianic Kingdom, they will 
choose righteousness and life or unrighteousness and 
everlasting death. The Scriptures seem to imply that 
there will be a great deal of shame and contempt properly 
attaching to those who will not have come into full accord 
with God.— Dan. 12:2. 

During the thousand years of trial, very many will 
purge themselves of this shame and contempt. Thus we 
may suppose that, as the years go by, the shame will 
gradually cease and the contempt will die away. We see 
this point illustrated in the case of Saul of Tarsus. When 
he learned that he was fighting against God, he was very 
much ashamed of the course which he had taken. As 
gradually he manifested his loyalty to God, he purged 
himself of this shame and contempt. St. Paul's valor and 
zeal in the service of the Lord offset the things which he 
did ignorantly as Saul of Tarsus. His shame, therefore, 
has passed away. 

The world will awake from the dead in this condition 
of shame and contempt. But gradually the obedient will 
arise from this state to the original perfection of the 
image of God. The wilfully disobedient, on the contrary, 
will not rise. They will sink lower, until finally they will 
go into everlasting destruction, or as St. Peter says, "As 
natural brute beasts. ..shall utterly perish in their 
own corruption."— 2 Pet. 2:12. 

At the First Advent our Lord did most of His healing 
on the Sabbath Day, thus foreshadowing the work of healing 
which He will do for the world in the great antitypical 
Sabbath— the Millennium. Mankind will come 
forth from the tomb free from their previous condemnation, 
with human bodies in proper condition, so that their 
friends will recognize them as formerly; but they will 
have weaknesses— physical, mental and moral. 

God has provided everything necessary for the resurrection 
of mankind— not only the Ransom-price, but also 

R5167 : page 26 

Christ's Mediatorial Kingdom. The uplifting influences of 
the incoming Age will be open to every member of the 



race, whether great or small, rich or poor. But their 
acceptance or rejection and the rapidity of their progress 
will depend upon their personal interest in the matter. 
Those who refuse to advance and who show no desire for 
their own development, will be cut off in Second Death. 

There is no reason why those who will not make progress 
should be allowed to live on indefinitely. The same 
Justice which declares that only those who are in perfect 
accord with God shall have everlasting life, will not permit 
those to live forever who continue to be imperfect. 
Such will indicate by their attitude that they are not in 
harmony with righteousness, and will be justly classed as 
wicked. Of these it is written, "All the wicked will He 
destroy. "--Psa. 145:20. 



R5167 : page 26 

QUIETLY MINDING ONE'S OWN BUSINESS 

"But we beseech you, brethren.... that ye study to be 
quiet, and to do your own business."— I Thess. 4:10,11. 

THERE IS A quietness that appertains to 

sloth and indolence; but this evidently is 

not what the Apostle means in our text; 

for elsewhere he urges us to be "not slothful 

in business." (Rom. 12:11.) There is 

another quietness that appertains to peace— 

a composure which is the opposite of 

nervousness, giddiness and childishness. 

This condition we believe to be that which 

the Apostle has in mind. The Lord's people 

are to study to have a mind that is well balanced. 

This composure is not natural to the majority of people 

and is, therefore, something to be studied and attained. 

We are in the school of Christ to learn such lessons. 

This desirable quietness represents the graces of the 
Holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience and brotherly 
kindness. While we are to be "fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord" (Rom. 12:11,) we are also to be obedient 
to the instructions of the Holy Spirit, in meekness, 
quietness and love. We are to endeavor to take a proper 
estimate of the affairs of life, and not to allow trivial 
things to excite us. This course, if faithfully pursued, 
tends to produce a quietness of spirit. 

To mind one's own business is a very important lesson 
to learn. Surely every Christian has observed that 
much of the trouble in the world results from interference 
one with another. In every difficulty, one or both of the 
persons involved failed to mind his own business. Some 
people are always seeking to find fault with others, 
and seem to think they are commissioned to correct the 
whole world. We find no authority given in the Bible 
for such a course. 



A busybody is a person who meddles with the affairs 
of others with which he properly has nothing whatever 
to do. Sometimes he fancies that it is his duty to advise, 
criticise, investigate, chide and reprove others. The 
Golden Rule will prove a great help in deciding what is 
one's duty in any case. This commandment of the Lord 
prohibits everything akin to busybodying. Each member 
of the New Creation should educate his conscience to 
discriminate between brotherly-love and busybodying, 
and should learn to apply the rules of justice and love to 
every act, word and thought, so far as in him lies. 

Where a matter is one in which we are personally 
concerned, however, we shall not be meddling with other 

R5168 : page 26 

people's affairs, but minding our own business, when we 
give it proper attention. There are times, places and 
circumstances which the Bible points out as proper for 
correction, reproof, etc. A parent may correct a child; 
a teacher, a pupil. It is not meddling for a parent to 
have knowledge and direction of all that is going on in 
the house, nor for the teacher to be in touch with the 
affairs of the school. The personal rights of the members 
of a family or of a school should never be lost sight of, 
however. A householder and those who are serving a 
house come under the same rule as do parent and child, 
teacher and pupil. 

One of the greatest lessons of life is to learn that one 
who spends considerable time in correcting others, even 
though it be properly done and well, is prone to forget 
himself. One's first duty is to bring himself into harmony 
with the Divine arrangement and to keep himself there. 

BUSYBODYING AN EVIDENCE OF UNBELIEF 

To keep ourselves in the Love of God, we should cultivate 
the fruits and the graces of the Holy Spirit. There 
are not a few who can discourse learnedly on those qualities, 
but who seem not to be able properly to apply their 
knowledge to the affairs of every-day life. They seem 
to be unable to realize where meekness, gentleness and 
love should be shown in their own experiences. There are 
some things which we can teach others better by example 
than by precept. If we show in the little things of life 
that we are governed by the principles of justice and 
love, and if when under trial we exhibit meekness, gentleness 
and other fruits of the Spirit, our influence for good 
will be greatly increased. 

Observation in life leads one to believe that fully one-half 
of the world are meddle-some busybodies, and that 
many of their trials result from this weakness. It would 
appear that in nearly every family there is some one, 
perhaps a husband, perhaps a wife, perhaps a child, who 
takes advantage of the kindness and generosity of the 
others and rules the house. Usually in such cases there 



is much injustice done. Those who take this position 
often attempt to justify their course by saying, "If I did 
not take the reins in hand, things would not run properly." 
Such do not perceive that they are busybodies. 

This course of conduct demonstrates a lack of faith in 
God. We should do our duty and leave the rest to the 
Lord. There are people who in the future will find that 
they have lost much because they have not been subject 
to the Divine arrangements. Any one of the Lord's 
people who thus practises injustice is not making progress 
as a New Creature. Whether it be the husband, the wife 
or the child who rides rough-shod over the rights of 
others, this course is contrary to the Divine Law and the 
spirit of Love. Some day these will realize that they 
made a grave mistake.— Col. 3:18-21. 

The head of a house and of a family has a responsibility 
which he should recognize and which it is his duty 
to exercise. But he should do so with loving interest, 
looking out for the welfare and the preference of those 
whom he directs. The responsibility of a husband in his 
home, therefore, means the obligation which the Divine 
Law has laid upon him and which often requires the 
sacrifice of his own time and preferences in the interest 
of his family. It is his duty to discharge this responsibility. 
-Eph. 5:25-33; 6:4. 

The Scriptures also describe the proper place for the 

R5168 : page 27 

mother in the family. This position is a noble one. But 
every woman who usurps the place of the head of the 
household is surely doing injury to herself and the best 
interests of her family, even though she may seem for a 
time to prosper in her wrong course.— I Pet. 3:1-6. 

There are many who are impatient and unkind in their 
dealings with the members of their own family, but who 
to outsiders seem to be models of deportment. It is hard 
to see how they justify their course, especially when we 
recall that they have a particular responsibility toward 
their family for mental, as well as physical sustenance. 
It behooves each one who would have the approval of 
God to study his conduct, not only toward the world and 
the brethren, but also toward the members of his own 
family, that he may be sure that he is minding his own 
business in every sense of the word. 



R5168 : page 27 

"YET THERE IS ROOM" 

"Hold that fast which thou hast, that 
no man take thy crown."— Rev. 3:11. 

THE QUESTION is sometimes asked whether 



it is possible for one to consecrate himself 

and to be accepted at this late hour in the 

Gospel Age, unless there is a crown reserved 

for such a one. Certainly it would be 

possible for one to consecrate himself. 

Consecration is always proper. Long before 

the Gospel Age began, Abraham and 

the Prophets made consecration of their 

lives. St. Paul informs us that these Ancient 

Worthies showed that their lives were consecrated 

to God and righteousness; for they suffered— many of 

them— painful and ignominious deaths for His sake. Thus 

they demonstrated that the world was unworthy of them. 

-Heb. 11:33-38. 

The fact that a person has offered himself in consecration 
does not, however, obligate the Almighty to accept 
the offering. While it is true that "God is no respecter 
of persons" (Acts 10:34,) yet His favor was 
given first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles. This 
favor is the most wonderful ever offered to beings on 
any plane of existence— that all who will accept the terms 
may come into the Church, which is the mystical Body of 
Christ, until a sufficient number shall have been found, 
until the fore-ordained number shall have made consecration 
and shall have made their calling and election sure. 

While the Scriptures indicate clearly that we are living 
at the very close of the Gospel Age, yet it is not for 
us to know when the full number shall have consecrated 
themselves. It is our belief that in a general way the outward 
call ceased in 1881, A. D. 

Our thought is that in 1878 there were a great many 
consecrated persons who had not passed their trial in 
full; and that there were in the nominal churches many 
thousands who had made full consecration to walk in the 
footsteps of Jesus. From 1874 to 1881, there was a great 
number of evangelists preaching both in this country and 
abroad. Of these, Evangelist Moody was perhaps the 
best known. He seemed to make a great many converts; 
and his preaching seemed to be very different from that 
of the majority of evangelists. He preached forgiveness 
through the precious blood of Christ, and full consecration 
to God. 

During that revival period, many made a full consecration, 
had their names tentatively written in Heaven, 
and filled up the number required. But when the testings 
came, many were found unworthy of a higher reward 
than that of the Great Company. Others took the places 
of the failures and were also tested and sifted. Vacancies 
occurred; and still others came in for an opportunity. 
We see evidences that this work has been going on for 
the past thirty years; and we believe that it is true that 
some names are now being listed and that there are 
crowns awaiting such. 

OUR REASON FOR THIS THOUGHT 



People who have not been interested in religion and 
who have not heretofore consecrated themselves unto 
God, have quite recently made full consecration of themselves 
and have received that evidence which seems to 
indicate that God has accepted them. Not only have the 
eyes of their understanding been opened so that they can 
see the spiritual, or deep things of God, but they are 
given opportunities to sacrifice. While we make a covenant 
that we will sacrifice (Psa. 50:5), yet it is for the 
Lord to give us the opportunity to do so. The fact that 
some of the recently consecrated are receiving and using 
opportunities to sacrifice, implies that when they made 
their consecration there was a place open and that they 
are filling it. 

The fact also that so many have been thus accepted 
since 1878 seems to imply that there has been a considerable 
vacancy in the list of the Elect, and that it is 
gradually filling up. It is not for us to say how much of 
a vacancy remains, or just when it will be filled. We 
fully believe, however, that it will be filled before the 
close of "the Times of the Gentiles," which we think will 
end with October, 1914. 

As for others who have not yet consecrated themselves, 
we can say with St. Paul, "I beseech you,. ..brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice." (Rom. 12:1.) Do your best. Itmaybe 
that there is an opening and you may get in. Consecrate 
your time, your talents, all that you have, to the service 
of God. He is a good Paymaster; whatever reward He 
may give you will be a prize. 

We realize, however, that all who will be accepted as 
members of the Body of Christ must have trials both of 
faith and of loyalty before being assigned to a definite 
place in the Kingdom. Those who become reprobates 
will constitute the Second Death class. Others may be 
assigned to the Great Company. All such will be counted 
out of membership in the Royal Priesthood. As each is 
put out as unworthy, his former place becomes vacant and 

R5169 : page 27 

his crown released. Such vacancies, we understand, are 
now being filled from among those who offer themselves. 

This condition has obtained since 1881, when, we 
believe— as before stated— the general call ceased. When 
a vacancy occurs, it is reasonable to believe that from 
among those who are in a waiting attitude the one would 
be chosen who is the most highly developed and most fully 
in harmony with the Lord. 



"The Lord be with you ! " steals the benediction 
With solemn splendor like a falling star; 

In morns of joy and midnights of affliction, 
It breathes its echoed sweetness near and far. 



"The Lord be with you!" when the shadows hold you; 

And prove His loving power to soothe and bless; 
When dangers darken and when fears enfold you, 

"The Lord be with you!" in His tenderness. 



R5169 : page 28 

ABRAHAM AND THE HEBREWS 

--FEBRUARY 16.-GENESIS 12:1-9.- 

"I will bless thee, and make thy name great; 
and thou shalt be a blessing."— Genesis 12:2. 

"FATHER of the Faithful" is one of Abraham's 

titles in the Bible. He is one of the greatest 

characters in history. The most enlightened 

peoples of the earth look back to him as the 

Divinely-appointed channel through whom 

all their religious hopes and prospects have 

been received— Jews, Christians and Mohammedans. 

God's promises made to Abraham 

constitute the foundation of faith for 

all these peoples, although many of them 

are not aware of the fact. 

The Jews are Abraham's natural descendants through 
Isaac and Jacob, while the Mohammedans represent specially 
the Ishmaelite and Esau branches of Abraham's 
family. Christians profess that they have become heirs 
to the chiefest blessings promised to Abraham's Seed, by 
becoming associates and joint-heirs with Christ Jesus, 
whom they consider the antitype of Isaac and the Heir 
to all things.— Galatians 3:29. 

The New Testament claim is that the Church of Christ 
—partly from the Jews and partly from the Gentiles- 
is the antitype of Rebecca, Isaac's wife and joint-heir. 
As such, the Church is to be the Bride and Joint-heir of 
Messiah in His Kingdom. In this picture Abraham typified 
Jehovah God, Isaac typified Jesus Christ, and Rebecca 
typified the Church. The New Testament claim is 
that this Spiritual Seed of Abraham is yet to be God's 
agency in blessing Natural Israel and all the nations. 
But, alas, much of the New Testament teaching was lost 
in the darkness of medieval times. 

Christians forgot their high calling, forgot that they 
were to be joint-heirs in Messiah's Kingdom, forgot that 
that Kingdom was yet to bless all the families of the 
earth. Instead, they got the narrow view that merely 
the saintly Elect would be saved at all, and that they to 
all eternity would look over the battlements of Heaven 
and see all others of mankind in torture, and to all eternity 
hear their groans. Only now are Bible students 
gradually getting freed from the creeds and back to the 



teachings of God's Word. Only now are we learning the 
true import of St. Paul's words to the Church, "If ye be 
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according 
to the promise [made to him]."— Gal. 3:29. 

One would think that under such circumstances every 
Jew, every Christian, every Mohammedan, would have 
absolute confidence in the fact that Abraham once lived. 
Indeed, it has been merely their confidence in the promises 
of God made to Abraham that has held the Jews together 
as a nation and that has gathered Christians from 
all nations to be heirs of that same promise. Yet, strange 
to say, the learned Jews and Christians of our day are 
turning Higher Critics. They are rejecting Abraham and 
the promises of God made to him as merely mythical 
legends. How strange that they do not recognize the 
inconsistency of their position! It is like the tail of a 
dog disowning its head. 

What excuse would Jews have, living in every nation 
and speaking fifty different languages, for still keeping 
themselves Jews at all, if they repudiate the peculiar 
promises of God which relate to them as a people and 
which caused them originally to remain separate from 
every other nation, according to Divine instructions, and 
in hope of a blessing ultimately? The Jew or the 
Christian who repudiates Abraham simply makes himself 
foolish in the eyes of all intelligent thinkers. Such would 
do themselves credit to renounce all claim to Judaism 
and to Christianity, and thereby they would benefit those 
whom they would leave. 

GOD'S CALL TO ABRAHAM 

The name Abraham signifies Father of a multitude. It 
was given to him after he had responded to God's call 
and showed his faith and obedience. Originally, his name 
was Abram, which signifies exalted faith. The name 
Abraham occurs in the New Testament seventy-four 
times. Jesus referred to him nineteen times. The promises 
of God made to Abraham constitute the foundation 
for all the theology of the New Testament, as expressed 
by the Lord Jesus, by St. Paul, by St. Stephen, St. Peter 
and others. 

Abraham's birthplace was Ur of the Chaldees, one 
hundred and twenty miles to the north of the Persian 
Gulf, and was known as the richest portion of Asia. His 
father, Terah, was a heathen. Polytheism prevailed— the 
worshiping of many gods. Jewish legends respecting 
Abraham tell that as a boy he loathed the vices with 
which he was surrounded. When only fourteen years 
old, he refused to join with the family in idol-worship, 
and on one occasion destroyed seventy-two costly idols. 

From Ur the family migrated to Haran, about five hundred 
miles northwest and in the direction of Palestine. 
There Abraham remained until his father Terah's death. 
Then he removed to the land of Canaan. God's dealing 
with Abraham, according to St. Stephen's account (Acts 7:2,3), 



began while he was still in Ur. God called him 

out of the midst of the evil surroundings to be the founder 

of a new nation that would be holy and obedient to God. 

The words of the call are not fully given, nor are we informed 

of the manner in which it was conveyed. It is 

sufficient for us that Abraham recognized the message as 

from the Lord, and that he obeyed Him. 

Evidently the Lord fixed no earlier date than the death 
of Terah for Abraham's going to Canaan. Otherwise 
Abraham would not have been justified in delaying the 
matter. Doubtless Abraham had something to do with 
the migration from Ur to Haran. It took them away 
from the idolatrous scenes of the metropolis to the quieter 
conditions of pastoral life, and would be recognized by 
Abraham as a step in the right direction— toward Canaan, 
so that, on the death of his father, he could be prepared 
to quickly enter upon the Divine arrangement. 

SEPARATE YOURSELVES FROM IDOLATERS 

A portion of the call is stated: "Get thee out of thy 
country and from thy kindred, and from thy father's 
house, unto a land that I will show thee; and I will make 
of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy 
name great; and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless 
them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth (injureth) 
thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed."— Genesis 12:1-3. 

It was in harmony with this Divine call that Abraham, 
seventy-five years old, at the death of his father Terah, 
took up his journey to the land of Canaan. There were 
no landed estates then. The Henry George idea of free 
land prevailed. Sometime before this, Abraham's elder 
brother, Nahor, had married and set up an establishment 
of his own. His brother Haran had died, and Terah. 
Abraham, with the remnant of the family— and his half-sister 
Sarah (princess), who became his wife, and his 
nephew Lot, the son of his elder brother Haran— took 
their flocks and herds to Canaan, so called because inhabited 
by sons of Canaan.— Genesis 10:18. 

R5169 : page 29 

ABRAHAM'S GREAT FAITH IN GOD 

The Bible makes a clear distinction between faith and 
credulity. Abraham was not credulous, in the evil sense 
of that word, but he was full of faith. This feature of 
his character specially endeared him to the Almighty, who, 
because of it, styled him His friend. As St. Paul writes, 
"Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for 
righteousness." (Galatians 3:6.) It is not claimed in the 
Bible that Abraham was perfect, nor that any man is 
perfect. The reverse of this is declared: "There is none 
righteous (perfect), no, not one." "All come short of the 
glory of God." (Romans 3:10,23.) None measure up to 



the glorious image of God, as first it was represented in 
Father Adam. 

Neither was Abraham the friend of God because of his 
great education, nor because of any wonderful intellectual 
powers. None of his attainments are held up to us as a 
basis of his special favor from God and relationship to 
Him. Nevertheless, we see that he had intellectual powers. 
The fact that he was very rich indicates that he was 
a good manager. His skill as a leader of men and as 
a general was shown at the time that Lot and all the 
wealthy Sodomites and their possessions were taken captive 
by King Chedorlaomer and his associates. In the 

R5170 : page 29 

most commonplace language we read that Abraham 
promptly armed 3 18 of his own servants, pursued the victors, 
by strategy routed them and recovered the spoils. 

But it was not for his skill as a general, nor for his 
generosity in dealing with the spoils, nor for his generosity 
on other occasions, that God loved Abraham. The 
special quality that God esteemed in him is repeatedly 
mentioned in the Bible as having been Abraham's faith. 
"Abraham believed God." He did not believe his own 
imaginations, nor the imaginations or dreams of other men. 

CHILDREN OF ABRAHAM 

Abraham's children, from God's standpoint, include only 
those who have faith in God. The original evidence of 
this faith and obedience was circumcision of the flesh, 
which figuratively represented a turning away from sin, 
to be obedient to God, and to be inheritors with Abraham 
of the promise made to Abraham and his seed. Circumcision 
has become largely a ceremony to the Jews— a ceremony 
in which they have little or no faith. Such faithless 
circumcision entitles them to no special favors of 
the Almighty. But all Jews who still trust in Abraham 
and the promises made to Abraham are subject to Divine 
favor and, to our understanding of the Bible, will 
soon be recipients of marked evidences of Divine blessing 
at the hands of the glorious Messiah, who soon is to 
set up God's Kingdom. 

St. Paul explains that all true Christians, coming 
either from the Jews or from the Gentiles, become the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham— heirs of certain spiritual 
promises, as the natural seed are heirs of certain earthly 
promises not yet fulfilled. But St. Paul tells us that as 
the natural seed must maintain their faith in circumcision 
to mark their separateness from the Gentiles, so the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham must have an antitypical circumcision 
of the heart— still more effective, separating 
them from the world and from sin— marking them off as 
God's peculiar people zealous of good works. 

We exhort both Jews and Christians to honesty 
and faithfulness— to obedience to God: the one class, that 



they may inherit the Heavenly promises; the other class, 
that they may be ready for the inheritance of the earthly 
promises, which will be theirs as soon as the Heavenly, 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham shall have been completed by 
the "change" of the First Resurrection. 



R5170 : page 29 

ABRAHAM WAS VERY RICH 

--FEBRUARY 23. -GENESIS 13:1-18.— 

"The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh rich, and He 
addeth no sorrow therewith."— Proverbs 10:22.— R.V. 

THE BIBLE declares that there are not many 

rich, not many wise, not many learned, who 

enjoy God's special favor, but chiefly the 

poor of this world, who are rich in faith. 

But whoever concludes from this that God 

is prejudiced against the rich, or that all 

the rich are iniquitous and have gained 

their wealth through fraud, errs grievously. 

What it does teach is that God is no respecter 

of persons. Whether one be rich 

or poor, learned or ignorant, God's estimation of him is 

from the standpoint of the heart. There are both good 

and bad rich men, just as there are both good and bad 

poor men. 

Abraham, though the youngest son of the family, at 
the death of his father Terah doubtless inherited all that 
remained of his possessions, including the share of Sarah, 
his wife, who was his half-sister. The chronology of the 
narrative agrees with this; but some have erred in the 
study of it. Abraham is mentioned first amongst his 
brethren because of his greater prominence, and not because 
he was the elder. 

Added to Abraham's rich inheritance was the blessing 
of the Lord upon him. After he had accepted the Divine 
call and left his homeland to become a wandering 
shepherd and herdsman in Canaan, his flocks and herds 
increased greatly. He was, under God's blessing, very 
rich. Others also of God's servants in the past were 
greatly blessed with riches— for instance, Job. We are 
not, however, to apply our Golden Text in this way at 
the present time. The blessing of the Lord very rarely 
makes wealthy His saintly people during this Gospel Age. 
Jesus and the Apostles and the specially saintly all down 
through the Age and today are poor in this world's 
goods. 

It may be asked, Why this change in God's dealings? 
The reply of the Scriptures is, that in the past, up to the 
time of Christ, God's blessings were to men as men; but 
since the time of Christ, God's saints are "New Creatures 



in Christ." The terms of discipleship are that they exchange 
all earthly favors, riches and blessings, and sacrifice 
their claims to these in order that they may become 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their 
Lord, to the Heavenly inheritance— and share in the 
Messianic Kingdom and its glory, honor and immortality. 

God dealt with Abraham as a friend and gave him 
earthly blessings and promised him earthly blessing in 
the future life. Jesus and His followers God accepts not 
as friends, but as sons. His promises to these are not 
earthly, but Heavenly, spiritual privileges and hopes in 
the present life, and spiritual glory and immortality— far 
above angels— in the life to come. God's favor to this 
House of Sons, of whom Jesus is the Head (Hebrews 3:6), 
is manifested often in the trials, difficulties, chastisements 
and earthly losses and afflictions which they experience, 
all of which are designed to work out for them 
"a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." The 
beauty and harmony of the Bible can be understood only 

R5170 : page 30 

by those who thus "rightly divide the Word of Truth" and 
differentiate between the blessings and promises to the 
Ancient Worthies as distinct from those which appertain 
to the followers of Jesus. 

ABRAHAM'S FRIENDS NOT JOINT-HEIRS 

Lot was a man of nearly Abraham's age, his nephew, 
the son of his brother Haran. They were friends and 
companions. God did not call Lot, nor any other of 
Abraham's relatives, but merely himself, to be the recipient 
of the promises— the channel through whom they 
would be fulfilled. This did not hinder Lot from being 
with his uncle, but indeed permitted him to share the 
blessings of Divine Providence, which guided Abraham's 
affairs. God's Covenant and promises were not made 
with Lot, but with Abraham only. Similarly the spiritual 
children of Abraham alone are the heirs of the Abrahamic 
promise, and not their friends or relatives, although 
the latter may share a reflex blessing of spiritual influence 
through association with them. 

These spiritual children of Abraham, Christ and His 
consecrated followers, are particularly specified as the 
heirs of the Abrahamic promise by St. Paul. (Galatians 3:29.) 
"They all have a faith similar to that of Abraham, 
and a spirit of obedience similar to his. Jesus is their 
Head, Captain and Leader, as well as their Redeemer, and 
they become His disciples by a covenant of sacrifice similar 
to His own. His promise to them is, "To him that 
overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne"— 
the Kingdom which is to fulfil all the gracious promises 
which God made to Abraham— to Jews and Gentiles. 

RICHES OFTEN BRING TROUBLES 



God's blessing upon Abraham, shared by Lot, led on 
to more or less of ambition and strife, not between the two 
men themselves, but between their servants. Abraham 
loved peace, and perceived that it would be wise that the 
two families should part company. Lot assented. Abraham 
gave him his choice as to the section of country; 
and Lot chose the most fertile— the plain of Sodom, in the 
Valley of Jordan, and the Plain of Sodom, afterward devastated 
as a judgment from the Lord, is now the Valley 
of the Dead Sea. 

Lot made his home in Sodom while his herds and 
flocks were pastured in the fertile regions surrounding. 
Doubtless Lot's wife had to do with the choice. She loved 
a beautiful home. To her the surroundings of Sodom 
were very attractive. The family lived there three years, 
although the riches of the country had a debasing effect 
upon the people. Lot's righteous soul was vexed, more 
than offsetting the charm of the country which his wife 
so loved. Looking back with longing heart at the time 
of its destruction, she was overtaken in the catastrophe 
which her husband and daughters escaped. 

R5171 : page 30 

Abraham, on the contrary, fixed his heart and hopes 
upon the gracious promises of God, which appertained less 
to the present and more to the future life. Sarah, his 
wife, was a real helpmate, who shared her husband's 
hopes and desired to co-labor with him faithfully for their 
accomplishment. In these two families, both well-intentioned, 
we see illustrated the difference between seeking 
chiefly the Divine approval and seeking chiefly earthly 
welfare and ease. 

Many Christian people today make similar mistakes 
to that which Lot made. They allow conflicting earthly 
interests to separate them from the blessings of God's 
greater favor. They thus involve themselves and their 
families in the snare of the wicked, while at heart preferring 
righteousness. 

The Master's advice should be remembered, "Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His Righteousness." Do 
that which is in harmony with that aspiration and leave 
to God the oversight and care of earthly interests, that 
He may give you the lessons and experiences most helpful 
for you. Those who follow His advice find peace 
and joy which the world can neither give nor take away— 
"the peace of God, which passeth all understanding." 

GOD'S BLESSING MAKES RICH 

Whoever has the Lord's blessing is rich indeed, regardless 
of the amount of this world's goods which he 
possesses. Of what value is all the wealth of a Croesus if 
it bring not peace, joy and happiness? Wherever we go 
we find all— rich and poor— seeking pleasure, seeking the 



springs of joy; but how few of these seekers ever find it! 
Alas! it seems impossible for the world to understand the 
great fact that the blessing of the Lord constitutes the 
true fund of riches and pleasures forevermore— more 
than the life that now is, and the coming one! 

Those whom the Lord makes rich with His promises 
and His favor, His guidance and His blessing, have the 
joy which others are vainly seeking. These true riches 
during this Gospel Age are obtainable by all who have 
the "hearing ear," and who learn of God's favor in 
Christ. In Christ are hidden all the treasures of Divine 
Wisdom, Love and Power. 

The only ones who obtain a share of these blessings 
at the present time are such as become followers of Jesus 
through faith and consecration of their lives to His service. 
Nevertheless, in Him are also restitution blessings 
for the world of mankind, which will be dispensed during 
the thousand years of His reign, which will begin at His 
Second Coming. St. Peter tells us of this, and points 
us to the fact that it has been "foretold by all the Holy 
Prophets since the world began."— Acts 3:19-21. 

God's Covenant with Abraham is several times repeated 
in slightly different form. One of these presentations 
is a part of today's study; but as this will be the 
topic of our study next week, we will here merely allude 
to it and ask the reader to note that it was not a Heavenly 
promise, but an earthly one— "all the land which thou 
seest"; and that it was to an earthly people— "I will make 
thy seed as the dust of the earth." These are wholly different 
promises from those which appertain to the Spiritual 
Seed of Abraham, as our lesson of next week will 
show. 



R5171 : page 30 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL: - 

Just about eighteen months ago I wrote to thank you 
for the great happiness your books had brought to my husband 
and self. Today I write to tell you that he finished 
his course— on September 25. 

It was truly as St. Paul says, "In the twinkling of an 
eye." He had been out, and was telling me something he 
had seen— and stopped in the middle of a sentence. 

In your answer to my last letter you said you noticed we 
were anxious to spread the Truth, and that perhaps we 
should be given more opportunity. He was. He became 
mate on the ferry here, and as it is quite a big thing, he 
had many opportunities of talking to people, and I don't 
think he ever missed one. 

Last year people used to laugh, but this year they were 
either annoyed or said, "Well, we can all see there's something 
coming, and perhaps you're right— hope you are!" 



Several, I know, thanked him for telling them of your 
books, and said they were just what they were wanting. He 
always said he wasn't nearly good enough for the "little 
flock," but it seems to me he was just the sort you describe 
in Vol. V, page 237. He hated the thought of the "Great 

R5171 : page 31 

Company," as he did anything that was half and half; and 
he certainly never turned his back on the Truth. 

His death was a great shock to everybody in the town, 
for he was considered one of its healthiest inhabitants, and 
he was only forty-three. As he lay there, I said to the doctor 
(who did not know him personally), "He never played 
a mean trick on anybody in all his life," and the doctor said, 
"You've only to look at his face to see that, Mrs. Childe." 

People who knew him always said he was the most absolutely 
honest man (very often to his own detriment) they 
had ever met. His deck hands have told me he was the 
nicest man they ever worked for— so fair and just, and 
always ready to stand up for them if anyone else tried to 
down them; and I would rather have that than a good word 
from the King— one doesn't put on company manners for 
one's deck hands. 

It may interest you to know that my husband tried twice 
(before we heard the Truth, and principally for the protection 
of myself and the children) to join a secret order. 
Each time— in different towns— the same men black-balled 
him. They had injured him, and so hated him. Since he 
knew the Truth, he has been asked to join (which is much 
against their rules, I believe), not only that order, but several 
others. They said it would make things so much easier! 
Of course, he stood clear, and was not in any "bundle" 
whatsoever. 

We were left with almost no money— had lost all we had 
a few years ago. I have three children— 1 1 and 9 years and 
10 months old. I hadn't a relative nearer than 2,000 miles 
away. I left it all with God, knowing "our bread and water 
were sure," anyway. And now we are provided for, for at 
least two years! There was no appeal made— just everybody 
wanted to help. Ah! — 

"I read from the past that my future shall be 
Far better than all my fears!" 

They all respected my husband for his character, though 
many thought he had "queer views." I should so value a 
word from you at this time. I don't know what I should 
do without the Truth now; I should be despairing. But now 
every newspaper I take up tells me I shall soon see him 
again! Thank God! I can say— 

"The billows that guarded my sea-girt path 
Carried my Lord on their crest!" 

He has been as good as all His promises. 

With many thanks for the comfort (under God) you 
have given me in this, my greatest trouble, I remain, 
Yours sincerely, 

ELEANOR I. CHILDE.-B. C, Can. 



page 3 1 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your letter to colporteurs I have received, and I wish to 
express my great appreciation of its words of encouragement 
and counsel. I also wish to thank you for the offered gift — 
I chose a "Heavenly Manna"— as my other one is wearing out. 
I could not live without these words of Truth each day, as 
they give needed strength in trials, and are a source of great 
blessings. 

The WATCH TOWER, too, is eagerly waited for. Each issue 
is most precious. When I saw the last report, I felt so glad 
that I had been permitted a very small share in the work. Oh! 
the joy of service. I wish to briefly tell a little experience 
regarding our newspaper here, The Piqua Leader-Dispatch, 
which gives us the sermon each Monday. 

Quite recently I was in the office on business, and being 
well known to the editor and others of their force, they called 
me in to inform me that a local minister had just been in to 
request the discontinuance of our sermon feature. They inquired 
of me the "why." 

I knew at once what brought this on, for we were that 
week putting out our recent "Hell" tracts. This was the 
result. I carefully, wisely (I trust) chose my words in 
answer. I also stated that I had worked this city for a year 
or so in the interest of the Bible Society, and knew of many 
who were much helped by the reading of the sermons. I said 
that all great men have enemies, but ours is a Christian cause, 
and a great success, too. 

Their reply was that personally they considered it very 
"small" for any minister to take such a stand. 

A week or so later this same minister publicly announced 
that he would expose "Pastor Russell," our society, Bible 
Students, etc. And he did— to a moderate audience. But the 
wrath of men must praise God; for he spoke of our untiring 
zeal, of the wonderful scope of the work, but couldn't understand 
where the money came from ! 

Then he related how he had requested The Leader-Dispatch 
to discontinue the sermons. Their answer had been, however, 
that "they were too valuable!" "Then," he added, "if they 
will put them before us, we can at least refuse to read them." 

I think this a good advertisement, don't you? But I found 
Catholics and Protestants, Christians, Jews and non-professors, 
who read them. Thanks be to God! How glad we are 
that in "due time" all shall know, even the least. We pray 
richest blessings upon you, dear brother, in the coming year. 

Yours by His Grace, MRS. GEO. H. KELLER. 



R5171 : page 31 
MR. EDITOR:- 



Enclosed herewith please find clipping from the Gospel 
Messenger, December 14, 1912 issue, containing an article 
entitled "Hell and Damnation," by B. E. Kesler, River Bend, 
Colo. This paper is a Dunkard paper, or more properly is 
the mouthpiece of "The Church of the Brethren." 

You will note that Mr. Kesler makes the charge that 
Pastor Russell makes all kinds of fanciful translations of the 
Scriptures in order to sustain what he designates your 
"theories." It is another case of "throwing dust" into the 
eyes of the people. I don't understand how any one can write 
such an article without knowing that he is misrepresenting 
the facts, and in proof note what he says respecting 2 Peter 2:4. 
Here he makes you say that God cast the angels that 
sinned down to the fires of Gehenna, whereas you plainly show 
in the pamphlet, which he evidently read, that the Greek word 
here is not "Gehenna," but "Tartaroo." This I find is what 
the Emphatic Diaglott, as well as Strong's Exhaustive Concordance 
of the Scriptures, reveals it to be. 

Is it not now time in the Lord's providence to answer the 
charge, "It is a peculiarity of his writings, generally, that he 
doesn't seem to find his theories taught in any of the commonly 
accepted translations of the Bible, and so he makes 
bold to make his own translation as he goes, and in this way 
tries to cover up his assumed prerogative, to condemn as 
'heretics' and 'hypocrites' all who do not bow at his shrine 
and accept his theories"? 

I will not now take the time to call attention to other 
discrepancies in this article of nonsense, but will leave it to 
your judgment of the Lord's will in the matter. Surely now 
is the separating time; and all who are professing to be the 
Lord's people are most surely now taking their stand for 
either Truth or Error, as never before. 

We surely can never appreciate the Present Truth enough, 
nor render unto the Lord sufficient praise or thanks for the 
anointing of our eyes with the "eye salve" of Truth through 
your faithful ministry. 

Yours in the Beloved, M. L. WOLF 



Thanks, dear friend! It is saddening to find religious 
teachers striving to throw "dust" in the mental eyes of their 

R5 172: page 31 

followers. Some are "blind leaders of the blind," while others 
apparently are "willingly ignorant." Like the Pharisees of 
old, some have taken away from their too trustful followers 
the "key of knowledge," and are grieved that the people are 
now being taught better. However, the result is that some 
are getting awake and learning to think, and to study the 
Bible for themselves, who otherwise might have slept on. It 
is God's "due time" for His faithful to be awakened and to 
come to a knowledge of the Truth; and for aught we know 
He is using the wrath of man to praise Himself. 
A still more despicable course is followed by some claiming 



to be ministers of Christ. Unable to controvert Pastor 
Russell's teachings they slander him shamefully. Professing 
to be Christians, they insinuate and come as close as possible 
to infracting the lowest standards of human law respecting 
slander and libel. They that preach the Golden Rule and 
profess to believe that everybody who breaks it is going to 
everlasting torture, do they forget the words of St. John that 
their course is in the sight of our Lord really "murder"?— 
1 John 3:15. 



page 3 1 

MY DEAR PASTOR:- 

Received the last WATCH TOWER for 1912 yesterday; and 
oh, how much good it has done me already! The article which 
appeals to me specially now is one entitled: "The Philosophy 
of Our Daily Experiences." It is meat in due season for me; 
and I thank the Lord for such strengthening food, as I am 
now undergoing some "training." By His grace and help 
assisting, I would like to come to the place where I will delight 
to do His will. 

God bless you and keep you till the end. 

MINNIE J. WILSON. 



page 33 
