To Our Readers
BEGINNING with this issue, the format of Awake! will reflect some changes. Although certain things will be different, much will remain the same.
Awake! is still committed to the objective that it has held for many decades. As explained on page 4, “this journal is published for the enlightenment of the entire family.” Examining world events, telling about people in various cultures, describing the wonders of creation, discussing health, or explaining science for the nonscientist, Awake! will continue to inform our readers, keeping them alert to the world around us.
In its issue of August 22, 1946, Awake! pledged: “Integrity to the truth will be the highest aim of this magazine.” True to that promise, Awake! has always endeavored to publish factual information. To that end, articles are thoroughly researched and carefully checked to ensure accuracy. But this journal has demonstrated “integrity to the truth” in an even more important way.
Awake! has always pointed readers to the Bible. However, beginning with this issue, Awake! will feature even more Bible-based articles than in the past. (John 17:17) Awake! will also continue to feature articles that show how the Bible’s practical counsel can help us to live meaningful and successful lives today. For example, much Bible-based guidance is provided in the series “Young People Ask . . .” and “The Bible’s Viewpoint,” which will remain regular features of this journal. In addition, Awake! will continue to direct readers to the Bible’s promise of the peaceful new world that will soon replace the present lawless system of things.—Revelation 21:3, 4.
What else will be different? Beginning with this issue, Awake! will be published monthly in most of the 82 languages in which it appears (formerly it was published semimonthly in many languages).a “Watching the World,” which has been a regular feature since 1946, will still appear in each issue but will be reduced from two pages to one. On page 31, we are also introducing an exciting new regular feature called “How Would You Answer?” What will it contain, and how can you use it?
Take a moment to look at page 31 of this issue. Some sections of the page will appeal to young readers; others will challenge the memory of more advanced Bible students. The section “When in History?” will help you build a time line showing when Bible characters lived and when major events happened. While the answers to the section “From This Issue” will be found throughout the magazine, the answers to most of the other questions will appear on a designated page in the same issue, where they will be printed upside down. Why not do some research before you read those answers and then share with others what you learn? You might even use this new feature, “How Would You Answer?” as a basis for family or group Bible discussions.
Some 60 years ago, Awake! made this promise: “As for coverage this magazine will endeavor to treat information from a world-wide rather than local viewpoint. It will appeal to all honest people of all lands. . . . The material and contents of the magazine . . . will be informative, educational and interesting to the greatest number of persons, young and old alike.” Readers from all over the world agree that Awake! has kept that promise. We assure you that it will continue to do so.
The Publishers
[Footnote]
Awake! is published quarterly in some languages, and the features discussed in this article may not appear in all such editions.
[Pictures on page 3]
Called “The Golden Age” in 1919, the name was changed to “Consolation” in 1937, and to “Awake!” in 1946
[Pictures on page 4]
“Awake!” has long pointed its readers to the Bible
[Credit Lines]
Guns: U.S. National Archives photo; starving child: WHO photo by W. Cutting

