The Bible’s Viewpoint
Why Look to the Bible for Guidance?
“All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight.”—2 Timothy 3:16.
WHERE do you go for guidance in your life? Today there is a superabundance of advice available on virtually every imaginable subject. Still, many people look to the ancient writings of the Bible for guidance.
The majority, however, regard the Bible as of little value, especially in this age of information and modern technology. Some respected educators and scientists hold to the idea that the Bible is no longer relevant. Are they right? Considering the many sources of guidance so prevalent today, why should anyone look to the Bible?
A Book of Truth
On one occasion Jesus Christ was resting by a fountain and had a conversation with a Samaritan woman. He said to her: “God is a Spirit, and those worshiping him must worship with spirit and truth.” (John 4:24) These words show that there is a form of worship acceptable to God. For our worship to be rendered with truth, it must harmonize with what God has revealed about himself in the Bible. God’s Word contains the truth.—John 17:17.
However, there are many religions professing belief in the Bible, and each one seems to teach different things. As a result, there is much confusion as to what the Bible really teaches. Is Jesus God, or is he the Son of God? Is there life after death or not? Is hell a real place where people are tormented after death? Is Satan an actual person? What does it mean to be a Christian? Do our actions and thoughts really matter to God? Does true love justify premarital sex? Is it wrong to drink alcoholic beverages?a Various religions claim to teach the truth about these matters. But religious doctrines are often in conflict with one another. They cannot all be the truth.—Matthew 7:21-23.
How, then, are you to find the truth about God and the form of worship that pleases him? Suppose you found out that you needed surgery to correct a serious medical condition. What would you do? If possible, you would thoroughly search to find the best surgeon available for that type of operation. You would consider his credentials and experience, contact him, and talk with him. Finally, after you were convinced on the basis of the evidence that he was the best, you would place your trust in him and let him operate on you. Others may have a different opinion. But your faith in this surgeon is now well-grounded.
In the same way, if you make an honest and thorough examination of the available evidence, you can build faith in God and the Bible. (Proverbs 2:1-4) In seeking answers to questions about the kind of worship that is acceptable to God, you have a choice. You can look to the conflicting teachings and opinions of men, or you can consider the Bible’s viewpoint.
Accurate and Practical
A careful examination of the Bible will provide you with considerable evidence that “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial.”b (2 Timothy 3:16, 17) For instance, the Bible is filled with detailed prophecies. History documents their fulfillment. (Isaiah 13:19, 20; Daniel 8:3-8, 20-22; Micah 5:2) Although not a science textbook, the Bible is scientifically accurate. It contains facts about nature and health that were written thousands of years before scientists were able to reach similar conclusions.—Leviticus 11:27, 28, 32, 33; Isaiah 40:22.
Moreover, the Bible helps us make wise decisions. Its pages contain an abundance of practical advice on family life, physical and emotional health, business, and other day-to-day matters. Proverbs 2:6, 7 says: “Jehovah himself gives wisdom; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment. And for the upright ones he will treasure up practical wisdom.” By looking to the Bible for guidance, you can train your perceptive powers “to distinguish both right and wrong.”—Hebrews 5:14.
God’s Word also helps us to understand the purpose of life. (John 17:3; Acts 17:26, 27) It explains the meaning of world conditions. (Matthew 24:3, 7, 8, 14; 2 Timothy 3:1-5) In it God shows us how he will remove badness from the earth and enable mankind to enjoy perfect health and eternal life.—Isaiah 33:24; Daniel 2:44; Revelation 21:3, 4.
Millions have experienced firsthand that the Bible is indeed a reliable and trustworthy source of practical wisdom. The publishers of Awake! invite you to examine the series of articles entitled “The Bible’s Viewpoint,” featured in every issue of this magazine. By doing so, you may find additional evidence pointing to the Bible as the best source of guidance for your own life.
[Footnotes]
“The Bible’s Viewpoint”—a regular feature of Awake!—will consider these and other questions in future issues.
For evidence that the Bible is divinely inspired, see the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
HAVE YOU WONDERED?
▪ What form of worship is acceptable to God?—John 4:24.
▪ What must you do to benefit from the wisdom of God?—Proverbs 2:1-4.
▪ In what way is the Bible a source of practical guidance?—Hebrews 5:14.

