Announcements
“CONTINUE IN THE THINGS YOU LEARNED”
In the book of life-giving knowledge, the Bible, is to be found this admonition: “Continue in the things you learned.” (2 Tim. 3:14, NW) The servants of the Almighty God, Jehovah, have learned from this source of knowledge the truths so vitally necessary to one’s gaining life. They have studied these truths and now want to unselfishly aid others to learn of this knowledge. During the month of July these faithful servants will offer to others this information by means of the book “This Means Everlasting Life”, together with a self-covered booklet. If you have learned these truths and are now happy in them, why not work along with Jehovah’s witnesses? Associate with others who are continuing in these same things and then report your activities to the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses, or send it to the Watchtower. A contribution of 35c is asked for the above combination of book and booklet.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
From August 4 to August 19 inclusive the Bethel home, offices and factory printing plant will be closed down to give the family a rest period. No mail or correspondence will be handle during this period. There will also be an unavoidable delay during all of August resulting from the accumulation of mail. Bear this in mind by making plans early and ordering needed supplies well in advance of this time.
SAVE YOUR “WATCHTOWER”
For a complete library and reference file of the many important scriptures discussed in The Watchtower during the year, why not retain and file your copies of the Watchtower magazine after you have read them? You would then have an excellent Bible study aid, providing a complete and convenient index of all the subjects and scriptures found in that year’s Watchtower listed in the December 15 issue. This would prove to be a valuable source of information not only for research, but excellent for answering Bible questions.
CORRECTIONS
In the April 1, 1951, Watchtower there was published a Chart of Outstanding Historical Dates, pages 221, 222. In connection with the date 1918 B.C. Acts 13:19 was cited. It should have been Acts 13:17-20, NW. Along with the date A.D. 70 Matthew 23:27 was cited. It should have been Matthew 23:37. In the May 1, 1951, Watchtower the early copies of that issue had a line misplaced. Page 262, first column, seventh line from the top, should read “not observe to do all the words of this law”.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 8: How Practical Is the Bible?
Week of July 15: Why the Bible Is Specially Practical for Our Day.

