“Pure Language”
WHAT a confused, disunited and bemuddled old world this present system of things is! Thousands of nationalities, races and tribes separated and divided by their prejudices, customs and, more particularly, by their religious traditions and human philosophies. Besides the host of heathen cults, there are literally hundreds of sects within Christendom, all opposed to one another over political, commercial and religious issues, even to the point where they wage violent wars of bloodshed against one another—Catholic against Catholic and Protestant against Protestant. No, it is not so much the 2,796 different languages and dialects spoken by the people as it is their babble over confusing religious creeds, that divide and separate earth’s population into so many antagonistic groups.a
Of course, the principal cause for this global state of confusion and perplexity, especially since the year 1914, is the god of darkness and confusion, Satan the Devil. In that year the old Dragon, Satan, was hurled down out of heaven and his wicked demonic angels with him. Consequently, “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time” before he is bound in the abyss of restraint.—Rev. 12:7-9, 12; 20:1-3, NW.
Now it may come as a shocking surprise to hear that the clergy of both heathendom and Christendom have been used with great success by the Devil to deceive and mislead the people and bring them into this present state of disunity, but the facts, if investigated, prove this to be the truth. By the teaching of deceptive lies and by suppressing the truth, organized religion has blinded the minds of the people to the light of truth and bound them in chains of darkness, superstition and fear.—Deut. 18:20; Jer. 14:13-15; 23:25-32; Matt. 23:2, 4.
Is there no way out for the people, no remedy or relief? Ah, yes, indeed! Twenty-six centuries ago Jehovah God declared: “For then will I turn to the peoples a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve him with one consent.” (Zeph. 3:9, AS) It is now in this period of time just prior to the battle of Armageddon that this prophecy is in the course of fulfillment, for the preceding verse Zep 3:8 describes other things taking place today: nations of this old world being gathered in order that Jehovah may pour upon them all his fierce anger and consume them with devouring fire.
But what is the “pure language”? Says the psalmist: “The words of Jehovah are pure words; as silver tried in a furnace on the earth, purified seven times.” “Every word of God is pure.” Every word of Jehovah is the truth! (Ps. 12:6, AS; Prov. 30:5; John 17:17) The “pure language” as revealed in the inspired textbook of truth, the Bible, is the glorious message that tells about the establishment of a new world of righteousness. What a mighty unifying force this proclamation is!
Already hundreds of thousands of people out of all nations have learned this pure language and now “call upon the name of Jehovah” and “serve him with one consent” in pure worship. You too can join this mighty crowd by reading your Bible. Get a copy of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures, for it further purifies this language by reaching back to the purity of the original inspired writings. Thus, by diligent study you too can be rescued from impending destruction at Armageddon.
[Footnotes]
Further details are cited in The Watchtower, September 15, 1950.

