page 1 
VOL. XVII. JANUARY 1, 1896. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 2 

Views From the Tower 3 

The Earth Saw and Trembled 5 

Poem: Still Let Our Hallowed Altars 

Burn 8 

The One Thing Desirable 8 

Bible Study: The Forerunner of Christ 10 

Bible Study: The Boy Jesus 11 

Bible Study: The Ministry of John the 

Baptist 11 

Bible Study: The Early Ministry of 

Jesus 12 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 

2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church.— Acts 3:19-21; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Associate. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



BY GIVING YOUR FULL ADDRESS at the head of each letter, you 
will save us much valuable time, and get your mail more promptly. 

THANKS FOR PROMPTNESS. 



IN compliance with our request in last issue we are hearing from large 
numbers of TOWER readers. Thanks! We now ask consideration 
of the fact that our mails are very large, as an explanation for delays in 
answering, and for the brevity of our replies. 

We greatly appreciate and enjoy your letters, being always specially 
pleased with those which acquaint us with your spiritual welfare. 
Please accept the WATCH TOWER articles as our responses; for, indeed, 
many of the subjects treated are suggested by your questions and evident 
needs. 

A MUSICAL NUMBER. 



WE hope soon to issue a musical number of the TOWER. It will 
contain some strictly new pieces of vocal music, written specially 
for it, on the lines of our spiritual hopes and joys. You may expect it 
February 1. 



R1911 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



PRAISE from thankful hearts, to the great Giver of 
all good, should be the uppermost sentiment with 
all the children of the great King at the dawn of the New 
Year 1896. Our praise should be for mercies past, and no 
less for the exceeding great and precious promises which 
stretch out before all who in deed and in truth are under 
the protection of the precious blood and consecrated fully 
to the will of God. 

"Give me a thankful heart, 
Like, Lord, to thine!" 
As a miser counts over repeatedly the gold he loves, 
and thus comes to value it more highly, so the children of 
God should count and recount the Lord's favors, and study 
their benefits, that they may appreciate them the more. 
The fully consecrated will, in the light of God's Word, find 
cause for thankfulness in the very things which once they 
would have reckoned as adversities; for they have learned 
that all things work together for good to them that love 
God [supremely], to those called according to his purpose. 
He who has freely given us Christ, shall he not with and 
through him freely give us all things? (Rom. 8:32.) Therefore, 
those who have rightly accepted God's "unspeakable 
gift" find in him abundant cause for thankfulness and rejoicing. 
Having in him the promise, not only of the life 
that is to come, but also of the present life (1 Tim. 4:8), 
they sing:— 

"Christ for sickness, Christ for health: 

Christ for poverty or wealth: 

Christ for joy, and Christ for sorrow; 



Christ to-day and Christ to-morrow: 
Christ my Savior, Christ my Friend: 
Christ my Treasure without end." 

After considering our personal blessings and privileges 
and rendering praise therefor, let us, as members of his 
Church, render thanks for divine favor upon his people 
and his work, and upon our united, though feeble, efforts 
in connection with it shown in the annual report 
in our last issue: also for the privilege of being co-workers 
together with God in the great plan of the ages;— for the 
privilege of sharing now the reproaches of them that reproached 
him, and thus filling up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ (Col. 1:24); and for the glorious 
prospect that those who suffer with him for righteousness' 
sake shall reign with him, if faithful unto the end. Let us 
be thankful, too, that as the darkness settles down upon the 
world, "ye brethren are not in darkness;" and that, being 
enlightened, the very things which cause the hearts of the 
world to fail with fear, and for looking forward to those 
things coming upon the earth, are to us evidences that our 
deliverance draweth nigh; causing us to lift up our heads 
with hope, and our hearts with rejoicing. 

The year, as it opens upon the Nominal Church, finds 
it flourishing as to numbers, influence and outward prosperity. 
"Rich, increased in goods, and having need of 
nothing," is its sentiment, as foretold by our Lord. (Rev. 3:14-19.) 
Never was there so much wealth invested in 
church buildings, equipments, choirs and minister's salaries. 
Never were the numbers of members so great, and 
never did they represent so much wealth. In addition, there 
is a general tendency toward union, federation, "confederacy," 
which is popularly considered an evidence of 
growth in grace. Never were there so many "young 
people" active in Christian work; and never so many 
"Boy's Brigades" learning the use of carnal weapons. 

But inwardly what do we see?— We see (1) a few in 
every congregation who are perplexed,— who know not 
whether to think that the outward prosperity is genuine or 
artificial, who know not whether to condemn the majority 

R1911 : page 4 

for having lost the spirit and power of full consecration, 

or whether they should accept the verdict of the majority 

that they are "old fogy," and the old sermons, old hymns, 

and old reverence for God and his Word and consecration 

of heart and life merely old-time nonsense. They hunger 

and thirst after righteousness sometimes, and try to satisfy 

their longings by listening to sermons which know nothing 

of either the cross or the crown, being prepared for the unregenerate 

"tares" who have no appreciation of those things. 

Amongst her learned men in seminaries and pulpits 
the doctrine of Evolution has supplanted the Bible doctrine 
of the fall, the ransom and coming restitution. And 
her great men, with very few exceptions, vie with each 
other in destroying the faith which once they preached,— 



in discrediting the inspiration and truthfulness of the Bible, 
under the name of "higher criticism." This flood of infidelity 
has not yet reached the masses: when it does Psalm 91:7 
will have its fulfilment;— thousands will fall from the 
faith now held by them credulously, but not understood, 
into mere social moralism, denying the fall and consequently 
the redemption from its condemnation, and all 
necessity for an imputed righteousness of Christ. This is 
the position of the leaders now, and both reason and Scripture 
indicate that "many will follow their pernicious ways, 
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken 
of." The few years ahead are important ones, and demand 
the energy of all who are awake to the truth, to extend 
the helping hand before the falling away becomes general. 

The outlook amongst the nations is unrest— "fear of 
those things coming upon the earth." Never were they so 
well prepared for strife, yet never did they so much dread 
it, and with good cause. 

The Far Eastern question, in which all the great nations 
of the world are interested, as well as China, Japan and 
Russia, is still unsettled; it is merely eclipsed for the time 
by the Turkish or Eastern-European question. Turkey 
has long been known as "the sick man" amongst the 
nations; and the Great Powers of Europe, all anxious to 
get hold of his possessions, fear each other. Constantinople 
has one of the choicest harbors of the world, and, in the 
hands of progressive people, would be of inestimable importance. 
It is coveted by Russia, which is practically an 
inland country, her Baltic and Arctic sea ports being ice-locked 
for a considerable portion of the year. 

The nations of Europe fear any increase of Russian 
power or influence, as likely to overshadow their own; and 
hence have aided Turkey to resist her powerful and acquisitive 
neighbor, Russia. It was for this reason that the 
Crimean war was fought, and, for Russia's limitation, one of 
the terms of that peace stipulates that no foreign warships 
may pass through the Dardanelles without permission from 
the Turkish government, Russia's ships being the only foreign 

R1912:page4 

warships that would probably desire to pass. Hence 
Turkey is called "the buffer kingdom." The "sick-man's" 
government, always execrable, has since become still worse, 
and Russian intrigue has fostered rebellions. But these 
seceding provinces were not allowed to fall into Russia's 
hands, nor into Austria's. The great powers met and 
decided to organize a line of petty princedoms between 
Turkey on the one side and Austria and Russia on the other. 
These are Roumania, Bulgaria, Servia and Montenegro. 

The recent massacres of tens of thousands of Armenian 
Christians (Catholics, slightly different from the Roman 
and Greek Catholics) in the Sultan's dominions is probably 
due either to the breaking down of the thoroughly 
corrupt government, or else to conspirators in power, who 
hope to secure the overthrow of the present government by 



"the powers," and thus to gain some personal advantages. 
The Sultan, once very tractable to the wishes of Great Britain, 
believing her a friend, is now distrustful, and fears that, 
as she has taken and held Egypt, she may intend now to 
grasp Syria and Palestine. 

The English people clamor for interference for the 
protection of life and order, and do not in general realize 
the importance of Turkey as a "buffer;" and their 
rulers fear to mention it lest it should stir up Russian pride 
and precipitate an undesirable conflict. Russia stands 
waiting, as for a rich morsel, but preferring to get it at a 
cheaper price than war. The situation is greatly strained 
every way. If it results in war, the Turks will make a 
stern resistance, and after their fall, Russia, with her army 
already on the spot, will be unwilling to let go, especially 
as she now has the French navy for an ally on the sea. 
This would be likely to involve all Europe, and perhaps 
Japan, in a war such as was not since there was a nation. 

But while the outlook is threatening, and many consider 
it sure that such a general European war will break 
out during this year, we do not share their fear. Turkey 
may be still further dismembered, or even entirely cut up, 
but the general European war will certainly not come for 
several years yet; not for ten years, we feel quite confident. 
If it be asked upon what evidence we reckon, we 
answer, (1) Upon the divine prediction of Rev. 7:1-3, 
that the "Four angels" (agents) must hold back that great 
storm until the truth shall first prepare or "seal the servants 
of God in their foreheads [intellectually]." (2) Upon the 
fact that the Scriptures clearly teach that first the union or 
federation of Protestants shall take place, and enable them 
to act conjointly with Papacy in support of "the kings of 
the earth and their armies," before the great overthrow of 
all government will take place. Whenever the general 
European war occurs, we may feel tolerably sure that its 
outcome will be world-wide anarchy, accompanied eventually 
by all the horrors of the French Revolution— worse by 
far than those perpetrated recently in Turkey. Of that 
time the prophet declares every man's hand shall be against 
his neighbor; and our Lord says that unless those days should 
be shortened (by the setting up of the elect in the kingdom) 
there would be no flesh saved.— Zech. 8:10; Matt. 24:22. 

We have gone into this matter at some length, because 
"Adventists" are industriously teaching that when 
Turkey falls the Lord's second advent and the burning up 

R1912:page5 

of the world will immediately follow. This has long been 
their mistaken theory, often disappointed. They fail to 
see that our Lord is a spirit being, whose second advent, 
glory and power, will be spiritual, not fleshly; that his 
Millennial parousia— presence— will be invisible to men; 
and that his kingdom will be the invisible power that shall 
use the nations to overthrow one another, and thus prepare 
men for the reign of the Prince of Peace.— See MILLENNIAL 



DAWN, VOL. II., page 103. 

Much more dangerous looking, to our view, is the 
threatened rupture between Great Britain and the United 
States. Related by ties of blood and history and language 
and religious sentiment, a war between these countries 
would be a specially sad picture. Yet the consanguinity 
of the two nations in some respects increases the danger; 
for both are courageous, both boastful and proud, both full 
of resources, and both confident of ability to teach the 
other "a needed lesson;" and neither is willing to give an 
inch, nor to acknowledge an error. Yes, we must admit, 
there is great danger of a war, which would be a disgrace 
to the two nations which, more than any others, should be 
able to settle disputes justly and amicably. Nevertheless, 
we do not expect war. We have great confidence that the 
British government will find a way to arbitrate its dispute 
with little Venezuela. Such a course would be very much 
to their credit every way. Yet thoughtless public opinion, 
with "brag and bluster," may force Lord Salisbury to say 
and do things very contrary to his own judgment. It is 
safe to assume that the United States Government dare not, 
and will not, retreat from the essentials of its present position. 



Matters get wonderfully mixed up sometimes. For instance, 
it was the peaceable, order-loving Christian people 
who insisted that British diplomats and, if necessary, gunboats 
should exact of China reparation for the murder of 
Christian missionaries, and who secured the execution of 
seventeen Chinese rioters. It is the same class of peace-loving 
people who are now urging Lord Salisbury to begin 
a war at once upon Turkey— in defense of the poor Armenians. 
Even the most ardent peace advocates must admit 
that, in Turkey's case, everything possible seems to 
have been done to avoid war; and that it is merely a 
question of time until the Turks will utterly exterminate 
the Armenians, if "the powers that be" do not interfere 
with physical force. The perplexing questions are: 
would it be more righteous and honorable to go to war or 
to permit such atrocities? 

What should be the attitude of God's fully consecrated 
saints upon this subject? Should we favor war and bloodshed 
in a good cause, or a peace that would leave fellow 
creatures exposed to such atrocities? What would our 
Lord do or say on this question? 

We believe that he would repeat his former words,— 
"They that take to the sword shall perish by the sword." 
"Do good to them that hate you and persecute you." "If 
ye suffer for well doing, happy are ye; for the spirit of 
glory and of God resteth on you." "My kingdom is not 
of this world, else would my servants fight." These instructions, 
however, are not for the world individually or 
nationally, but for the saints who would walk in their 
Lord's footsteps. Of these our Lord said, "Ye are not of 
this world; for I have chosen you out of the world and ordained 



you, that you should go and bring forth fruit." 

The governments of the earth, although largely dominated 
by Satan, "the prince of this world," and although 
in no sense kingdoms of God, nevertheless have a lease of 
power from the Almighty, which carries with it a certain 
responsibility;* they are to be "ministers of justice" fully 
authorized to "bear the sword" and use it, as the Apostle 
Paul points out. (Rom. 13:1-4.) So, then, let the nations 
do their part, and let God's consecrated "little 
flock" remember their Master's words, "Ye are not of this 
world, even as I am not of this world," and abstain from 
the use of carnal weapons, and from counseling others to 
use them, and instead be "fervent in spirit serving the 
Lord," and using the sword of the spirit, the Word of God. 
The "saints" thus appear to the world unpatriotic; but 
this is unavoidable. We have become aliens so far as all 
present earthly governments are concerned; we are citizens 
of the heavenly kingdom, and hence "strangers and 
pilgrims" here. Filled with the spirit of the Captain of 
our salvation, we cannot be otherwise than opposed to the 
destruction of human lives, our desire on the contrary being 
to save them. If compelled by the government to enter the 
army, we should "go" (Matt. 5:41), but probably could 
get into the hospital service. 

The fact not generally recognized is, that the Scriptures 
lay down a particular rule for the saints— the law of 
Love to God and man— while the world is left to its own 
expediency. The Church alone is on trial: the world is 
merely gaining an experience, whose failures will prepare 
the worthy to appreciate the Millennial reign of righteousness, 
under the law of Love. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., p. 259; VOL. II., p.73. 



R1913 : page 5 

THE EARTH SAW AND TREMBLED. 



"His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled." 

"Beware lest you should reject him who now speaks; for if those did 

not escape who rejected him who admonished them on earth [Moses- 

Heb. 10:28], much less shall we escape if we turn away from 

him that speaketh from heaven; whose voice then shook the earth 

[Exod. 19:16-18]; but now it has been announced, saying, 

'Yet once for all I will shake not only the earth, but the 

heaven also.' Now this word, 'Yet once for all' denotes 

the removal of the things shaken, as of things made, 

so that those things which cannot be shaken 

may remain."-Psa. 97:4; Heb. 12:25-27. 



THE Psalmist prophetically taking a standpoint of 
observation future from his day declared, "The Lord 
reigneth, let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be 
glad thereof." As has been shown,* this began to be true 
in 1878, when our returned Lord Jesus took unto himself 
his great power. Yet not until 1915, when his kingdom 
will be fully set up and established in the earth, will his 
glorious reign be fully manifested and recognized. But 
that the prophet is referring specially to the present time, 
since 1878 and down to 1915, is clear from his succeeding 
statement— "Clouds and darkness are round about him: 
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. 
A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies." 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., Chap. ix. 

R1913 : page 6 

How true it is that the storm clouds are all about this day 
of his kingly presence! and the darkness of gloom and 
perplexity and trouble deepens on every side. If we inquire, 
Why is this day of his presence such a time of trouble 
and perplexity and distress of nations? the answer is, Because 
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his 
throne, and he is judging the nations and weighing them 
in the balance. Judgment is being laid to the line and 
righteousness to the plummet, to the intent that ere long 
the equitable principles of his government may be established 
in all the earth. And not only will all unrighteousness 
be made manifest, but "a fire goeth before him and 
burneth up his enemies." All the opposers of his righteous 
course will be the sufferers: they shall be cut off, 
destroyed, burned up, with the fire of his jealousy.— 
Zeph. 3:8. 

This work of judgment and consequent time of trouble 
being a necessary preparation for the glorious reign of 
righteousness that shall immediately succeed it, and all 
being wisely directed by the high and holy One who is too 
wise to err and too good to be unkind, the Prophet bids us 
discern in it all the abundant cause for rejoicing and gladness. 
Indeed, there is cause for rejoicing, not only among 
the saints, but in the whole earth; and it is the privilege of 
the saints to tell them so if they will hear. But whether 
they will hear or whether they forbear, let us tell it out, and 
by and by when the great afflictions of this judgment hour 
begin to seal its instruction upon the hearts of men, then 
the blessed testimony will be as healing balm, and they 
will see that he that smote them in his wrath, and scourged 
them in his hot displeasure, is also merciful and gracious, 
and unwilling that they should perish, but anxious rather 
that they should turn unto him and live. 

It is in the midst of the clouds and darkness of this 
day of trouble incident to the setting up of Messiah's Kingdom, 
that the statement of the prophet is verified— "His 



lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled." 
How apt is the figure! Truly like lightning flashes 
in the midst of the gloom and perplexity of this cloudy 
day come to men the remarkable glimpses of the great 
principles of truth and righteousness in contrast with which 
the world's present disorder is so manifest. A flash of 
lightning from the obscured throne discloses here one error 
and there another and another; and by and by the whole 
world will be aroused. Already it is largely so, and the 
whole world trembles for fear, not knowing what the outcome 
will be. 

It is remarkable, too, that the lightning flashes are 
continually calling attention to the Word of God— to the 
golden rule, to the equal rights and privileges of human 
brotherhood, to the faultless character and self-sacrificing 
disposition of Jesus Christ, to the law of love in contrast 
with the law of selfishness. It is leading men to reason of 
righteousness (if not to practice it) and of coming judgments 
when they hope and believe that in some way present 
wrongs will be righted. By the sudden and now increasingly 
frequent flashes of light which issue from the 
very storm clouds that surround the invisible, spiritual 
presence of our glorious King, these principles of the Word 
of God are ever and anon being illuminated and brought 
to the front for the consideration of all men. They are 
discussed in the daily press, in our popular periodicals, in 
labor and trades unions, on the streets, in stores and factories 
and counting rooms, in the market places, at public 
gatherings; even the heathen nations are discussing them 
and contrasting the daily life of professed Christians and 
Christian nations with the character and teachings of the 
great founder of Christianity, extolling the latter and 
ridiculing the former. 

Thus his lightnings are enlightening the world, and as 
a result there is great commotion everywhere manifest: 
there is dissatisfaction, unrest, and the whole current of 
popular thought is set in a revolutionary direction. The 
lightning flashes are revealing the corruption that is in the 
world, and showing men that they are living far below the 
dignity of manhood; but how to right things they are not 
able to see; and the conflicting ideas and voices and theories 
and threats reveal the facts the prophets foretold— "The 
nations are angry"; and the whole earth trembles from 
the din of a wordy conflict which they realize must sooner 
or later come to blows. "The earth saw, and trembled." 

But while the whole earth trembles for fear and for 
looking after those things that are coming on the earth, 
what is the attitude and condition of the Lord's consecrated 
and faithful people? Are they, too, in fear? and when 
the judgments of the Lord fall heavily upon the wayward 
and disobedient, so that the whole earth reels to and fro 
and staggers like a drunken man (Isa. 24:20), are they in 
dismay and distress? Ah, no; for it is written— "Zion 
heard and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, 
because of thy judgments, O Lord;" and Psalms 91 and 
46 show why they rejoice while others weep. It is because 



they dwell in the secret place of the Most High (represented 

by the holy place in the typical tabernacle), and abide 

under the shadow of the Almighty (as the typical tabernacle 

was covered by the cloud, which symbolized the 

Lord's presence and protection). "The secret counsel 

of the Lord is for them that fear him, and his covenant [is] 

to make it known to them."— Psa. 25:14. 

These dwellers in the secret place of the Most High 
are therefore provided in these perilous times with a clear 
knowledge of the divine plan, which enables them to see 
both the necessity for the present method of divine discipline 
upon the world and also the peaceable fruits of righteousness 
which shall result therefrom. In the midst of the 
storm and battle of this day of the Lord they hear the 
commanding voice of the Lord of armies, and their hearts 
rejoice because they have full confidence in his ability to 
bring order out of all the confusion. They realize that in 
the judgments of this day it is the Lord that speaketh from 

R1913 : page 7 

heaven— from the high place of authority and control; 

and therefore they rejoice and give thanks at the remembrance 

of his holiness— of his justice, wisdom and love, 

which insure his doing all things well. 

But the Psalmist intimates that while the world at 
large would be in ignorance of the import of present events, 
and therefore in fear and dread; and while the saints, with 
clear knowledge, will be rejoicing because of the Lord's 
judgments and their foreseen outcome; some, all heedless 
of both the world's distress and of the voice which speaketh 
from heaven, will still boast themselves of idols. He says, 
"Confounded be all they that serve graven images; that 
boast themselves of idols."— Psa. 97:7. 

These words call to mind the warning of the Apostle 
Paul, above quoted— "See that ye refuse not him that [now] 
speaketh," etc. The Apostle addresses these words to 
those who know the Lord's voice and recognize it, warning 
them against at any time refusing longer to heed it, when 
it speaks in wrath and judgment. But, alas! there are some 
who heed not the warning, and who, although they recognize 
the voice of the Lord, do refuse longer to obey it 
and be led by it; and they turn away from him that speaketh 
from heaven, to the idols which their wayward hearts 
have set up in his stead. These "graven images" are indeed 
the work of their own hands— they are the human 
philosophies and science, falsely so called, of this evil day; 
and those who reject the testimony of him that speaketh 
from heaven, having once heard it, invariably fall into some 
one of the many forms of idolatrous worship now so prevalent; 
or else they drift restlessly from one to another 
of them. 

All such shall surely be confounded; they shall be put 
to shame and confusion; their idols shall be destroyed; 
and the wilful sinner, once enlightened and blessed with 
the hallowed influences of the holy spirit and the truth, and 



who then turns away from all these, the Apostle declares 
shall not escape the reward of his deeds. "For," he says, 
"if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, 
much more shall not we escape if we turn away from 
[after once recognizing] him that speaketh from heaven." 
The former reference, as shown by the preceding verses 
(Heb. 12:18-21), was to the ceremonies which accompanied 
the establishment of the law covenant, with Israel, in 
the hands of Moses, the mediator of that covenant. (Exod. 19.) 

R1914:page7 

So solemn and impressive was the occasion that even 
"Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake." First, 
through Moses, the people entered into a sacred covenant 
to obey the Lord, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken 
we will do." And the Lord covenanted with them, saying, 
"If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, 
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above 
all people;... And ye shall be a Kingdom of priests 
and a holy nation."— Exod. 19:5-8. 

Then followed the giving of the law and the accompanying 
solemnities which established the covenant in the hands 
of Moses as the divinely appointed mediator— "And the 
Lord said unto Moses. Lo, I come unto thee in a thick 
cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee and 
believe thee forever." (Verse 9.) Then followed the 
demonstrations of the divine presence in the cloud-covered 
mountain, from which proceeded thunders and lightnings 
and the sound of a trumpet— "And Mount Sinai was altogether 
on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in 
fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a 
furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. And when 
the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder 
and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a 
voice... .And the Lord called Moses up to the top of 
the mount, and Moses went up." (Verses 18-20.) And 
the people were charged not even to touch the mount on 
penalty of instant death.— Verses 12,13,21-25. 

These solemn ceremonies prefigured the still more impressive 
circumstances which accompany the establishment 
of the "new covenant" in the hands of the mediator 
greater than Moses— our Lord Jesus Christ. The mountain 
(kingdom) of the Lord's house is now being established 
above the tops of all the mountains (kingdoms) of the 
earth, and exalted above the hills. (Isa. 2:2.) Clouds and 
darkness (trouble and perplexity and distress of nations) 
are round about it (Psa. 97:2); and the thunderings and 
lightnings are making all the earth to tremble as did Israel 
at Sinai. And now (since 1878) "God hath set his King 
upon his holy hill of Zion." (Psa. 2:6.) Wherefore, 
says the Apostle, "See that ye refuse not him that 
speaketh." For if those who refused to obey Moses, and 
presumptuously disgraced the ceremonies of the occasion 
at Sinai, met with instant death, how can we escape if we 
disregard the voice of the Mediator greater than Moses, 



who now bids all beware of the presumptuous sin of disregarding 
the remarkable circumstances which now accompany 
the establishment of the new covenant through Christ, 
its mediator? 

We see the gathering, darkening clouds of trouble; 
we hear the thunder tones of judgment that "call the earth 
from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof"— 
from the east to the west (Psa. 50:1); we see the lightning 
flashes of truth and righteousness, and how the whole earth 
trembles with fear and for looking after those things that 
are coming; and the foretold events of this harvest time 
speak in trumpet tones. How shall we regard these things? 
Shall it be with thoughtful and reverent fear, lest, the 
promise being left us of entering into the rest and glory 
of his Kingdom, any of us should seem to come short of 
it (Heb. 4: 1), and with great carefulness to make our calling 
and election sure? or shall it be with that presumptuous 
irreverence which disregards all these manifestations 
of divine power and glory, and, turning away from him 
that thus speaketh from heaven, sets up some idol of a wayward 
heart? Let us beware of any condition of heart that 
would lead to such a course. 

R1914:page8 

As in the type, so here, the establishment of the new 
covenant is accompanied with the shaking of the earth 
(society) and the mountains (kingdoms); and not only so, 
but Paul says the heavens also (the ecclesiastical powers) 
shall be shaken. 

What is the object of all this shaking? It is the removal 
of the things shaken, and the establishment of a 
kingdom which cannot be moved. In this eventful period 
everything that can be shaken will be shaken; for only the 
unshakable principles of truth and righteousness can endure 
and be worthy of a place in the Kingdom of God. And every 
one called to share in that Kingdom must be a lover of 
and follower after righteousness and truth. All others will 
be shaken out of the company called to share the honors 
of the Kingdom. The many snares and delusions of this 
evil day are accomplishing this very work: they are shaking 
out all the unstable as well as the false and faithless 
ones; and in the end only the true will remain. 

Seeing then that all these present things shall so shortly 
be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in 
all holy conversation and godliness? "Be diligent that ye 
may be found of him in peace."— 2 Pet. 3:11,14. 



R1914:page8 

STILL LET OUR HALLOWED ALTARS BURN. 



THE following lines were prepared by Dr. Oliver Wendell 
Holmes (now deceased) and read at the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the organization of the Young Men's Christian 
Association, in Boston. They voice well our sentiments 
for the New Year 1896 for all of God's children awakening 
from the errors of the "dark ages." As errors are discovered 
and discarded, may the truths, old as well as new, 
become all the more precious to us all. 

"Our Father, while our hearts unlearn 

The creeds that wrong thy name, 
Still let our hallowed altars burn 

With faith's undying flame. 

"Not by the lightning gleams of wrath 

Our souls thy face shall see, 
The star of love must light the path 

That leads to heaven and thee. 

"Help us to read our Master's will 

Through every darkening stain 
That clouds his sacred image still, 

And see him once again,— 

"The brother man, the pitying friend, 

Who weeps for human woes, 
Whose pleading words for pardon blend 

With cries of raging foes. 

"If 'mid the gathering storms of doubt 

Our hearts grow faint and cold, 
The strength we cannot live without 

Thy love will not withhold. 

"Our prayers accept; our sins forgive; 

Our youthful zeal renew; 
Shape for us holier lives to live, 

And nobler work to do." 



R1914:page8 

THE ONE THING DESIRABLE. 



"The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord 
is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?. ..One thing 
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that 
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my 
life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and 
to inquire in his temple."— Psa. 27:1,4. 

THE inspired Psalmist in loftiest strains of devotion 
and fervor puts into the hearts and minds of God's 



consecrated people sentiments of faith and trust and love 
and adoration to God, who is worthy of all praise. While 
many of these sentiments were based upon his own checkered 
experience, they were uttered under divine inspiration 
for the instruction and edification specially of the true spiritual 
Israel of God. 

Thus the Lord himself would indicate to us the sentiments 
of fervent devotion to him that should fill our hearts; 
and in this view of the matter we see how closely he would 
draw us to himself in love and faith and childlike confidence. 
While reason and common sense have their rightful 
place and are indispensable to a religious life, the soul 
that never mounts upon the wings of holy and fervent 
emotion, that is never stirred to its depths by a sense of the 
divine goodness and beneficence, has never yet experienced 
the blessedness of the relation of sonship. A true son of 
a beloved and approving father naturally experiences the 
fervor of tender emotion. Especially is this so of a true 
son of God who recognizes in his heavenly Father the perfection 
of every grace, the crowning glory of all excellence, 
and who lives in close communion and fellowship with him 
and has the constant witness in himself of his love and 
approval. 

Ah, those were no empty words of our blessed Lord 
Jesus when he said,— "The Father himself loveth you." 
"If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my 
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make 
our abode with him." (John 16:27; 14:23.) It is under 
such conditions that all those holy emotions of love, tenderness, 
faith, gratitude and praise fill to the brim our cup of joy; 
and with holy ecstasy we sing, "My cup runneth over. 
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of 
my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever." 

How full of the melody of fervent emotion, of grateful 

R1914:page9 

praise, and of loving confidence are the inspired psalms! 
They bid our hearts rejoice and our tongues be glad, and they 

R1915 : page 9 

show us how, by meditating on his word and obeying his 
precepts, to "Rejoice in the Lord always, and in everything 
give thanks." 

It was in view of the Lord's providences and of his 
many deliverances from the power of his enemies, and of 
the uniform kindness and mercy of God as he meditated 
upon them, that David exclaimed, "The Lord is my light 
and my salvation: whom shall I fear? The Lord is the 
strength of my life: of whom shall I be afraid?" This 
consolation, variously expressed throughout the Scriptures, 
comes with all its blessed potency in our times of greatest 
need: the more desperate and determined the foes we encounter 
and the more fierce the conflict with the powers of 
darkness, the more glorious is the deliverance and the 



clearer are the manifestations of divine grace. And, as a consequence, 

faith takes deeper root, and, with renewed confidence 

and assurance, lays hold upon all the precious promises 

of God; and love and gratitude well up from hearts refreshed 

with an increased sense of the divine favor and 

blessing. 

So it was with David; and so it is with God's faithful 
people who lead a life of prayer and faith and close 
fellowship with God. Such fellowship with God in adversity 
and in prosperity naturally tends more and more to 
center the heart's affections and desires in God, until the 
one thing supremely desired and sought after is that expressed 
by the Psalmist— to continually dwell in the house 
of the Lord, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to inquire 
in his temple. 

To dwell continually in the house of the Lord signifies 
to be continually counted worthy and to be recognized of 
God as a member of his Church, "whose house are we if 
we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope 
firm unto the end." (Heb. 3:6.) These, who hold fast 
their faith, and by faith overcome the allurements and temptations 
of the world, dying daily unto its spirit, hopes and 
ambitions, and living more and more unto God— these shall 
indeed dwell in the house of the Lord, in his holy, spiritual 
temple, his Church, forever. Now they dwell in the 
holy place of consecration and adoption; and the Lord 
says, "I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, 
but I will confess his name before my Father and before his 
angels;" and by and by he will present them to himself "a 
glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, 
and worthy, as kings and priests unto God, to pass beyond 
the vail into the Most Holy— into the glorious spiritual 
condition and into the immediate presence of God. 

"To behold the beauty of the Lord" is to behold the 
beauty of holiness, to have this image of his glory ever 
before the mind's eye as our inspiration, our light, our 
guide, our pattern and our chief joy. Here indeed is the 
Christian's secret of a happy life— happy in the midst of 
whatever may come to him of affliction or pain or loss or 
perplexity or whatever experiences come through the checkered 
scenes of this present life. To behold the beauty of the 
Lord really is only possible to those who dwell in his house; 
for only to such does he reveal himself "the fairest among 
ten thousand and the one altogether lovely." Such only 
know how to appreciate the beauty of his holiness; such 
only can delight themselves in the Lord and in the 
continual meditation of his law, and in conforming their 
lives to it. 

"To inquire in his temple" signifies that those who 
are truly of the Lord's house are inquirers, students of his 
holy law and testimony, and that their delight is in so doing. 
The language of their hearts is, "Oh, how love I 
thy law; it is my meditation all the day." "I have meat 
to eat that ye [who are of the world] know not of;" for 
"It is my delight to do thy will, O God." 

This one desire is the sum and substance of the Christian's 



ambition as more and more he becomes dead to the 
world and alive toward God. Let us more and more seek 
after it and conform to it; for in so doing Christian courage, 
boldness, fortitude and zeal will be greatly multiplied. 
These all are not only born of faith, but they increase and 
grow strong by a living faith developed and strengthened 
by the lessons of experience. 

Courage, born of faith and strengthened by endurance, 
cries with humble boldness in the midst of the deepest 
darkness of the most perplexing difficulties, and in the midst 
of the wildest storms and most threatening dangers, "The 
Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the 
Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?" 

The Apostle Paul surely caught this blessed inspiration 
when he said, "Rejoice in the Lord alway; and again I say 
rejoice. ...Be careful for nothing; but in every thing, 
by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests 
be made known unto God." Mark how all through 
the Word of God we are taught, not only to be sober, 
vigilant, diligent, thoughtful, prayerful, and always abounding 
in the work of the Lord through whatsoever it may 
bring of toil or care or reproach or persecution, but in the 
midst of any or all of these experiences we are taught to be 
happy and to be filled with the inspiration of a holy joy. 
And not only are we counselled to be joyous, but the manner 
of life which naturally produces this joy is pointed out 
to us. When we come into the Lord's family we enter a 
new and holy atmosphere which those only can realize and 
appreciate who have the one desire above referred to paramount 
to every other, viz.,— to be counted worthy to abide 
continually in the house of the Lord. 



"Do not count, when day is o'er, daily loss from life's rich store; 
But the gains, however small, count them daily one and all: 
Every sweet and gracious word, every pleasant truth you've heard; 
Every tender glance and tone, every kindly deed you've known: 
Let all evil things go by; still with brave endeavor, try simple joys 

to multiply. 
Thus you'll learn, how large a sum will with faithful reckoning come.' 



R1915 :page 10 

THE FORERUNNER OF CHRIST. 

-JAN. 5.-Luke 1:5-17.- 

Golden Text— "And thou, child, shalt be called the Prophet 
of the Highest; for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord 
to prepare his ways."— Luke 1:76. 

IN considering this familiar narrative we are reminded 

of the Lord's great care in preparing his chosen instruments 



for the various parts of his great work. Abraham's 

life was a long discipline of faith and patience; for 

he was to be the father of the faithful, a type of the fatherhood 

of God, and a worthy example to all his children, 

both those under the Law and those under the new covenant 

of grace.— Rom. 4:11-17. 

Moses was specially prepared to be a leader, lawgiver 
and judge to Israel. Born under the humiliating conditions 
of bondage and the imperial sentence of death, he 
was providentially protected, preserved and adopted into 
the royal family, where he received a measure of that education 
necessary for his future service; and after that he 
had forty years more in the retirement of domestic life, 
which, under the operations of divine grace, hardened his 
virtues and mellowed the ardor of his temperament. Thus 
God gave to Israel a trained and experienced character as 
a leader. Similarly, suitable preparation for the positions 
they were to occupy or the work they were to do is very 
noticeable in other cases, both of Bible record and of subsequent 
history. Mark the case of Samuel, a child of prayer, 
devoted to the Lord from his infancy, and trained in the 
service of the Lord under the care of Eli; and of Paul, called 
from his infancy, instructed in the law, and zealous toward 
God even while ignorantly persecuting the saints, verily 
thinking he did God service. 

John the Baptist was another illustration. The preparations 
in this, as in most of these cases, began before he was 
born, in the hearts of his parents,— "They were both righteous 
before God, walking in all the commandments and 
ordinances of the Lord blameless." (Verse 6) Consider 
also subsequent reformers known to all through the pages 
of history, and mark the providential leadings in their preparation 
for their work long before they could have any 
knowledge of the work that was before them. Consider 
also how the Lord has been preparing the Gospel Church 
for its Millennial work; and how he prepared the ancient 
worthies for their Millennial work in the earthly phase of 
the coming Kingdom; and so on through all the list of his 
"chosen vessels." The "chosen vessel" is always a prepared 
vessel for the service intended; and that the preparation 
is of God, and not of himself, is manifest from the 
fact that in every case it began long before the chosen one 
knew of the ends to be accomplished or the significance of 
the providential circumstances or the measures of discipline. 

The principal preparation which God requires for every 
part of his honorable service is holiness of heart— devotedness 
to God and to his righteousness and truth, and abhorrence 
of all that is unholy, unclean. "Be ye clean that 
bear the vessels of the Lord." There are, however, some 
parts of the Lord's service which reflect no honor upon 
those engaged in it, though they do reflect honor upon the 
wisdom and power of God who is able to make even the 
wrath of his enemies to praise him, by his power to out-general 
and overrule their evil for good to his cause. For 
instance, Satan, and every other evil worker, whose evil 
devices are, by divine power, overruled for good of God, 



unwittingly serve some of the purposes of God— sometimes 

R1916 :page 10 

for the discipline of the children of God and sometimes for 
the revolutionizing of affairs in the world. 

The prenatal influences upon John the Baptist were such 
that, from his birth, his heart was inclined toward God and 
holiness (verse 15); and the training and discipline of his 
life were such that at maturity he was ready for the work 
of introducing to Israel the long-promised Messiah. Of 
him it was foretold, "He shall be great in the sight of the 
Lord." Yes, he was a great man, a great preacher and a 
great prophet. Jesus said he was the greatest of all the 
prophets. (Matt. 11:11.) But he was not great in the eyes 
of men. He was never a guest at the palace of Herod, but 
he was a prisoner in his prisons. He was not an esteemed 
orator in the Jewish synagogues, but he was "a voice crying 
in the wilderness." He was not arrayed in purple and 
fine linen, nor did he fare sumptuously every day, but his 
raiment was of camel's hair and a leathern girdle, and his 
meat was locusts and wild honey. And though, for a time, 
the multitudes were attracted by his preaching, he was soon 
abandoned by the people, imprisoned by the king, and 
finally beheaded in prison. 

And yet John was truly a great man; for he was "great 
in the sight of the Lord." He was great in the sense that 
he that ruleth his own spirit according to the principles and 
precepts of the divine Word is greater than he that taketh a 
city. (Prov. 16:32.) All the natural aspirations and human 
ambitions were made subservient to his one mission of introducing 
his cousin, Jesus of Nazareth, a man of humble 
birth and circumstances, as the Messiah, to whom he knew 
the gathering of the people would be after he had accomplished 
his mission of introducing him. (Gen. 49:10.) But 
John was pleased to have it so, and declared that in performing 
this service for his cousin according to the flesh, 
and thus accomplishing his part in the divine purpose and 
prophecy, his joy was fulfilled. (John 3:29.) And, by the 
eye of faith discerning in the humble Nazarene the Son of 
God, he said to the people, "One mightier than I cometh, 
the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose." 
"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of 
the world!" "He must increase, but I must decrease."— 
Luke 3: 16; John 1:29; 3:30. 

It was this meekness, this complete self-abnegation and 
singleness of purpose to accomplish the righteous will of 
God, that constituted the moral greatness of John. And 
because he was in that attitude of heart where the Lord 
could use him he was privileged to be the greatest, the 
most highly honored, of all the prophets, in that he was 
chosen to introduce, to Israel and the world, the Anointed 
Son of God, the Redeemer and future King of the whole 
earth. Thus he became a great man, a great preacher of 
righteousness and truth, the greatest of all the prophets, 
and one of the heirs of the earthly phase of the Kingdom 



of God. 

What a profitable lesson is in this for all who would 
seek true greatness— to be "great in the sight of the Lord." 
It calls to mind that wise admonition of the Apostle, 
"Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God that he 
may exalt you in due time." (1 Pet. 5:6.) The way of 
the cross, the way of humiliation and self-abasement, is the 
way to the crown, to that true honor that cometh from God 
only. Where now is the honor of the great ones of earth 
who have passed away— the Caesars, the Herods, the Alexanders 
and Napoleons; the Jewish scribes and Pharisees 

R1916 :page 11 

and doctors of the law and Rabbis? and where all the reverend 
Popes and Cardinals and Bishops and Priests of the 
great Apostasy who proudly flourished in their day? They 
have all come to naught, and in the Millennial judgment 
they will come forth to shame and confusion of face, stripped 
of all their honors. But those truly great ones— "great in 
the sight of the Lord"— are reserved unto honor and glory 
and power at the appearing and Kingdom of Jesus Christ. 

Let the lesson come home to each of our hearts,— 
"He that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; 
and he that is chief, as he that doth serve." Patiently submit 
to the humbling now, and hopefully and joyfully wait 
for the glory to be revealed by and by in all the faithful. 
This is not the time nor place for rewards, but for discipline 
and service, for the development of character, for 
making ready for the future exaltation, that we may appear 
without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, joint heirs of 
our Redeemer. 

For an exposition of verses 16 and 17 see MILLENNIAL 
DAWN VOL. II., chapter viii. 



R1916 :page 11 

THE BOY JESUS. 

-JAN. 12.-Luke 2:40-52.- 

Golden Text— "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, 
and in favor with God and man."— Luke 2:52. 

THIS brief narrative gives us a single glimpse at the 
youth of our Lord; but it reveals all that is important 
for us to know concerning him before he arrived at 
maturity. It shows us the wonderful prodigy of wisdom 
and grace, so developed at twelve years of age as to be able 
to cope with the reasoning powers and the learning of men 
far advanced in years, in so much that he astonished them 
with his understanding and answers. 

We observe also that his superior ability did not puff 
him up nor cause him to forget the respect and deference 



due to the advanced years and position of the Doctors and 
teachers. He was meek and lowly of heart, both as a boy 
and as a man. He was anxious also to learn of them from 
the law and the prophets. He did not miraculously know 
all that was in them; but he "grew in wisdom." He acquired 
knowledge, but with that ease, rapidity and retentiveness 
with which only a perfect mind can grasp and 
hold it. 

His tarrying in the temple to receive the instructions 
of his Father's Word evidently was not in wilful disregard 
for his parents; but rather, was an evidence of his zeal to 
do his Father's will, which motive, in his childish simplicity, 
he seemed to think his mother and Joseph would fully 
realize and approve. This is apparent from his question,— 
"Why did you seek me? Did you not know that I must 
be in the courts of my Father?" No, they did not know. 
They could not understand the wonderful child. Bearing 
in mind subsequent expressions of more mature years which 
showed that his memory extended back to his previous existence 
with the Father before the world was, we have no 
reason to doubt that at the age of twelve his memory was 
active, and that he then knew what in after years he affirmed, 
saying,— "Before Abraham was, I am." "What and if ye 
shall see me ascend up where I was before?" "Father, 
glorify me with thine own self, with the glory which I had 
with thee before the world was," etc.— John 8:58; 6:62; 
17:5. 

But his mother and Joseph understood him not. How 
could they? Mary silently pondered these things in her 
heart; but how could she understand this mystery of God? 
Jesus, seeing that he was not understood and remembering his 
duty of submission to parents, was subject to their wishes, 
and returned with them to Nazareth. "And Jesus increased 
in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man." 
In the retirement of his early life of preparation for his 
public ministry and great sacrifice, his virtues commanded 
the admiration of all who knew him. Praise God 
for this testimony of the human perfection of his dear Son! 



R1916 :page 11 

THE MINISTRY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. 

-JAN. 19.-Luke 3:15-22.- 

Golden Text— "Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sin of the world."— John 1:29. 

SEVERAL points in this familiar narrative are 
worthy of special notice,— (1) The deep and wide 
influence of John's preaching. The prepared instruments 
of the Lord are powerful in his hand. The whole nation 
was aroused, the multitudes were baptized with the baptism 
of repentance (Mark 1:4,5), and the expectation of 



the immediate advent of the Messiah was everywhere manifest. 

(2) The humility and sincerity of John, which was not 
changed in the least by the popular favor, is seen in his denial 
of the suggestion that he might be the Messiah. Had he 
made the claim, how readily would the people have accepted 
it! But this prepared vessel of the Lord was so established in 
righteousness as to be superior to any such temptation. 

(3) In disclaiming this honor for himself John compared 
his own work and the work of the coming Messiah 

and showed them the difference. Referring to himself he 
claimed great inferiority. And his own work he described 
as only a preparatory work,— "I indeed baptize you with 
water, but... he shall baptize you with the holy spirit 
and with fire." It is very manifest that all of the multitudes 
who were baptized with water were not baptized with 
the holy spirit. The baptism of the holy spirit came at 
Pentecost after the Lord was glorified, but only upon a 
small minority of the Jewish nation. The baptism of fire 
came later— in the end of the Jewish harvest (A.D. 70) 
when Jerusalem was destroyed and their national existence 
terminated in the midst of a great time of trouble. Verse 17 
is in reference to the great separating work of the Jewish 

R1917 :page 11 

harvest and the gathering of the worthy remnant into the 
garner of the Gospel age, and the fiery judgments upon the 
unworthy chaff. 

(4) In the baptism of Jesus we see that the ordinance 

received a new significance. His baptism was not unto repentance; 
for he had no sins to repent of. "He was holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Heb. 7:26.) 
With the accustomed view of baptism, John declined to 
baptize Jesus in whom there was no sin, nevertheless, though 
he could not understand why he should desire it, John 
complied with his request— "Suffer it to be so now; for thus 
it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."— Matt. 3:15. 

The righteousness of God's law which could by no 
means clear the guilty (Exod. 34:7) without a satisfaction 
of the claims of justice by the sacrifice of a life for a life 
(Exod. 21:23; Lev. 24:17-21; Deut. 19:21), he was about 
to fulfil by the sacrifice of himself. He was about to give 
his flesh for the life of the world— giving his life for the life 

R1917 :page 12 

of Adam, in whom we were all condemned, that as all posterity 
were included in the condemnation, so they might likewise 
have a share in the redemption. And all who desire to 
follow in the footsteps of Christ must likewise present their 
bodies living sacrifices, holy and acceptable through Christ. 
Thus it becometh us [the Christ, Head and body], to fulfil 
all righteousness. 

With the baptism of Christ, then, the ordinance received 
the new signification of entire consecration to God 
as living sacrifices, even unto death. And in this new view 



of the matter some of the Jewish converts were baptized 
again. See the baptism of John and the baptism of Christ 
and his body, the Church, contrasted in Acts 19:3-5. See 
also TOWER for June 15, '93. 



R1917 :page 12 

THE EARLY MINISTRY OF JESUS. 

--JAN. 26.-Luke 4:14-22.- 

Golden Text— "And they were astonished at his 
doctrine; for his word was with power."— Luke 4:32. 

WE HAVE before us in this lesson the greatest teacher 
that ever lived; and if we inquire wherein his power 
consisted, the answer is, It was the power of the holy spirit, 
which he had without measure. (John 3:34.) This is 
the secret of all power in the work of the Lord. Learning 
and worldly wisdom, or natural talents of fluency of speech, 
or oratory, are no substitutes for this indispensable requirement 
for the divine service. No preaching, no teaching is 
of value, except it be in the power of the holy spirit. 

In this power our Lord Jesus came up from the wilderness 
into Galilee. How did he obtain this power? He 
obtained it in the same way his followers may obtain it; 
viz., by entire consecration to God, faithfulness to that 
consecration, and by communion with him in prayer and 
meditation upon his Word. The complete consecration 
our Lord had made and symbolized at Jordan; and while 
carefully studying the law and the prophets in order to an 
exact knowledge of the will of God, he had just endured a 
most subtle and severe conflict with the powers of darkness 
for forty days alone in the wilderness.* Through implicit 
faith in the wisdom, love and power of the Father, he came 
off that battlefield victorious, and filled with the power of 
that holy spirit which had given him the victory. Thus he 
was equipped with power from on high for the great work 
upon which he immediately entered. It was no wonder, 
indeed, that the people "were astonished at his doctrine; 
for his word was with power." "He taught them as one 
having authority [as one who knew the truth by an implicit 
faith in God which admitted of no doubt, and by the practical 
demonstration of its power upon his own heart], and 
not as the scribes who had no such power, and no such insight 
into the holy things of God. 

It is thus, and only thus, that the followers of Christ 
may also gain this power which will mightily convince men 
of the truth, and which will compel respect for it, even in 
those who are not prepared to receive it into good and 
honest hearts. The preacher or teacher acceptable to God 
must, therefore, like the Lord, be first sincerely and fully 
consecrated to God. Then, when tried and tempted, he 
must prove his faithfulness to that consecration. Then let 



him go forward in the work of the Lord with a resolute 
purpose, to do his will at all hazards of human approval or 
disapproval, or of human praise or persecution. Most 
likely, like the Lord himself, he will have some of both— 
at first some of the praise, but afterward the bitterness of 
persecution. 

At first Jesus "taught in the synagogues, being glorified 
of all," "and all bore him witness and wondered at 
the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth;" 
but very soon his faithfulness to the truth, which rebuked 
their unrighteousness, turned the praise of the people into 
wrath and persecution. This is the reward that faithfulness 
to the truth is sure to bring in the present life; 
and those who find it so should rejoice in this fellowship in 
the sufferings of Christ. Every new trial of faith, patience 
and perseverance, and every new victory in such trial 
brings to the soldier of the cross added power of the holy 
spirit— a courage born of endurance, a confidence in God 
born of experience, and a zeal born of a human appreciation 
of the power and intrinsic worth of divine truth, and 
a fuller appreciation of the righteousness of God and of all 
his ways. In this light the Christian should view every 
trial that comes to him, and, by drawing near to God in it, 
seek that measure of his holy spirit which will enable him 
to overcome, and in the conflict to gain new strength for 
further service. 

The text of our Lord's discourse on this occasion was 
chosen from Isaiah 61:1-3, which declared his commission 
from God to preach the gospel— "The spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach," 
etc. This was the object of his anointing with the holy 
spirit. And this anointing needed no supplement of human 
authority. No Jewish ecclesiastics or councils had anything 
to do with giving him this authority. It came, as 
he showed, from God alone, through his inspired prophet. 

In this connection we are also reminded that, through 
him, this same anointing has come upon every true member 
of the body of Christ, which is the Church— "The 
anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you." 
(1 John 2:27.) This anointing began at Pentecost, and 
has continued upon all who are truly the Lord's, even to 
the present day. 

And not only so, but every member of the body, however 
humble or obscure, being "anointed to preach," is 
failing in his mission if he does not preach. Indeed, if 
he be filled with the spirit he must preach, being impelled 
to that service by a burning zeal, like him who said, "The 
zeal of thy house hath eaten me up;" "It is my meat 
and drink to do thy will, O God." But preaching is not 
always public declaration. Every influence that we can 
send out from within the radius of our talents, be they one 
or many, or be they humble or brilliant, is preaching the 
gospel. Let us all, therefore, diligently apply ourselves to 
it, and let it be "in the power of the spirit." 

It is very significant that our Lord in quoting this commission, 
quoted only so much of it as was to be fulfilled by 



himself, the last phrase being, "to proclaim the acceptable 
year of the Lord,"— the Gospel age, the time 
wherein the presenting of our bodies as living sacrifices 
would be acceptable to God. With this he closed the book 
and sat down, and said, "This day is this scripture fulfilled 
in your ears." Had he read the remainder of it he could 
not have claimed its fulfilment that day; for it was not yet 
time to preach the day of vengeance, nor yet to begin the 
great Millennial work foreshown in verse 3. The proclaiming 
of the day of vengeance belongs specially to this end 
of the age, and the whole commission applies to the Church 
entire. The message concerning day of vengeance is now 
due, and consequently is now being proclaimed by the 
"feet" members of the Christ. 



*See our issue of August 1, 1894. 

page 13 
VOL. XVII. JANUARY 15, 1896. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 14 

Views From the Tower 15 

Boast in the Lord 17 

Poem: The Promise 20 

Bible Study: The Power of Jesus 21 

Bible Study: The Sermon on the 

Mount 22 

Bible Study: The Great Helper 22 

Into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 23 

page 14 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 



requesting the paper. 



R1919 :page 14 

CHART DISCOURSES. 



THE Chart of the Ages is made a frontispiece to the first volume of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and is described by a chapter of said volume; 
but when, later, it was published separately, as a map mounted upon 
a spring roller (2 feet 6 in. x 5 feet), requests came in from every quarter 
for such amplified explanations as would enable friends of the truth to 
give comprehensive parlor talks from their wall charts. And it is to fill 
this requirement, and to enable many to tell the good tidings of great 
joy connectedly and systematically, that a little pamphlet has been published, 
giving three suggestive discourses upon the chart. 

Many other discourses can profitably follow, and suggestions for 
some of them will be found in Chapters X., XL and XII. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. I., and Chapter V. of VOL. II. 

After interesting your friends or neighbors by the discourses on the 
chart, either loan or sell to them the volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN and 
get them to reading, and follow this up with assistance upon points which 
may seem to them obscure. Next we advise a weekly gathering of such, 
as a "Dawn Circle for Bible Study." A method for conducting these 
very profitable meetings is suggested in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, Sept. 
15, '95, and Dec. 1, '95. 

The price of the above described pamphlet is ten cents. 

These will be ready for mailing about Feb. 1. Orders will be 
filled in rotation as received. 

page 14 

BINDERS FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 



ALL those who preserve their TOWERS for future reference, should 
know that we supply the Emerson Patent Binders, stamped in 
gilt, at 60 cents each. They hold 864 pages, or three years' issues, 
which can be added as received, and thus kept clean. 

YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE INDEX. 



THIS is of value only to the critical and scholarly, but very valuable 
to such. We have purchased the entire stock, so far as we are 
aware. Price 50 cents each. Some of them are soiled outwardly, and 
such we offer at half price, 25 cents each. 



R1917 :page 15 



VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



"OVER sixty churches in New York have already 
joined a federation which hopes to band together 
the churches for all sorts of practical ends— charitable, 
humanitarian, social and reformatory." (The Golden Rule.) 
Similar federations are in progress in various cities. 

"In Mobile, Alabama, a Methodist and a Jewish congregation 
united in a Thanksgiving-day service in the Jewish 
synagogue. Both ministers addressed the assemblage, 
and all united in singing." Of course, Christ was not 
preached nor his name mentioned in the thanksgiving, for 
fear of offence to the Jews. Are such thanks acceptable 
to God who specifies the name of Jesus as the only one by 
which he can be approached? Could such a service help the 
Jews to recognize Christ, the crucified? Are unions or 
federations which ignore the principles and doctrines of 
God's Word at all desirable? We would rather stand alone 
with God upon his terms than unite with millions upon any 

R1918 :page 15 

other. Individual freedom and mutual cooperation upon 
the lines laid down in the Scriptures is God's way, and 
hence our way. 

Chicago, anxious to please all classes, has arranged to 
have the Bible read in her public schools, and a committee 
made up of Protestants, Catholics and Hebrews is appointed 
whose duty it will be to select "non-sectarian passages" 
of Scripture for this use. That committee will have a difficult 
task. It is possible that the framers of that law intended 
to prove to the people the impossibility of suiting 
the ideas of all. Hebrews would probably object to the 
New Testament as a whole, and Catholics, Hebrews and 
Protestants would dispute about which version or translation 
of the Old Testament they should use. 

Evidently, the religious instruction of children should 
be in the care of their parents and their chosen religious 
guides, and not mixed with secular studies which should be 
compulsory and under the supervision of the state. Attempts 
to unite the two must prove disadvantageous until God's 
absolute and infallible Kingdom shall have obtained 
control. 



The Czar of Russia has through the Procurator-General 
of the Holy Synod brought to an end the persecution of 
Stundists and others in his Baltic provinces. The procurator 
excuses the change of his policy, thus: "The Orthodox 
[Greek] Church is showing gratifying growth in those parts," 
and "extraordinary measures need no longer be taken by 
the authorities to help forward the work." Thank God! it 



will not be long until the power to persecute will be taken 
from the Mohammedans and Greek Catholics, as it has already 
in civilized lands been taken from the Church of 
Rome. 



The Emperor of Germany seems bent upon crushing 
Socialism regardless of consequences. Even moderate objections 
to his government are prosecuted as treasonable disrespect. 
In addition, the Chief of Police of Berlin gave 
notice of the summary closing of eleven Social-Democratic 
clubs of that city— six Reichstag clubs, the Socialist Press 
Committee, the Agitation Committee, the Local Socialist 
Committee, the Club of Party Delegates and the Central 
Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany. 
The effect will be to unify and strengthen the Socialists, 
who are already a powerful third in the Reichstag. 

The Emperor's heart and the hearts of his counsellors 
are evidently failing, for fear and for looking forward to 
those things which are coming upon the earth. He is putting 
the whole weight of the government upon the safety 
valve, to stop the noise of the people clamoring for liberty. 
We agree with him that the liberty desired would bring fallen 

R1918 :page 16 

men to license and anarchy; but we can read, as he probably 
can not, the sentence of present governments, as recorded 
in God's Word,— Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin,— 
Babylon, thou art tried in the balances, and found wanting. 
Thank God! the fall means but a brief though awful chaos, 
and then the establishment of God's Kingdom in the hands 
of Christ. 

"The tide of Socialism is rising in France. M. 
Bourgeois has carried his graduation succession duties by a 
majority of 404 to 125. They are probably the most 
extreme in the civilized world, and for a precedent you 
must go to Oriental countries. There the ruler takes what 
he likes, or what he can get. In France the new ruler begins 
by exempting all estates under two thousand dollars— 
a premium on poverty to start with, and a bid for the votes 
of the peasantry and the workingmen. From exemption 
he passes by easy stages to confiscation, ending by taking 
one-fifth of the entire property devised to strangers."— 
N.Y. Herald. 

This seems to us a more equitable and a wiser taxation 
than the Income Tax. Society has a claim upon a share of the 
money accumulated under its protection, when the accumulator 
is done with it. This method would induce some 
of the wealthy to dispense their means more liberally while 
alive, to see to its use. Apparently few of the saints are 
wealthy; but such as have wealth should regard this as a 
part of their stewardship, one of their talents, for which 
they will be required to give an account. "Ye are not your 
own," applies to all that we have, money, influence, time, 



all. If the measure of our self-denial in the interest of the 
Lord and the truth is the measure of our love, we can 
neither afford to neglect the cultivation of this love nor to 
neglect opportunities for manifesting it to the Lord and to 
ourselves, however we may modestly seek to hide it from 
our fellow men. 



We learn that Joseph Rabinowitz, the converted Jew, 
purposes shortly to remove from Kischenev to Palestine, 
expecting that the latter will prove to be a better center 
from which to carry on his missionary work among his 
kinsmen according to the flesh. This we believe will be a 
good move. We urged him to make it when we visited 
him in 1891, and again when he visited us in 1893. Although 
he will be leaving a city containing nearly as many 
Jews as are in all Palestine, we believe that those who have 
returned to the "land of promise" would prove the more 
receptive— if not now, very shortly, when "the time of 
Jacob's trouble" shall be upon them there. They need 
instruction, whether they hear or forbear, to prepare them 
by and by to acknowledge the earthly phase of the Kingdom 
when it shall be established among them. 



It does not seem to be generally known that Jews (not 
converts to Christ or Islam) have not been allowed to settle 
in Palestine since August 1891, and only a few are 
permitted to enter as visitors with fifteen to thirty day 
permits. This edict of the Sultan of Turkey went into effect 
just before we reached there. No Jews have been permitted 
to settle there since. Items published in newspapers telling 
about thousands of Jews going to Palestine, etc., are either 
fabrications or else five-year-old items republished. We 
expect, however, that by the time European persecutions 
shall again become hot against the Jews the door to Palestine 
will somehow be unbarred. 



The London Review of Reviews says:— 
"In Austria, the form taken by social discontent is 
that of a violent agitation against the Jews. Dr. Lueger's 
reelection as Mayor of Vienna, with the consequent dissolution 
of the City Council, led to a debate in the Reichsrath, 
which was interesting as revealing the savagery with 
which the Jews are hated in Vienna. One of the speakers 
was not ashamed to assert that at Jewish festivals the food 
is sprinkled with a dark dust which is made from Christian 
blood! There is reason to believe that if the masses had 
their way in Central Europe, the Jews would lose their eye 
teeth, if indeed they were permitted to escape with their 
lives. It really seems as if it will be necessary before long 
to reconstitute the Kingdom of Jerusalem, if only to give 



the Jews a center from which diplomatic intervention would 
be possible on behalf of the scattered and peeled remnant 
of the children of Israel." 



"The Bishop of Jerusalem declares that a great change 
of front toward Christianity is taking place among Jews 
all over the world. There is an avowal of disapproval of 
the crucifixion of Christ; there is admission of his claim 
to be a Prophet; to be the Messiah, at least of the Gentiles; 
to be the holiest of the sons of men. The assertion of the 
Yemenite Jew, 'Our fathers never returned from the captivity 
until now; we are not chargeable with the black deed 
of the rulers against Jesus;' is but the expression of a widespread 
desire to reverse the imprecation of eighteen centuries 
past; it seems like a prayer, 'May his blood be forgiven 
to us and to our children!'" 

It is reported that a Russian Jew, recently converted 
to Christ, in a hospital in Smyrna, has begun preaching 
the newly found Messiah among the Russian Jews there with 
great success. A Jewish Christian Society has been started, 
and already is reported to have nearly two hundred adherents, 
who are being persecuted by kinsmen after the flesh. 

It is the time to expect such movements. The time 
for the beginning of a return of divine favor was 1878, and 
beginning there it has been steadily progressing since. 



Dr. Ahlwardt, the German Jew-hater, who came to 
this country to arouse hatred toward the Jews— but without 
success— in answer to the question, By what means do 
you propose to put an end to Jewish influence in Germany? 
said,— 

"It can be done only by educating the masses, and 
getting the right sort of representatives into the Reichstag. 
For one thing, legislation should be enacted against ownership 
of land by Jews. Forty-seven per cent, of the agricultural 
land in Germany is owned by Jews, and they hold 
mortgages upon most of the remainder. Of course, we 
have not been able yet to pass any of the laws we advocate, 
as we have only seventeen representatives in the Reichstag. 

R1918 :page 17 

Anti-Semitism has spread fast recently, and the people are 
coming to see the corrupting influences of Judaism. Our 
support comes chiefly from the middle and poorer classes, 
who have suffered from the greed and unscrupulousness of 
the Jews. The lower clergy, both Catholic and Protestant, 
are nearly all with us." 

No doubt there is considerable truth in this charge, 
and, taken together with the fact that Jews seldom so violate 
the laws as to get into prison, suggests the thought that 
their experiences under the Law of Moses have not been 



valueless to them. They are law-abiding so far as the letter 
of the law is concerned, but use all the ingenuity of their 
active minds in avoiding and circumventing the spirit of 
it. Outwardly they are very obedient to the law; but they 

R1919 :page 17 

do not recognize that love to God and the neighbor is the 
essence of the Law. 

Nevertheless, under the new Millennial laws they will be 
found amongst the most pliable and consequently will be 
amongst the first to be blest by the new order of things; 
and by and by no doubt many of them will learn that the 
whole Law is comprehended in the one word, Love: and, 
learning this, many doubtless will obey it from the heart, 
and become "sheep" of the Millennial fold. (John 10:16.) 
God foreseeing this made them certain promises which cannot 
fail (Rom. 1 1:25-32), and their trouble, now brewing 
in Germany, will only serve to drive them out and to prepare 
them for the fulfilment of the divine covenants. 



The Turkish question seems to be subsiding. It is 
settling itself. The German Emperor is averse to meddling 
with any ruler's control of his own subjects,— evidently 
fearing that at some time it might be a precedent for interference 
with his control of the Social-Democrats. Russia 
believes that she will get cheaper and more satisfactory 
possession by and by, when some other war is on foot involving 
other powers, and is not anxious now. France 
does what Russia does, and England, the only hope of the 
Armenians, is impelled by caution (in view of Venezuelan 
and South African difficulties) to let Turkey alone. 

The matter is rapidly settling itself by the Armenians 
becoming Mohammedans, as the only escape from death. 
Thus quickly can threatening wars be averted, and the 
winds of strife held back, that the sealing of the servants 
of God may be first accomplished, as suggested in our last 



While the general tendency among prominent Protestants 
is toward skepticism and open infidelity of the Dr. 
Briggs type (We do not mean Atheism, the denial of a 
personal God, for few are so blind and foolish— Psa. 14: 1 — 
but Infidelity in the sense of disbelief in the Bible and the 
record of the fall, redemption and restitution as therein set 
forth), still there is another movement progressing vigorously 
—a return to formalism and ceremonialism, as represented 
in Roman Catholicism. The more ignorant gravitate to the 
Romanists, and the more cultured and wealthy to the Episcopal 
church. St. Ignatius Church of New York City is 
one of the favorites with the latter, and is known as a high-church. 
Another, recently finished at a cost of half a 



million dollars, is known as The Church of St. Mary the 

Virgin. At both of these churches the Romish ceremonials 

are in vogue, and Masses are celebrated, as by Roman 

Catholics. (For the significance of the Mass see MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, Vol. II., page 324, and Vol. III., pages 98-104.) 

The next few years will witness alarming progress 

in both of these opposite directions, as well as toward mere 

Moralism. Thousands will thus fall, from the only standing 

(in Christ) which has divine favor and recognition, on 

every side of those who abide under the shadow of the Almighty, 

rooted and grounded in the promises of God's 

Word and firmly fixed upon the ransom, the rock of 

salvation. 

But, thank God, their fall is not an everlasting fall, but 
only a part of the present sifting and shaking in which only 
his "elect," his "saints," shall be able to stand— the falling 
of the false that the true may be made manifest. 
(1 Cor. 11:19.) When the Millennial Sun of Righteousness 
shall have arisen and scattered the mists of error, 
many now stumbling blindly will, we trust, be recovered. 
Those, however, who have been granted the light of present 
truth, and who are cast out as unworthy of it, seem 
to be in a more serious condition— apparently in danger 
of the hopeless "second death." 



R1919 :page 17 

BOAST IN THE LORD. 



"Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let 

the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his 

riches: but let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth 

and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exerciseth 

loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; 

for in these things I delight, saith the Lord." 

"Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of 

this world?" "He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord."— 

Jer. 9:23,24; 1 Cor. 1:20,31. 

THINGS highly esteemed among men are wisdom, 
power and riches. But it is not the wisdom that 
cometh down from above, nor the power of godliness, nor 
the true heavenly riches that moth cannot destroy nor rust 
corrupt that is sought after by the world. Men of the 
world have not learned the value of these, and therefore 
they "spend their strength for naught, and their labor for 
that which satisfieth not." "The reverence of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom;" the faith that lays hold upon 
the might of the Lord is the beginning of power; and the 
poverty that freely surrenders all things to the will and 
service of God is the beginning of true riches. Worldly 



R1919 :page 18 

wisdom, which has not its foundation in the reverence of 
the Lord, tends to self-exaltation and pride; power in the 
hands of the ungodly tends to haughtiness and overbearing 
selfishness; and riches, among those who have not 
learned from God the responsibilities of stewardship, tend 
only to dwarf the soul, rendering it impervious to the noble 
sentiments of love and brotherly kindness. 

The man who, by dint of labor and strife, succeeds in 
a measure in gaining one or all of these earthly prizes 
generally considers himself a wise man; for he does not 
realize how transient are the treasures, how unsatisfactory 
they will prove in the end, what snares are in them, nor 
how great is the value of the heavenly treasure which he has 
missed while grasping after fleeting earthly things. 

To the worldly who have never known the treasures 
of divine grace these earthly things are of paramount importance; 
but to the child of God, if possessed, they only 
increase the responsibilities of his stewardship; for they 
are not his, but the Lord's, all being included in his consecration. 
Whatever he has of human learning— education 
—must be held in subservience to the wisdom of God. 
No human theories or philosophies that conflict with the 
Word of God may be entertained. A "Thus saith the 
Lord" must be the end of all controversy when human 
reasonings come in conflict with divine wisdom; for the 
wisdom of this world that arrays itself in opposition to the 
heavenly wisdom is "foolishness with God," and will by 
and by be brought to most ignominious humiliation. So 
also the human might that lifts its puny arm in defiance of 
Jehovah's power shall suddenly be destroyed, and that 
without remedy, and the hoarded riches shall be scattered 
to the winds. 

What folly is it then— especially for any one who has 
been enlightened by the truth, and made a child and heir 
of God— to forget the importance and value of the unseen 
heavenly treasure and turn to minding earthly things. For 
any to glory in such a course is to glory in their shame and 
folly. But let it not be so with us: "He that glorieth, let 
him glory in the Lord." "Let him glory in this," saith 
the Lord, "that he understandeth and knoweth me." 
"And this is life eternal," said Jesus, "that they might 
know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou 
hast sent."— John 17:3. 

This is the knowledge that does not puff up, the wisdom 
that cometh down from above. The beginning of 
this wisdom is indeed the reverence of the Lord. Nor can 
we grow in this wisdom except by continued growth in the 
reverence of the Lord. If to any degree we cease to reverence 
supremely the Lord's words, or if we cease to cultivate 
his acquaintance through our privilege of communion 
and fellowship with him in prayer, in the study of his Word, 
meditation upon his glorious character and teachings, and 

R1920 : page 18 



in obedience to his will, to the extent of our neglect we 
fail to realize the blessings of that wisdom that cometh 
down from above. 

But if, in the use of these privileges, we open our 
hearts to receive all that divine grace has in store for us, 
then, indeed, we may glory in the Lord. Let such a one 
"glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me." 
To thus know the Lord is not merely to know of him, to 
know something of his works and ways, but it is to know 
him by that intimate fellowship and communion which, by 
a living faith, seals the testimonies of his Word upon our 
hearts and makes us to realize that they are ours personally, 
that the Lord himself is our personal friend and helper and 
counselor and guide. We thus become acquainted with 
his spirit, his principles and methods of action,— we understand 
him,— we know how to interpret his providences, to 
mark his leadings, to observe his attitude toward us and 
thus daily to walk with him. Thus also we are led to a 
fuller appreciation of the Lord's righteousness and of his 
loving kindness, which will in due time establish justice in 
all the earth. Well, indeed, may we glory in the Lord and 
in the fact of his great condescension to us personally, when 
thus we come to understand and know him. 

In this blessed sense of the divine love and care, we 
may say in the words of the Psalmist, "My soul shall make 
her boast in the Lord. I will bless the Lord at all times: 
his praise shall continually be in my mouth. O magnify 
the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. I 
sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from 
all my fears. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard 
him, and saved him out of all his troubles. O taste and see 
that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in 
him. O fear the Lord, ye his saints; for there is no want 
to them that fear him."— Psa. 34:1-9. 

How precious is this experience of the child of God! 
but it can never be the experience of a proud heart; "for 
God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace [his favor] to the 
humble. Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time." (1 Pet. 5:5,6.) 
It is hard for those who are rich in the wisdom 
or power or wealth of this world to do this. (Matt. 19:24-26.) 
It was hard for the scribes and Pharisees who were 
rich in titles and honors and praise of men; it was hard 
for the whole Jewish nation who were proud of being the 
seed of Abraham to whom pertained the promises of God; 
it was hard for the Greeks who were proud of their worldly 
wisdom and intellectual attainments; it was hard for the 
Romans who were proud of their power and prestige among 
the nations. And it is hard to-day for all those who have 
pride in any thing. It is hard for all religionists whose 
pride in the sectarian religious systems of Christendom 
blinds their eyes to the truth now due; it is hard also for 
those who boast in human philosophies and science, falsely 
so called; who are proud of being inventors of something 
new and strange, and who desire to be thought great and to 



lead men after them; it is hard for all those who reverence 
the opinions of men more than the words of the Lord. All 
those who either are rich or desire to be rich in the things 

R1920 : page 19 

of this present life, and specially those who are "rich" in 
a good opinion of themselves, or in self will, find it hard 
to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God. Indeed, 
the Apostle intimates that the greatest battle of each 
one coming to a knowledge of the truth is along this line; 
for it is after pointing to the severe humiliation of our Lord 
Jesus that he says, "Wherefore, my beloved, work out your 
own salvation [in like manner] with fear and trembling; 
for it is God that worketh in you [by this severe discipline, 
this humbling process] both to will and to do of his good 
pleasure."— Phil. 2:12,13. 

Those who have endeavored in all sincerity to do so 
have always found the grace of God sufficient for them; 
but very few are ever disposed to make the attempt. To 
all the worldly-wise the preaching of the cross is foolishness, 
and they have no disposition to take up their cross daily 
and follow Christ. 

It is for this reason that "not many wise men after the 
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called" to share 
with the Lord in the glory of his Kingdom. They are 
generally so engrossed with the things of the present life 
—its pursuits, its cares, its pleasures, etc.— that they have 
no ear for the Lord's call. They are not humble enough 
even to hear the call; much less are they humble enough to 
obey it and to walk the narrow way of self-sacrifice in 
which the Lord leads. 

"But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world 
[those who are not noted for worldly wisdom or influence 
or wealth] to confound the wise; and God hath chosen 
the weak things of the world to confound the things which 
are mighty; and base things of the world [the humble 
poor], and things which are despised, hath God chosen; 
yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things 
that are." (1 Cor. 1:26-29.) How truly the wise are being 
confounded to-day by the power of the truth in the hands 
of the humblest of God's consecrated children! Systems 
of error which are the growth of centuries are put to confusion 
and are tottering before it, and the sages of all the 
sects are troubled by it; for it is becoming more and more 
apparent to all men that "the wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men 
shall be hid." -Isa. 29:14. 

Why has God chosen these weak, inferior instruments 
for his great work? why does he not employ the eloquent 
tongues, the pens of ready writers, and the prestige of great 
names? Paul tells us why. It is in order "that no flesh 
should glory in his presence." The great work of vanquishing 
sin and establishing righteousness in the earth is the 
Lord's work: no human power is adequate to the emergencies 
of the case. Yet God is pleased to allow his power 



to operate through any human instrument that is meet for 
his use; i.e., that can be used without injury to itself. If 
God were to work his wonders through those whose hearts 
are inclined to pride, that pride would grow, and would 
arrogate to self the glory that belongs to God, instead of 
appreciating the honor of being a servant of God, an instrument 
in his mighty hand— "for the Master's use made 
meet." 

The Lord's use of even the weakest instruments, of 
those having even a very small measure of talent for his 
service, sometimes proves an exaltation too great, and that 
which was a blessing becomes a curse through pride and 
vain-glory. Such is the perversity of human nature, and 
such the subtlety of the Adversary in gaining the advantage, 
that the very texts above cited sometimes become a stumbling-block 
to many who are not only poor financially, but 
who are deficient in intellect and education, and who even 
lack instruction in the divine Word. They forget that the 
Lord said, "Blessed are ye poor i.e., those who were poor 
(or became so) as his disciples]" (Luke 6:20); or, as 
Matthew (5:3) records it, "Blessed are the poor in spirit." 
And they forget that the ignorant as well as the learned, 
the poor as well as the rich, can become "puffed up in their 
fleshly mind." It is sad to see "a man think himself to 
be something, when he is nothing" (Gal. 6:3), thus deceiving 
himself,— but specially so, when even the rudiments 
of education and Christlikeness are lacking. We believe 
that modesty and simplicity are traits to be cultivated by 
rich and poor alike, who are blessed with a knowledge of 
the truth, and that any "confounding of the mighty" 
should be done kindly and in meekness (Eph. 4:2; 2 Tim. 2:25), 
and not in a combative spirit or with a show of 
gratification over their defeat. 

Above almost every thing else, therefore, beloved, let us 
guard well our humility. It is only when we are little in 
our own eyes that God can use us with safety to ourselves. 
And yet he does not shield us from every test of fidelity. 
If therefore the Lord gives you a little exaltation to-day, a 
little encouragement of success in his service, receive it 
humbly, meekly remembering your own unworthiness and 
insufficiency except as God is pleased to work through you; 
and be just as ready to receive the humiliations of tomorrow 
as necessary for your discipline and the proper 
balancing of your character. If the success of yesterday 
makes you fret under the humiliation of to-day, then beware: 
you are not as roundly developed spiritually as you 
should be. Whatever may be the triumphs of the truth 
through us, let us always remember that we are among "the 
things that are not." Let us endeavor therefore to 
make the Apostle Paul's experience our own, who said,— 
"I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be 
content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how 
to abound: everywhere, and in all things, I am instructed, 
both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound and to 
suffer need. I can do all [these] things through Christ 
which strengtheneth me."— Phil. 4:11-13. 



In God's dealings with his people at all times we can 
see his care in guarding them against pride and self-sufficiency. 
If he would choose Israel to be his peculiar people, 
he permits them first to be enslaved for four hundred years, 

R1920 : page 20 

and then with a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm he 
gathers them to the promised land. Moses, too, the chosen 
deliverer, was of humble birth. He was slow of speech, 
and needed Aaron to supplement this weakness. And Paul 
had his "thorn in the flesh," from which the Lord was not 
pleased to deliver him, though thrice he besought the Lord 
to remove it; and the Lord said unto him, "My grace is 
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness 
[i.e., my strength, operating through this imperfect 
earthen vessel, will be more manifest to men than if the 
vessel were a perfect and polished one. In that case men 
might ascribe the greatness of the work to the talent of 

R1921 : page 20 

Paul, and by and by conclude that since Paul is only a man 
it is only presumption for him to assume to teach other 
men, etc. But if the power is seen to be of God, and 
merely working through Paul as a ready instrument— meek, 
willing and energetic— then the testimony of the grace of 
God will be weighty with them: and so it was]." 

To this explanation and assurance from the Lord Paul 
meekly replied, "Most gladly therefore will I rather glory 
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon 
me."-2Cor. 12:8,9. 

The Lord with unerring wisdom has always chosen the 
meek for every great work. Moses was the meekest man 
in all the earth. (Num. 12:3.) Meekness was a marked 
characteristic of all the prophets and ancient worthies. 
The Lord Jesus was meek and lowly of heart (Matt. 1 1:29), 
who, though he was rich, yet for our sakes became poor. 
He was of humble birth, born in a manger and reared in 
the despised town of Nazareth, that he might be called a 
Nazarene. The twelve apostles were all plain men, mostly 
fishermen; and so also the whole Gospel Church— not the 
church nominal, but the true ones written in heaven— have 
generally been the poor of this world, who were willing 
to be humbled yet more and more, that the power of 
Christ might be manifested through them. 

Let every one therefore humble himself under the 
mighty hand of God. This is not the time for exaltation, 
but for humiliation and trial. The exaltation will come in 
due time to the faithful. Let our present glory be in that we 
understand and know the Lord, and in that he condescends 
to make use of these poor earthen vessels in his service, that 
it may be manifest to all men that the excellency of the 
power is of God, and not of men.— 2 Cor. 4:7. 

R1924 : page 20 



THE PROMISE. 



"Times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, 
and he shall send Jesus Christ, who before was preached unto you. 
Acts 3:19-21. 

There are verses in my Bible 

That bring solace and delight; 
On my way-worn spirit shining 

Like a day-star in the night; 
For my faith now holds the promise 

Of a grand and glad reward,— 
Since refreshing times are coming 

From the presence of the Lord. 

While I tread life's rugged pathway, 

Through the calm and stormy years; 
As I hear the wails of anguish, 

And behold the gushing tears; 
I might fail to see God's goodness, 

And surrender to despair, 
If I could not read my Bible 

And his promise written there. 

When I hear the bondman cursing 

Cruel hands that forged his chain; 
When I scent the smoke of carnage, 

And recount the mangled slain; 
I might own the prince infernal 

As creation's reigning lord, 
If I could not read the promise 

And believe its cheering word. 

While the pliant mind of childhood 

Is estranged by errors vile, 
And the lips so pure and loving 

Are instilled with curse and guile; 
While the spotless form of virtue 

Is befouled with hands of lust, 
I can still look up to heaven 

And believe that God is just. 

Oh! the better day is dawning 

When the Judge shall take his seat, 
And this murderous tide of error 

Shall ebb out in swift retreat. 
Then the resurrected creature 

Shall the Lord's salvation see, 
Can repent of former follies 

And "in Christ" henceforth be free. 

Would you know what makes me trustful 
When the clouds obscure the sun? 



Would you know what makes me cheerful 
When life's race is almost run? 

There's a book mark in my Bible 
That will point you to the line 

That has filled my saddened spirit 
With the rays of hope divine. 

For my faith now holds the promise 

Of a grand and glad reward: 
Since refreshing times are coming 

From the presence of the Lord. 

See Isa. 25:6-8. G.M.BILLS. 



R1921 : page 21 

THE POWER OF JESUS. 

--FEB. 2.-Luke 5:17-26.- 

Golden Text— "The Son of Man hath power 
upon earth to forgive sins."— Luke 5:24. 

THE statement of verse 17 shows the rapidly growing 
influence of our Lord even at this early stage of his 
ministry. From the wilderness scene of temptation and 
victory he had gone into Galilee filled with the power of 
the holy spirit, and his fame had gone out through all that 
region. He had taught in their synagogues and been glorified 
of all. He had come down to Capernaum, and the 
people were astonished at his doctrine, for his word was 
with power. He had healed the sick and the lepers, and 
had cast out devils, and the multitudes thronged about him 
continually. And so great was the attention which his 
teaching and his works attracted that Pharisees and doctors 
of the law came out of every town of Galilee, and Judea, 
and Jerusalem to hear and to see.— Luke 4:14-16,22. 

We next notice the great faith that so perseveringly 
brought the palsied patient to the attention of the Great 
Physician. Being unable to reach Jesus through the crowds 
that continually thronged about him, so great was their faith 
in his healing power that they removed a portion of the 
tiling from the roof, and, with his couch, let him down 
over the heads of the people. This persevering, trusting 
faith in Christ speedily received its reward— the forgiveness 
of sins and healing. 

We notice that the forgiveness of sins was the first 
blessing— "And when Jesus saw their faith [the faith of 
the sick man and those interested in him], he said unto him, 
"Man, thy sins are forgiven thee." This evidently was 
an unlooked for answer. The previous miracles of healing 
doubtless led all to expect a similar manifestation of healing 
power; but as yet it was not manifest. There lay the 
sufferer before them all while the people pondered this claim 



of the man of Nazareth to have power on earth to forgive 

sins, probably while the Lord was proceeding with his discourse, 

not allowing this incident to interrupt it entirely. 

But there were some whisperings among the scribes and 
Pharisees present, who said, This is blasphemy. Who can 
forgive sins but God alone? Though their murmuring 
words did not reach the ear of the Lord, he perceived their 
thoughts. Their cynical faces doubtless told the tale of 
their scorn and unbelief; and their influence upon the 
people who looked to them as leaders and teachers 
was also manifest. Has this man indeed power to forgive 
sins? has he authority from God to this effect? is he indeed 
the Messiah, the sent of God?— these were the questions 
revolving in the minds of the people. And it was to 
awaken these thoughts that the Lord had said it. His words 
implied the claim of Messiahship. Truly none could forgive 
sins but God alone, except as his anointed and authorized 
agent and representative, and in his appointed way. The 
divinely appointed way for the cancellation of sins was by 
means of the ransom as the legal settlement of the penalty, 
and faith in Christ the Redeemer. 

The faith of this man and his friends in Christ and his 
claims had been put to the test and manifested, and though 
the ransom price had not yet been actually given, the Lamb 
for sacrifice had already been presented by our Lord at his 
baptism, and had been accepted of God and was on the 
altar of sacrifice. And therefore, in view of the complete 
consuming and acceptableness to God of that sacrifice, 
Jesus, perceiving their faith, could then say, "Thy sins 
are forgiven thee." 

We observe that the healing did not follow as a result 
of the forgiveness of sins. The forgiveness of sins was one 
thing, and the healing was another; and Jesus intimates 
that the same divine authority that was necessary to the 
forgiveness of sins was also necessary to the healing; and 
that if the forgiveness of sins was blasphemy, so also was 
the healing. From what they had seen, they must all admit 
his power, and consequently also his authority, to heal, and 
that the authority and power must be of God. And this 
power and authority they must therefore recognize as the 
divine testimony of his claims to be the Son of God and 
the Messiah of Israel. "Whether is easier," said he, "to 
say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Rise up and walk;" 
for the same authority and power are necessary to both. 
"But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on 
earth to forgive sins (he said to the palsied man), I say 
unto thee, Arise and take up thy couch, and go into thine 
house. And immediately he rose up before them, and 
took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, 
glorifying God. And they were all astonished, and they 
glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have 
seen strange things to-day." 

Thus our Lord called attention to his miracles of healing 
as the divine testimonials of his claims to be the Son 
of God and the long-looked-for Messiah of Israel, to whom 
was intrusted the great work of taking away the sin of the 



world, and subsequently of healing men of all their infirmities, 
these all being part of the wages of sin. "Behold 
the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world!" 
said John; and Jesus endorsed that saying by his subsequent 
claim to have power on earth to forgive sins. And 
the Father also endorsed his claim by granting him the 
power to do many wonderful works in the sight of all the 
people. 

While the forgiveness of sins is an assurance that the 
healing, or removal of the penalty of sin, will surely follow, 
as the palsied man doubtless considered it and waited for 
the healing, it does not signify that the recovery from the 
penalty will immediately follow. The Gospel Church, for 
instance, receives the forgiveness of sins in this Gospel age; 
but not until the dawning of the Millennium will she be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption. But in due 
time the power that accomplishes the one will accomplish 
the other also; and by and by those miracles of grace which 
brought health and gladness to so many in Israel, and which 
attracted the attention and were the astonishment of that 
whole nation, will be totally eclipsed by the wonder-working 
power and authority of this same Jesus exalted to power 
and dominion over the whole earth as the mighty Prince of 
peace, who, having in the days of his flesh redeemed the 
world by the sacrifice of himself, comes again to heal all 
their infirmities and to restore them to the fulness of divine 
favor in which is eternal life and peace. 

Blessed be God! it is as easy to say, Thy sins be forgiven 
thee, as to say, Rise up and walk, and vice versa; 
for both the authority and the power are committed unto 
Jehovah's Anointed, in whom is all our hope and all our 
trust. 

It will be observed that all the healings performed by 
our Lord were both instantaneous and complete, showing 
the fulness of his authority and power, and they included 
the worst forms of disease— leprosy, palsy, blindness from 
birth, and even awakenings from death. In all these respects 

R1921 : page 22 

they differed from the healings we hear of to-day, 
many of which are somewhat remarkable; and when the 
agents and agencies employed are not in opposition to the 
Lord and his truth, we are justified in accepting them as 
slight intimations to men that the times of restitution are 
at hand, and as a preparation for the great restoring work 
which may be expected as soon as the world's great tribulation 
is past. 

Other manifestations of healing power through agencies 
in subtle opposition to the Lord and his Word of truth, 
such, for instance, as Christian Science, so called, we can 
only regard as the efforts of Satan to offset the power of 
God, which is now occasionally and partially manifested as a 
mere intimation of coming blessings to lead men gradually 
to expect their fulness.* 



*See The Epistle of James, in our issue of May 15, '92. 



R1922 : page 22 

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 

--FEB. 9.-Luke 6:41-49.- 

Golden Text— "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and 
do not the things which I say?"— Luke 6:46. 

THIS portion of our Lord's sermon suggests several important 
thoughts:— (1) That it is wrong to encourage 
in one's self a fault-finding disposition, even though the faults 
of others, if not our own, must be manifest and often painful 
to us. True brotherly love remembers that we are all 
imperfect in various ways, that while our neighbors' faults 
are unpleasant to us, ours may be equally unpleasant to 
them; and as we desire to have our neighbors considerate 
of our lameness from the fall and to have patience with our 
weaknesses, so, in the same brotherly love, we should exercise 
a similar forbearance. 

(2) The Lord's words imply that a persistent fault-finding 
disposition, which ignores the faults of self and 

magnifies those of others, is mere hypocrisy— a vain pretension 

to a zeal for righteousness which is not sincere. A 

sincere zeal for righteousness will always begin with self-discipline; 

and in proceeding to help others will endeavor 

to do so with skill and carefulness, and as gently as possible, 

remembering the slow and painful processes of one's own 

self-correction and self-culture. 

If any man does not submit his own heart to the leading 
and teaching of the Lord, he has no authority from him 
to teach others to do so. And for such to presume to do 
so, as did the Pharisees and doctors of the law, is hypocrisy, 
as the Lord plainly indicated. (See also Matt. 23:2-7,13.) 
"Unto the wicked [those who know what is right and do it 
not, who refuse to practise what they preach], God saith, 
What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou 
shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou 
hatest instruction and castest my words behind thee?" (Psa. 50:16,17.) 
Only those who, being fully consecrated to 
the Lord, have received the anointing of his holy spirit, 
are commissioned of God to preach the gospel and serve 
the household of faith. And only such as continually and 
faithfully submit themselves to the leading of the spirit of 
God, out of the old paths of sin and uncleanness, into the 
paths of holiness, are worthy or able to perform the skilful 
service of teaching and serving the Lord's household. 

(3) The Lord points to the common acts and words 

of our daily life as the index of our hearts, saying, "A good 
tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt 



tree bring forth good fruit; for every tree is known 
by his own fruit." So also, "A good man out of the good 
treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and 
an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth 
forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart 
his mouth speaketh." 

Thus it appears that all of our words and actions in 
the little as well as in the great things of life testify in judgment, 
either for or against us, every day. With what carefulness, 
then, should we guard every act and word of life; 
and if overtaken in a fault, we should quickly repent and 
seek forgiveness, remembering that "If any man sin, we 
have an advocate," etc.— 1 John 2:1,2. 

(4) Our attention is called to the necessity of doing, 
as well as hearing, the words of the Lord. To do as the 
Lord indicated, signified, not an insincere outward show of 
righteousness (calling attention to one's own good deeds by 
contrasting them with the failures of others, and at the same 
time being blind to deeper and graver personal faults), but 
it signified radical and thorough reform, a digging down 
deep through all the rubbish of pride and conceit and laying 
well the foundations of a sincere and righteous character. 
Digging deep for a sure foundation upon which to rear 
such a superstructure, we find nothing solid until we come 
to Christ the rock. (1 Cor. 10:4; Rom. 9:33; 1 Pet. 2:7,8.) 
In ourselves we find no ground of stability upon 
which to rear our building of character and faith. Nor is 
there stability in anything which other men can furnish. 
Human resolutions and human theories are all sandy foundations 
which cannot insure permanence in the storms of 
life. But those who are rooted and grounded in Christ and 
built up in him— in his doctrine, his love, and his character 
—shall never be moved. When the floods of temptation 
rise and in a steady stream beat against that house, it 
shall not be moved; for its strength is in Christ, the solid 
rock upon which it is founded. 

Those not thus founded in Christ will surely fall: their 
faith will surely be swept away; and character must necessarily 
suffer from the decline of faith. 



R1922 : page 22 

THE GREAT HELPER. 

-FEB. 16. -Luke 7:2-16.- 

Golden Text— "And there came a fear on all; and they glorified 
God, saying, A great prophet is risen among us, and God hath 
visited his people."— Luke 7:16. 

IN THIS narrative a believing Gentile is brought to our 
attention whose faith and humility are worthy of imitation. 
An officer among the Roman soldiers on duty in 
Palestine, he had come in contact with God's people and 



law and from these had learned something of the righteousness 
of God, of his wonderful leading and teaching of his 
people, and of the promises given to them. Evidently these 
things had awakened in him feelings of reverence for God 
and love for righteousness and truth. These sentiments 
towards the God of Israel found expression in special kindness 
toward his people; and, being a man of means, he 
had built a synagogue for some of them. 

Evidently he was naturally a benevolent man, well disposed, 
and had a heart, which, had he been born an Israelite 

R1922 : page 23 

and entitled to the privileges of that elect nation, would 
have proved to be good soil in which the good seed of the 
Kingdom, planted by our Lord, would have brought forth 
good results and have constituted him one of the "brethren." 
This is attested not only by his faith, but also by the fact 
that his servant was "dear unto him," so loved that he 
went to much trouble to secure his healing. In his humility 
he felt unworthy of our Lord's favors, realizing, as did the 
Syrophenician woman, that the Gentiles were as "dogs" 
who could have only the crumbs from the children's table. 
Hence he got the elders of his city to request the Master 
to heal his servant; and they urged his request before our 
Lord, saying that he was a good man, "He loveth our nation 
and hath built us a synagogue." 

The beauty of the centurion's faith and humility was 
specially manifest in his afterthought and message of apology 
to the Lord for having asked him to come to his house to 
see his servant; for he felt that in so doing he had only 
put him on a par with other physicians, and besides was 
taking him away from other and more important work: 
hence his message, I am unworthy that you should come 
under my roof; but being myself a man clothed with 
authority, and accustomed to doing things by my servant's 
hands, I know that you can do the same on a higher plane 
with your servants and agents: therefore simply speak 
the word of command, and it shall be done. 

This simple, noble faith and humility were very pleasing 
to the Lord, who declared, "I have not found so great 
faith,— no not in Israel," where he had much more reason 
to expect it. His faith was rewarded by the healing of his 
servant, and our Lord, who had received his message through 
the Elders at Capernaum (verse 3), and who had already 
started toward the Centurion's house, discontinued his 
journey and instantly granted the healing of the servant. 

Impressed by the faith and goodness of this Centurion, 
so unexpected among Roman soldiers, we were considering 
that it would be "just like the Lord" to send the gospel 
to such a noble Gentile soon after the Jewish favor would end, 
when the doors of divine love and mercy would be opened 
to Gentiles as well as Israelites. Then the Lord brought 
to our memory Cornelius, the first Gentile to whom the 
gospel message was sent. (Acts 10:1-8.) We remembered 
that he also was a Centurion, and of him also it is 



recorded that he was "a devout man, and one that feared 
God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, 
and prayed to God always." It is not probable that among 
the Roman soldiers of Palestine there were two Centurions 
of such similarly exceptional character. The residence of 
the Centurion mentioned by Luke is not stated but that of 
Cornelius is mentioned: it was Caesarea. Turning to Map 
No. 10 in a Teacher's Bible we found with no little pleasure 
that the distance from Capernaum to Caesarea is only about 
45 miles, and that Nain is on the way, a little to the East, 
about 20 miles from Capernaum. We note also the remark 
of Peter, when preaching Christ and his gospel to 
Cornelius (Acts 10:37), to the effect that Cornelius already 
knew the word which Jesus had preached throughout all 
Judea. In our judgment the circumstantial evidences 
are strong that the Centurion of our lesson was Cornelius. 
This would also explain why the holy spirit was poured out 
on Cornelius and his house even while Peter yet spake, and 
before it is even stated that Cornelius accepted Christ; for 
apparently he had already done so, as narrated by Luke. 

R1923 : page 23 

It was just like the Lord, too, to keep in mind this 
exceptional character among the Gentiles, and when the due 
time came for the gospel to be preached to the Gentiles, to 
send it to him first. "Them that honor me, I will honor," 
saith the Lord; and so it appears in this case that the 
Centurion was doubly honored, first in the granting of his 
request and in the friendship and commendation of the 
Lord; and subsequently in being the first Gentile to receive 
the holy spirit of adoption as a son and heir of 
God. 

The power manifested by Jesus in reawakening the 
young man of Nain was another proof of his Messiahship 
which none of his enemies could gainsay or resist; and 
the people drew from this potent argument the only legitimate 
conclusion. There came a reverential fear on all; 
for they felt that this was indeed the great prophet sent of 
God, and that in him God had visited his people to bless 
them with his love and grace; and they glorified God. 

If the people had only followed their convictions, 
based upon such indubitable testimony, how greatly they 
would have been blessed! But instead of doing this, they 
afterward stifled their convictions and weakly leaned upon 
the judgment of their blind guides; and by and by, with 
few exceptions, notwithstanding all the testimony of his 
wonderful teachings and mighty works, and notwithstanding 
all that the prophets wrote concerning him, which was 
plainly fulfilled in him, they stumbled into unbelief and 
crucified the Lord's Anointed. Let children of God to-day 
beware of a similar mistake, and when convinced of the 
truth, hold it fast in a good and honest heart and promptly 
acknowledge it, lest blindness come upon them; remembering 
the Lord's words,— "He that is ashamed of me and 
my words, of him will I be ashamed." 



R1923 : page 23 
"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT. 



Virginia. 

DEAR SIR:— Recently, while waiting on a patient, on 
looking around for something to read, I came upon the 
second volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. I became much interested 
in it; and upon inquiry, I learned that my patient 
had all three volumes, which she kindly loaned me. They 
had been in the house, she told me, several years, but they 
had evidently never been read. I have read them all, not 
as carefully as I should have liked, and found in them much 
food for thought. Your calculation as to the time of the 
end seems to be very plausible. I am not able to pick any 
flaw in it, unless I say that I have always had the idea that 
God never intended that any one should know in advance 
when the end would come. Of course, this idea of mine 
may be a very erroneous one, and certainly is worth absolutely 
nothing if there is any Scriptural proof against it. 
Your calculations, made in different ways and from different 
standpoints, do seem very conclusive, the one based upon 
the Jubilee striking me very forcibly. 

I am sincerely anxious to know the truth and to live 
the truth. I am a Calvinist in faith, profoundly reverent 
in my attitude toward God, and earnestly desirous to know 
and to do his will, and his alone. If the views instilled into 
me from my infancy are in any respect erroneous, I 
would like to get rid of the error, but I do not wish to 
commit the mistake of giving up the real truth under the 
belief that it is not truth. 

Your views are intensely fascinating, but some of them 

R1923 : page 24 

are so different from and opposed to what I have always 
believed to be Scriptural, that you can not wonder that I 
want more proof. Have you anything more that will 
throw further light on these grand themes? 
Very respectfully yours, W. W. M . 

REPLY:— We are always glad to meet and greet personally 
or by mail God's consecrated children. We perceive 
that you have the spirit of Christ, reverence and love for 
the truth. Your "idea" that God did not intend that anyone 
should know in advance when the end of the present 
age would come, and the Millennium be ushered in, is, we 
think, correct— borne out by facts. But if the Millennium 
began chronologically in 1874, and we are since then in the 
lapping time (forty years) in which the one age ends and 
the other as gradually begins, can it be said that any one 



knew of it in advance? Should we not expect that all 
who are Christ's "brethren" would be made to know of 
the changes of dispensation now in progress which are 
causing the world so much perplexity? Remember the 
Apostle's words on this subject: "The day of the Lord so 
cometh as a thief in the night [stealthily, unobservedly], 
and when they [the world] shall say, Peace and safety, then 
sudden destruction cometh upon them as travail upon a 
woman with child [with paroxysms of increasing severity]; 
and they shall not escape; but ye, brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake you [completely] as 
a thief. Ye are all the children of the light and of the 
day."— 1 Thes. 5:2-6. 

We have sent you samples of this Journal, as requested; 
and recommend a second or third careful reading 
of the three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have read with interest 
the article in the TOWER for Nov. 15, "Decently and in 
Order." Do I understand you to advise an organization 
as nearly as possible like that existing in the days of the 
Apostles? We have abundant evidence that their arrangement 
did not preserve the Churches in those days from error; 
in fact, they finally degenerated into Papacy; and it seems 
as though that would have been nearly impossible if there 
had been no "bishops," "deacons" and "elders." 

Again: If elections are left to the vote of the people, 
will not the unfaithful soon gain the advantage and create 
another "system" from which we will be glad to "come 
out?" 

If those gathered out of Babylon by present truth are 
all of the "wheat" class, they surely need no rules or 
order of any kind. If they are not all "wheat," but if 
some are "tares," will not the electing of elders make 
the companies part of Babylon, which is to be destroyed? 
Yours, B. R. J . 

[REPLY:— The article "Decently and in Order" will 
stand careful study, because the subject is much confused in 
many minds. We expressly state in that article that we 
do not propose an organization, because the true Church is 
already organized, and has been organized for over 1 800 
years. We proposed no preparation of a creed, because our 
creed was made for us (by the Lord), and we have no right 
to change it. We distinctly stated that in our judgment 
only those have a right to a voice in the Church who profess 
faith in the ransom and full consecration to the Lord, 
and whose lives are in conformity with that profession. 

This simple order, if still in force, would operate as at 
the beginning. You will find that in any congregation the 
number of those who even claim such faith and consecration 
is very small. The difficulty which you apprehend in 
the following of the course of the inspired Apostles is a 
misapprehension. The falling away, which culminated in 



Papacy, was from the opposite reason; namely, because 
the consecrated did not preserve their liberties by choosing 
their own leaders according to their understanding of the 
Lord's mind, but on the contrary permitted the leaders to 
usurp their places, authority and power, independent of 
them. Our only safety lies in close adherence to the instruction 
of the Word of God. 

We have never claimed that the acceptance of the 
present truth proved a person to be of the "wheat" class; 
on the contrary, we have pointed out, repeatedly, that 
after receiving the light of present truth the sifting and 
separating, the threshing and winnowing, progresses most 
earnestly;— that the truth is a savor of life unto life, or 
of death unto death. The gathering of the wheat "into 
the garner," from which all "tares" are excluded, is the 
gathering into the heavenly state as we are "changed," 
and pass beyond the vail. 

To suppose that observing the Apostolic order, and 
preserving liberty by electing "elders" to serve the Church, 
is joining "Babylon," is to suppose that the Apostles 
organized "Babylon;"— a great mistake. The Babylonian 
method is just the reverse: it, so far as it is able, fetters the 
conscience of the believer with elaborate human formulae 
of creed, and makes the ministers (servants) a special and 
higher order, above the congregation, self-appointed or appointed 
by each other, as the case may be. 



England. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I received your letter this 
morning. I am reading DAWN for the third time, and the 
only part I cannot understand is why others cannot see the 
truth presented therein. Sometimes, when I am reading, my 
heart runs over with joy. I feel like a different man from 
what I was four months ago. I was almost ashamed to 
speak of Jesus and his love, but now I cannot help speaking 
of it all the day long. I have purchased sixty-five copies 
of DAWNS, and have a large card placed in my window as 

R1924 : page 24 

follows: "Every seeker after the truth should read MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, to be had within." 

Our class, of sometimes eighteen, meets on Sunday 
and Tuesday evenings. We are now making arrangements 
for a hall to hold two hundred and fifty people, which we 
trust to open shortly. We shall also have arrangements 
for baptism. We have already commenced open air meetings. 

I have been appointed by the class to be responsible 
for all tracts and DAWNS. We have received over two 
thousand tracts and could do with fifty thousand more. 
We also propose to visit a different town every Saturday afternoon, 
circulating tracts, each tract stamped with my address. 

Yours in Christ, W. THIRKETTLE. 



page 1 
VOL. XVII. FEBRUARY 1, 1896. No. 3. 



HYMNS OF THE MORNING. 

The Shining Light 3 

Before the Great White Throne 4 

Oh, I Am So Happy 5 

I'm Nearing the Goal 6 

Jubilee Echoes 7 

When the Crowning Day Shall Come 8 

Fullness of Joy 9 

I'm Running for the Prize Divine 10 

Now are We the Sons of God 11 

In That Day 11 

O Christ, Our Immortality 12 

page 2 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



OLD LOT OF CLOTH BOUND MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



OUR new stock of cloth-bound DAWNS is of uniform shade of 
cloth in all volumes, and stamped on sides as well as backs with 
silvery instead of gilt metal. 

THE old lot stamped in gilt and not perfectly matched in shade of 
cloth we are closing out at the special price of $1.00 per set (3 vols.), 
including postage, or 75 cents per set at your charges. 



page 25 
VOL. XVII. FEBRUARY 15, 1896. No. 4. 



Vol. XVII 



ALLEGHENY, PA., FEBRUARY 1, 1896 



No. 3 



giON's (6lad Songs 0™ ^Horning. 



m 



F. G. BuEEOuaHS. 



The Shining Light. 



H. L. MoPhati. 



& 



$ 



1 



aj- 



in rs is 



1 



t t f 



*'+*■ -* 



§sa 



1. Od the Chris-tian's path s shin - ing light ap-pears, Grow-ing bright and bright - er 

2. Though 00 eye hath seen, nor mor - tal ear hath heard, All the grace and bean • ty 

3. There is noth • ing cov - ered but shall be re-vealed When the books are o 

m — * — « — m — * 



jFFjp-tf — I 



fc^ P I * P 



^m 



Jbt2fcp^ZP=Ep 



£=t 



1/ * 



I I 



ft> 



p^ 



=± 



:*^£: 



£ 



f=i=i= 



=1^^ 



^— 4 4 f - 



terf 



4 ^ 4—4—4 — *--# 

with the pass - ing years, 'Tis the light of wis • dom from the realnib a - bove, Ev - 'ry 
found in God's pure Word ; Yet His Ho • ly Spir -it in • to truth will guide All the 
and the rolls un-sealed ; So we fol - low on, to know as we are known, Tow'rd the 

— — m — • •-, 1 m — 1-0 — » — » — • — » m* - 



£ 



£e£ 



£ 



£ 



fczy— p— p 



U U U U I 



u i 



-v- 



I 



& 



cnoKCs. 






53 



* * — • — » 

day in - creas - ing like God's gifts of love. ) 

trust - ing ones who in His love a - bide. > We will fol - low its lead - ing. We will 

per - feet day when shad-ows will have flown. ) «. fs s ». k 



^S 



i 



-L I v H r 



^ > r 



£ 



T — r 



fa ", P F F F F 



^ 



^ 



MM 



_^_ 



± 



*= #-: : * £ 



i;j. b. ■ J 



fol - low its lead - ing, We will fol - low its lead - ing all the way 



P«- 



■0- ■#• •# ■ ♦ 

1 I » » ^ 



1BZ 



For that 



9 V,>r ^ X I eI 



% 1 % % 



H 



> p 



^ 



■v- 



i 



Xb' f f f 



A-N- 



^S 



a 



£ 



F F F 



5 



H H 



1 



*=£ 



p-#- 



^ 



shin - ing light Will shine more and still more bright, E- ven on • to the per • 

■#• ■#- -P 4- £ 



l> j> U -V-r- 



^ 



feet day. 

•P 



i£ 



a 



F I* 



P — P 



m 



:p=p: 



*c=* 



-+] 



1?-F 



Copyright, 18M, by M. L. HorbaU. Und by permlMloo. 

Ul-a [19261 



(S) 



4 Before the Great White Throne. 

{Firtt verse, Dan. 7: »-!*. L« ! 18) {Second verte. Re*. 3 SI. II- t-5. 18.5-9) {Third verse. Rev. 19. 11-18. Ps. 72.) 
{Povrtk verte, I»». SS: fr-fl. 45: SS-». Lu. 3: «.) (/VMiwrw, Rev. 21 3-8. Ps.67) 

G. M. Bills. M. L. McPbail. 



^ u ^f f^ ^^$^w ^ ^ m 



m 



1. The hour is fast approaching, when thro* a • ery stream Of God's e - ter-nal 

2. And there will be pre-sent - ed the Church, His wor- thy bride, Those fault-less vir ■ gins 

3. Lo! One with crim.9on vest-ure, His name-the Word of God, Shalt lead His shin. nig 

4. The res • ur-rect-ed myr-iads of ev ■ 'ry land and tongue Will haste to swear al - 

5. How grand the con-sum-ma-tion, with death and hell de-stroy ed ; No trai - tor left to 



glo • ry, the 
cbo-sen. His 
ar - mies and 
le-giance to 
dark-en the 



M§& 



m 



•f-~~m. — w~3 — — — aM-5— 3 — — 3— 3 



ma m 



x 



judgment throne shall gieum , When to the Anuient's presence the Son of man they bring, Ten thousand times ten 
joiut-heirs to a - bide; They share His roy - al hon • ors, His na-ture, and His throne, While written in their 
wield the i - ron rod; His word shall smite the na-tions. His feel the wine-press tread, Un-til the fiends of 
God's a-noint-ed Son . Drawn to the blood-stained ai-tar, the ransomed host shall fall In grate-fiil aci - o- 
E - don then en-Joyed , With not a note dis-cord - ant, that u • ni • vera - al song Shall thro' e • tcr - eal 



9 



7»~ 



I: 



mm 



-s-s ~t 



£=§=£ 



— ^-i— f-TTTT 




^^f^f#^^^J 



*T 



thousand shall crown Him Lord and King. Oh, 
fore-heads His Fa-ther's name is shown Oh, 
er - ror from earth have ev - er fied Oh, 
ra - tion, and crown Him Lord of all. Oh, 
cy - cles Je - ho • vah's praise pro-long. Oh, 



that will be a crowning such as earth has 

that will be a marriage snob as earth has 

that will be a conquest such as earth has 

that will be a tri-umph such as earth has 

that will be an anthem such as earth has 



nev . er known, 
nev - er known, 
nev • er known, 
nev . er known, 
nev - er known, 



JtAAJLA^JtXl JL JL JL Jt. 



fe^^^jjg^jj 



i«ip 



When Christ His kingdom shall re-ceive be-fore 

When the bride and bridegroom are made one be-fore 

When the kings of earth their hon-ors lay be-fore 

When ev - 'ry knee is bow - ing low before 

When the Hal - le - lu - jah cho - rus rings be-fore 




A. JL JL 



the great 
the great 
the gr.at 
the great 
the great 

-r* 



white throne, Oh, that will be 
white throne, Oh, that will be 
white throne, Oh, that will be 
white throne; Oh, that will be 
white throne; Ob, that will be 



a crowning such as 
a marriage such as 
a conquest such as 
a tri-omph such as 
an anthem such as 



# 



mmk 



P.~pyr!:sht, WF>. by ^f. L, McPhaii, 03ed b) pcrmi.Mon. 



[1926] 



Before the Great White Throne-Concluded. 



i 



fc 






T\ 



=fc 



-*7S 



^ ' ■ ™ ' " ■ 



m 



*^E*E$E^ 



*=* 



eartn has nev . er known. When Chnst His kihg-dom shall re • ceive be - fore the great white throne, 

earth has nev . er known. When the bride and bride-groom are made one be - fore the great white throne, 

earth has nev . er known, When the kings of earth their hon - ors lay be - fore the great white throne, 

earth has nev er known, When ev . ry knee is bow - mg low be - fore the great white throne, 

earth has nev • er known. When the Hal • te • In • jah uho - rns rings be - fore the great white throne 



eai iu ua» uev ei kuuwu, ** ucu ev • ij nucc 13 uvw ■ tug ww uc ' 

sarth has nev • er known. When the Hal • te • in • jah uho - rns rings be ■ 



ptni. 



t=dh=5 



* 



1 



te*= 



-Jt |» If izfr: 



T 



V 7 T~ 



^—Hff — w — v — v- 



F G Burroughs 



Oh, I Am So Happy. 



^m 



i j j nr^4 



\s* 



M. L McPhail 



JT-lt- 



i 



J* J ^Z* -^ %_J 



■ — 1 — 1 — — ^— w- 



1 Oh. I am so hap . py all the day, My bur - dens have all rolled a • way , 1 

2 Oh, I am so hap - py all the time, Hope's bells of joy so sweet • ly chime; And 

3 Oh, I am so bap . py in the Lord, He is my shield and my re - ward, No 



rf 



1_JLJ.\J-J EE* 



r£t 



T=f 



,« 



*=*i=Z* 



± 



44. -#— j fc 



r- 



N*» 



w=t 



&^sk 



1 



■& 



ntae 



<■ « 



^ 



cast all my care on Christ, my Lord, And I'm trust - ing in 

good - ness and mer ■ cy shall at • tend All my jour « ney to 

val • ley of shad • ow will 1 fear While my Com • fort • er 






His pre - cious word, 
its bliss • ful end. 
and Guide is near. 






I I » 



=fi 



ff\ 



£=J=^ 



:*^=fc 



f 



REFRAIN 



M 



K^ 



-jt :». 



t 



N N 



±= n\ \ 1 1 



f g'ULJ 



* 



*=* 



^_i_^_ 



-# — m- 



r 



1 know I am His and He is mine. My all to His care 



now re - sign, 



^#i - f r if f ^-riCTd ^^ 



I s *! 



a? 



f 



&&&g* 



V v i 



I 



fi 



^ — p. 



^i 



-* ?r 



■# 4 •— — ;#■"■" 





3<8 J i 



r — K- 



=*«=»: 



3tr=^ 



No foe can my peace • ful spir • it harm While I lean on my 






|!|f f f 



Be - lov - ed's arm. 

J3^ - * 



tt 



» 



S3 



-^ — P : 



E 



Copyright. 18M. by M L McPhail Used by permission. 



[1927] 



6 M. Bills. 

Not too fast 



I'm Nearing the Goal. 



M. L. McPhail. 




_i_3 i i_ 



-*-*- 



-N— h 



-*-*- 



- *-*- 



JK 



While on the broad road to de • strnction I strayed, The Spir-it my vile-ness re - 
When Je - sua a-noint-ed my eyes to be-hold The prize that the faith- ful may 
Let lov • ers of pleasure in - tent- ly pur-sue The phantoms of fol - ly and 

4. The serv-ants of mammon may gather in mirth To jeer at my sta - tion un - 

5. Tho' de-mons are strewing my pathway with thorns, Determined to cause my de ■ 

6. The yoke of my Mas-ter is eas - y to wear; The cross that I'm bear-ing is 



vealed;.. 
win ; . . . . 
pride; .. , 
known; , , 

lay, . . 

light;... 



1 
1 

E- 
My 
My 
His 





^=?C 



/TV 



i 



v u * 



-t3 



-\t 



saw all my woes on Im • man • a - el laid, And knew by His stripes 1 was healed .... 

en • tered the race for a cit - y of gold, And fled from the pleasures of sin 

ter - ni - ty's joys I am keep-ing in view, As on - ward to glo • ry I glide 

lot may be cast with the hnm-ble of earth, Yet I am an heir to a throne.... 

soul their de - vie • es of cru - el - ty scorns, And hast- eth to fin - ish her way 

love ev • er - last -nig is sooth-ing my care, And giv-ing me songs in the night 

/7\ 






* 



4 



*& 



W¥*Ut 



1 



Wsn&^ 



■+•* *■ 



^^ 



9&$=* 



t 



B5£ 



£ 



CHORUS. 



1 



te 



K±-± 






i J U 3 3 3 i\i \i i 



P^ 



iW= 



■• — #- 



I'm near - ing the goal, yes, near - ing the goal, The goal of e • ter - nal re 

A. 



§: dE^z|i-HF^^----r^ 



E£ 



=£ 



£ 



ward; 



*=p: 



U V I 



3EZ?I 




i 



/7\ 

S N 



rf\ 



$==}: 



a 



N *l ^- 



— P * . ' ' ■ 1 *t ' ' d , U ^ ' ^ " N " — ™ — ™ 



a!" < 



a^ 



I soon will be there, for - ev - er to share The glo - ry of Je - sus, my 

-»-j-r J / J t t—ft—J - 

-»-P — i — 1 -H i — 



Lord 



<L± 



V- — g> ty>- 



i — ._# 4 m- 



£ 




Words and Music copyright. 1895. by M L. McPhail C*ed by permission. 



[1928] 



G. M. BlLLB. 



Jubilee Echoes. 



i 



^ 



M. L. McPhail. 

N *_ 



% I S 



^=t 



* * f 

1. List - en to the voice ce - les - tial, 

2. Ev • 'ry tomb shall be de - sert • ed, 

3. No more wid - owed hearts re • pin - ing, 

4. With the liv - ing wa - ters flow - ing, 



F^-fry 



Ye whose eyes with weep - ing fail, 

Harps of jo - bi - lee shall ring; 

No more bnn - gry, home • less soak. 

And His sav . ing health made known, 



? E E 1 P [ I JHZ? fr 



■¥- 



S 



Hr-j 1 j t= * 



m 



* 



God re • reals His gra • cious par • pose, To 

'Ruth -less grave, where is thy tri • amph? Cra 

When the earth shall bloom as E - den, And 

Ev - 'ry cheek with bean - ty glow • ing; Ev 



the sonl in sor • row's vale: 

el death, where is thy sting?" 

the "Prince of Peace" con - trols; 

'ry friend of e • vil flown. 



X 



9^ 



* 



Hr-fr 



?= 






£ 



* i i i — ^ f^ 



:£=J=g=g: 



■+- 



r 



There will be no hope - less sad • ness, In 

Sing the blest e > man • ci • pa - tion, Ev 

When the ran • somed hosts are sing • ing, Not 

God will scat • ter leaves of heal • ing, For 



the new earth's gold • en 

'ry creat - ure that bath 

an ech • o of de • 

each loy • al heart and 



years, 

breath, 

spair 

brain, 



£ 



* 



J. 



» 



4- L I 



a 



-Y 



I 



&E 



3 



Et 



E^EEJ 



3 



#£ 



* 



* 



Bliss - ful years re - plete with glad 

Life shall quick • en all ere - a ■ 

In His vast do • min • ion ring 

All His match - less love re - veal 



^ % J * Z 



ness, "God shall wipe a • way all tears," 

tion, There shall thence -forth be no death, 

ing, ' 'There shall be no sor - row there," 

ing, "There shall hence - forth be no pain," 



» : i £=»=* 



32= 



S 



Jc 



I 



-«-r 






¥ 



/?\ 



m 



* 



:*- 



fcfc 



^ 



3: 



Bliss • fnl years re • plete with glad 

Life shall quick -en all ere - a - 

In His vast do • min • ion ring 

All His match -less love re - veal • 

-* — « — ft — « — ft — l£i — "t~ 



* 



u 
< ness, "God shall wipe a - 

tion, There shall thence • forth 
■ ing, "There shall .be no 

ing, "There shall hence • forth 

£ £ t t l* 



way 

be 
sor 

be 

J- 



all 
no 
row 
no 



tears," 
death, 
there." 
pain." 



EfdEEEE 



m 



^z 



±!: 



Copyright. 1899. by M. U McPhull. Used by penDmlon. 



SSJ 



St/ 



[1929] 



8 



When the Crowning Day Shall Come. 



G. M. Bills. 



•• The marriage of the Lamb U oome, and bla wl(e hath made herself ready."— Rev, It: 8-0. 



M. L. McPhail. 



i 



te 



* 



a 



:*=*: 






=5: 3d: 



-A— N- 



i=g=g=£ 



*^r 






• jab!" And the an* gel of the bar- vest shall bring 

■ jah!" And His lov • ing smile with rapt-are shall thrill 

■ jah!" And the saints the judgment scep-ter shall take, 

• jah!" 'Tis this bless • ed hope that fill • eth my soul ; 



When the crown-ing day shall come, "Hal-le . 

When the crown-ing day shall come, ' 'Hal-le . 

When the crown-ing day shall come, "Hal-le ■ 

Oh, the crown-ing day shall come, » 'Hal-le < 



In 
la 
In 
Ju 



f—f- 



■&~ 






nr&l L 



*= I i 1 1 I i r f » \ it 

fTTrrf E rrFm 



? 



» 9 - 



u v — f — v — y- 

N S N - 



■v-v- 






N N 



t 



-« — 0- 



JKQ lq_,..iin^Hi ■ 



N - ft ' 



:^-5=5=-5 




^Ft 



3t3fc 



#=f 



ZSlT 



Ul "His jew - els" that are 



;#-!—#- 



« j. 4 ~ 



All "His jew- els" that are sealed in their fore • heads, To the grand e - ter-nalhome of the King; 

All the ho - ly ones who stand with the Bride-groom, On the heights of Zi - on's glo - ri - ous hill: 

Allearth'sty- rants and their schemes of op-pression, As a curs • ed pot-ter's ves • set to break; 

It is now my dai - ly aim and am • bi - tion To be pure, and free from world- ly con - trol: 



m 



&£l 



-0-0- 



•w — m — a~ 

-p—p-~wz 



■&- 



PS 



:*:=■: 



^— W- r*~- -4 — 



y— m 



H » 0- 



a 



? V * 



-v-v- 



■*—'/- 



W- 



\, V V 



W nnnrrm ^ 



^ — ^ — i. 



*=*— c 



-^tf»- 



-^- 



Oh, what ra - di - ance will light ev - 'ry feat - ure, That was once with thorns of suf-fer. ing scarred 
Then the eyes that see the King in His beau - ty, Nev-ci-more a tear of sor - row shall shed; 
Then the slaves of er • ror, freed from their blind-ness, Shall with glad-ness leave their bondage and strife, 
Well as • sured of an e • ter - nal sal - va - tion, If the path of con - se - era - tion I tread, 



-0—*- 



£ £ P 



*—*- 



— — . ^ — f — h 1 ' — *■*" 1- m-s — m 

^ F i> C L i— ia L \j L, I Li^ -S 



■&- 



3E 



//J 



P=f=f ± ?T^ 



V U fc>- 



521 



f 



-#-s— •- 



tt= 



■¥-¥- 



ycz^. 



M 




N N N 



i 



:j f - j » fc=» 3' j 4 &=2=2 



:*—«- 



*=*=* 



PP5 



7 U i/ 1/ I — •—" — " — " — p - • * * * 4- * — *~~* .. 

And what maj - es - ty shall crown the « 'New Creat-ure," When the ev - er - last - ing gates are nn - barred 
While the feet that trod the thorn-path of du - ty, Shall the heights of im-mor-tal • i - ty tread. 
And be wel-comed by the Spir - it of Kind • ness, To the ev • er - flow - ing wa - ters of life. 
I am look - ing for my blest re - ere • a - tion, In the like - ness of my heav • en - ly Head. 



i-X 



Bi rfc^— ^ 



t-t-^t- 



§ 



1* I* V V- 



■i > u v v- 



u u 



q^qjz: 



ta: 



« 



■CHORES. 



5 



N IS IS IV 



$ 



n r» 



w* 



*f 



TFr?rzT- 



fc^xp^:*: 



&m 



• : • 



-£ — * « - # • 



# 0— 4h 



* V V 
When the crowning day shall come, « 'Hal-le- lu • jah!"And the saints of God are gathered a-bove, 



ass 



i 



■»—— i — i — »- 

v v u > r 



+j — h — b — b- 



hE^ 



? 



v — y 



g ^ i> y - 



-V-? 



v-t^ 



t 



U U V » ^£^*J- tf^ 



"Hal-le - la -jab! Hal-le-ln-jahf" 
Oopiiilnht, IBM, by M. L. MflPhaU. UMd by permiuion. 



above,g»thend above. 



[1930] 



^ 



When the Crowning Day-Concluded. 



^ " ** #■ 



^_fV_^ 



rgTM^s 



i 



-4—* 



5=3=** 



» ■■ « ■ 



r 



i*- 



Will we join the shining ranks of the faith • 
ltd (tto.-We shall join the shining ranks of the faith • 



fal? Shall we wear the blessed seal of His love? 
> ful . We shall wear the blessed seal of His love. 






J //, 



fo. , 1 



I I I f it 



-h—f 



i 



1 



k=it 



U U U i "US 



ftithful, Of the faithful, 

Fullness of Joy. 



Mrs. M: L. Uibb. 



P». 19: .11 



PH 



jfc=R: 



-&- 



love, of His lore. 



M. L. McPhail, 



Hi 



33E3 



t \ * * j j r 



*■ 



* ^ ^ 



1. 'Tis sweet in the prea-ence of Jesus to dwell, Tho' troubles and tri -als an - noy, 

2. A - ban • dant - ly furnished with grace for our needs, When Sa • tan at-tempts to de - coy, 

3. To work for our Lord is a priv • i - lege rare. Each mo-ment of time to em- ploy; 

4. glo - ri - ousproB-pect— if faith-ful till death — Of bliss that no foe can de - stroy! 

4t + 



£EE 






H, l c r r i> i t i 



m 



%m 



1 U i~\.J. 



*=^c 



1 



f t f t 



v—v- 



% 



r=r 



u u n*. 



~f 



i 









i 



it 



£ 



^ 



*==* 



f-iT- 



£3 



j 1- 3 **■■ J : 



*2^= 



of joy! 

of joy! 

Of joy! 

of joy I 



To con-stant-ly feel His ap-prov-al and smiles: — In this there is fnll-ness 

Christ flie3 to our res -cue — to vie • to - ry leads: — In this there is full-ness 

Co - reap-ers with Him in the har-vest to share: — In this there is full-ness 

Made one with the Bridegroom, all na-tions to bless: — In this there is full-ness 



l*JU 



S 



*=£ 



* •» 



B££ 



I 



n^ 



:| § p * jezqe: 



t C ■ > 



£=E 



tit 



IU U H p 



*=*& 

£ 



s 



CHOBPS. 



I J J / J < 1 4 £ j 



pen 



£ 



BHK-k 



^v- 



^ 1 m{ «(_ 



-p — p — ? 

Full-ness of joy I yes, full-ness of joy! Serv-ing our Mas-ter with hearts 

" « * * * J , J»,J> 



^ 



£* 



£ 



* 



full of joy 



1 



--\t L- !-. ► 



» 



£*E 






s 



*— fr 



=£ 



*A 



/TV 



<C\ 



i 



^33^ 



-*—<■ 



ir-ir 



_( p q H- ft M ^ 1 I--* 



*-*! 



Soon we will fin - ish our work here be - low, With full-ness of joy nn - to Him we shall got 



£ 



/•^ 



* » m- 






§sa 



* 



-b> — P U V V 



+ r r f * l 

y \J- - y \ y- 



t ? ^ U fe. 



S=*C 



2Z3|: 



Ospyright, 1P95, by M. I. MePhall Used by permission 



[1931] 



10 



I'm Running for the Prize Divine. 



G. M. Bills. 



M. L. McFhail. 




3 



3=ri 



1. I once re-dined in Sa- tan's coils, Quite will -ing to re - main; I cov-et-ed earth's 

2. God called me while I wan-dered still, His voice my spir • it charmed; The trag-ic scenes on 

3. My bleat e - lee - tion to re • tain, My call • ing to make sure, I still must run thro' 

4. Earth's roy - al pal -a - ces may fall, Her mar • ble turn to dust, Her sweet-eat pleas - ure 



'! Mmriqrr^ 



t 



£ 



BJ 



*=X~- 



jBt . ^ 'fljCZ^d 



11/01 



U 



f 



tae 



* 



S 



s 



tM 



3^=5*-^H|*-S-*- 



^ 



sin - ful spoils, I sought its gold -en gains: But now its charms have passed a- way, Its 

Cal-v'ry's hill My reb • el will dis- armed: The Sav - ior whis - pored to my soul — "Be- 

toil and pain, And to the end en - dure; An earth - ly home may not be mine, Yet 
change to gall, Her gold and ail • ver rust; But for a cit • y I am bound Whose 

JS ~m * m m, "f - "*" • 



95 W=H =§ 



B=§=\t±33i 



-B. 



f 



«=ft 




I 



ij& 



■i * — *-t— 



at 



* 



treas • ures are but dross, I'm in the Chris • tian 
lieve and fol - low me;" 1m -mor-tal heir - ship 
in ex-change there stands For me a build • ing 
walls e - ter - nal shine; Where with my dear He - 



race to - day, I start - ed at the cross, 
is tby goal, Since "I have chos-en Thee." 
all di - vine — A home not made with hands. 

deem-er crowned, "The kingdom" shall be mine. 



£ 



«* * 



*^E 



E5 



fee 



*=p: 



A — 1— 



E 



m 



Vr-p—v i 



-K 



-yzz^zzpzx^: 



^ 



7 

CHORUS. 



i 



S 



l 



ir=t=l= 



=lE 



1? ? r 



-&- 



the prize <di • vine, Joint heir • ship with my Lord; 



I'm 



run • niDg for 



# 



* 



aas 



e 



^ 



s 



±3E 



£ 



-iT 






A- 



/*\ 



— I « m ■**- 



I 



-*■?- 



I 

Eartu and 



-tj* - 
its 



-•-*- 



hon 



ore I 



£fie| 



£ 



£ 



re • sign 



£ 



To 

-re- 



gain this great re • ward. 



f— R? 



T =T 



f 



I 



f 



$z=tzfe 



Copyright. 19(6, by M. L McPhatl 



u wd by 



p*rmis*lra. 



[1932] 



"Now are We the Sons of God. 



11 




F. G. Burroughs. 



" Belored, sow are we tbe aon» of God."— 1 John S: £ 



M. L. MoPhail. 



^m ^EJ ^^n U 4^~M 



1. Now are we tbe sons of God, Heirs with Je - sua Christ, our Lord; Now for Him the 

2. "Now axe we the sons of God;" Oh, what bliss these words re -cord! All the Fa - ther 

3. "Now are we the sons of God," Bought and sealed with Je - sus' blood; And when gath-ered 



f f *]f f 



1 



i 



t u* 



ps 



f 



? 



m 



^^^^m 



CHORDS. 



iiiggi 



1 



£ 



* 



cross we bear, That we may His glo - ry share. 

hath we claim, Thro' the dear Re-deem-er's Name. {• Hal-le- lu-jah! what a prize Faith be-holds be- 

home a-bove. We shall be like Him we love. 



?\ 



i 






*=t 



I 






^ _ 



£ 



P ^J ^ - ^ ^ ^^4e^ ^^M 



yond the skies! Hal ■ le - lu - jahl praise the Lord! Now are we the sons of God, 

fl± ft £,f t±j 



t^M^i M 



i 



pp 



i 



? 



i~ — i 



Copyright, 1896, by M. L. MoPhail. Used by permission. 



¥ f 



I 



J. McPhail. 



±=S^£ 



In That Day. 



John McPhail. 



SS 



i 



=± 



^ 



1 



2t± 



-<S 



# — #• 



1 All those who love and o • bey my word, In that day. In that 

2. They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, In that day, In that 

3. They shall be with me for - ev - er - more, In that day, In that 

-r*- #■ -0- m ! I # 






day, They shall re-ceive a 
day, When I shall make my 
day, And all their tri - als 



mm 



t± 



Jt * & 



& 



TT 



j r^ 



CHORUS. 






m 



s 



=F 



great re 
jew - els 
will be 



ward 
np 
o'er 



In 
In 
In 



J^L 



that day. 
that day. 
that day 



} 



£ 



S 



They to my pre-cepts are al - ways true, Do • fag my 



£ 



£ 



I 



> g 1 1 § t . 



m 



1 



&<■'. 



ss^~ 



? 



*— »■ 



? 



fcMP 



Used by permluioo of Henry Date, owner of the copyright. 



[1933] 



12 



In That Day-Concluded. 



fctz^zli 






will in tbe work they do, 




-?—. 4 fJ 1 



1 shall be witli them and crown them too, In that day 



are? 



Z*=K 



-*—»*- 



1= 



X: 



t=t 



-e>- 






i^ 



¥ 



sz: 



i-~« -<g - 



fe 







O Christ, Our Immortality. 



•' And this is I tar record, that God bath given to u* eternal life, ana this life is m Kit Son He that hath tbe Sod or God bath lire: 
and he that hath not the Son of God hath oot life " — 1 JohuS' 11, 12. 

F. G Burroughs M. L. McPhail. 






*F 



r 



1 Christ, our im - mor • tal 

1 Chmt, our im • mor - tal - 

3 Christ, our im • mor - tal - 

4 O Christ, our im - mor -tal - 

5 O Christ, our im - mor - tal - 



mm. 



s 



ty, We have no life ex - cept in Thee 

ty, A - mid earth's storms to Thee we flee! 

ty. Our safe - ty is to hide in Thee 

ty. Death has no sting nor vie - to - ry, 

ty, No dark - ness can be found in Thee 

JS -m. 



3=1 



£3±3B3 




i i 



U U U U U J J 



:p=p: 



-#<— 9- 



^kd 



$m 



m 



3 



m 



$ 



-JSlPL 



our res . ur - rec - tion breath, And with 

this Sol - id Rock can break, No flood 

Re-demp-tion now we claim And life 

Thy peo - pie Thou didst win The great 

to ev • 'ry trust- ing heart Thou dost 



Thoo art 

No wind 

Thy blest 

Since for 

And in 



out Thee is end - less 
this Surer Foun • da - tion 
re - ceive thro' Je ■ sus' 
Bal - va - tion from all 
the light and life im • 



£ 



-rS^ 



i 



— S»-*-- 

death. 
shake, 
name, 
sin. 
part. 



£ 



isit 



rs>- 



P?eeeS= 



£E 



-JLUK 



:p=*=*=*=r 



p~fr 



1/ u 1/ 



I 



» 



CHORUS. 



. * . , . • _ 



'! V ■ V 



pg 



B£i 



dj— g - 



3E 



^ 



3S 



^ 



-&- 



* 



Im - mor • tal 



i - ty, 



Im • mor - tal - i - ty Is 



Je - sus' gift to 

Jl 



me; 
•jS*-. 



£■*■*• £ ■** -r* ■* J I s J ♦ £ £ ^ 



g.^ 



p^LfJ-UM^Lj^i-J 



I 



f7\ 



I 



g * - X 



Life and light di - vine, thro' the blood are mine-, And end - less tic - to - ry. 



§**!> 



i 



i# 



fr-W^-Af 1 - f 1 C: 



i 



s 



II 



-p -f r g 

J U U U K 



£dc 



W 



Copyright, 189*. by Jl L. MoPhail Used by permission. 



[1934] 



page 1 
VOL. XVII. FEBRUARY 1, 1896. No. 3. 



HYMNS OF THE MORNING. 

The Shining Light 3 

Before the Great White Throne 4 

Oh, I Am So Happy 5 

I'm Nearing the Goal 6 

Jubilee Echoes 7 

When the Crowning Day Shall Come 8 

Fullness of Joy 9 

I'm Running for the Prize Divine 10 

Now are We the Sons of God 11 

In That Day 11 

O Christ, Our Immortality 12 

page 2 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



OLD LOT OF CLOTH BOUND MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



OUR new stock of cloth-bound DAWNS is of uniform shade of 
cloth in all volumes, and stamped on sides as well as backs with 
silvery instead of gilt metal. 

THE old lot stamped in gilt and not perfectly matched in shade of 
cloth we are closing out at the special price of $1.00 per set (3 vols.), 
including postage, or 75 cents per set at your charges. 



page 25 
VOL. XVII. FEBRUARY 15, 1896. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 

Special Items 26 

Views from the Tower 27 

The Sure Mercies of David 28 

Poem: The Peace of Christ 30 

By thy Words Acquitted; by thy 

Words Condemned 30 

Bible Study: Faith Encouraged 33 

Bible Study: Jesus the Messiah 34 

Bible Study: True Love to One's 

Neighbor 34 

Encouraging Letters 35 

page 26 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE CHART OF THE AGES. 



OUR announcement of the pamphlet giving three primary discourses 
on the Chart of the Ages (leatherette covers, 10 cents each) 
brought many orders, and fresh inquiries about the Charts for use in 
home gatherings and small audience rooms. We therefore again describe 
them. 

They are five feet long, of heavy, tinted cloth, with spring roller, 
having painted thereon, by a good artist, the outlines, etc., of the divine 
plan of the ages, the same as represented by the diagram in the front of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. Ordinarily it would cost about five dollars 
to prepare such charts; but by giving large orders in the dull seasons 
we can supply them at one dollar and fifty cents each,— and we prepay 
the expressage. 

A careful study of the three discourses above mentioned will enable 
many of the friends of the truth to explain the chart and the divine 
plan there symbolized, to their friends and neighbors. Later on you will 
be able to present other features, finding the help you need in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. 



All the consecrated are "anointed to preach" the gospel; and all 
such may do it, according to their talents and opportunities, regardless 
of nationality, color or sex; for all such are "new creatures in Christ:" 
and in Christ there is neither male nor female, bond nor free. But let 
all things be done decently and in [Scriptural] order, which implies 
that, all other conditions being equal, the man should do the public 
speaking, as the Lord's representative and mouthpiece. 

But let none but the consecrated attempt to teach spiritual truths; 
for they have no commission or ordination of the Lord so to do. Moreover, 
others would do injury to themselves; for their fleshly minds would 
soon be puffed up, and they would ere long fall into the snares of the 
Adversary, as boastful, heady men-pleasers. 

R1935 : page 26 

THE MUSICAL TOWER. 



WE have heard from many of their pleasure in connection with our 
last issue of the TOWER— "Zion's Glad Songs of the Morning." 
We would like it if these beautiful songs should become popular among 
Christian people generally. The singing of the truth is a good way to 
get it into the heads and hearts of God's people. It is one way of 
preaching the gospel, which figuratively is called a "song:" "Thou 
hast put a new song into my mouth, even the loving kindness of our 
God." 

We thank God for the musical and poetic talents granted to some 
of his saints. (We esteem the collection represented in the MUSICAL 
TOWER, and in our hymn book, "Poems and Hymns of Millennial 
Dawn," to be not only choice doctrinaily, but also choice poetically.) 
We thank God for the privilege of serving the truth to his flock in poetry, 
as well as in prose. Let each one who receives be active in serving 
again, by song and printed page and word, to others who have not yet 
tasted the heavenly food provided now, as "meat in due season," by 
our present Lord. If the whole body were an eye or foot or hand, 
where would be the symmetry? Nay, those members which even seem 
to be feeble and less important are all necessary, and may all do something 
in the service.— 1 Cor. 13:17-24. 

Extra copies of the musical TOWER will be supplied at the rate of 
five cents each, or twenty-five to one address for one dollar. 

page 26 

DO NOT SEND MONEY UNLESS "REGISTERED." 



COMPLAINTS of money lost in the mails continue. Send only by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order or Express Order. Then if letters be stolen 
the money can be recovered. 



R1935 : page 27 



VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE wonders of our day, "the time of the end," are 
so many and so astounding that even prudent, cautious 
thinkers hesitate to pronounce the most unreasonable 
things untrue. The present year has introduced to the 
world one of the most remarkable discoveries of modern 
times; one which, had it been advanced a century ago, 
would have been esteemed the ravings of a maniac, but 
which to-day is received at once by the scientific men of 
the whole world within two weeks of its first announcement. 
We refer to the discovery made by Prof. Roentgen, 
of Wurzburg University, Germany, that an electric ray 
can be passed through opaque substances, such as paper, 
wood, cloth, leather, aluminum, animal flesh, etc., although 
to varying degrees, and that the same ray does not penetrate 
bone, stone, and metals generally. 

Experiments show the photograph of coins in a purse, 
of a razor in its case, of the bones and sinews of a man's 
hand, of the contents of a wooden box, etc. Although 
still an infant of a month, the professional men of Europe 
and America are busy with various experiments which may 
yet lead to great improvements and to wider usefulness. The 
chief value of the discovery, so far, would seem to be in 
aiding surgery, by locating bullets and other foreign substances, 
"gravel" in the kidneys, "gall stones," etc., saving 
life and sufferings; for not infrequently good surgeons 
err in diagnosing. 

But a lesson goes with this discovery which will not be 
generally recognized at first, and yet one that sooner or 
later is sure to influence many. For centuries, skeptics 
and Infidels have been disposed to smile incredulously at 
the words of our Lord, "Enter into thy closet, and when 
thou hast shut thy door pray to thy Father which is in 
secret, and the Father who seeth in secret shall reward thee 
openly." (Matt. 6:6.) Can these scientists any longer 
mock at Christians for "credulity," because we believe 
that "All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him 
with whom we have to do?" (Heb. 4:13.) Surely human 
pride and positiveness may well be abashed by its own nineteenth 
century discoveries. "He that formed the ear shall 
he not hear? He that formed the eye shall he not see?" 
And we begin to see how that other prediction can be fulfilled, 
largely in a "natural" way— "There is nothing 
covered that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not 
be known." 

Step backward only one century and you can sympathize 
with the Infidelity which disputed and denied everything 
which it could not see and handle and comprehend; 
for their unbelief in unseen things and powers was in full 
accord with their experiences. But when God's set time 
for "knowledge to be increased," "the time of the end," 
had come, he began gradually to lift the curtain, and to 
show the world invisible things and to teach them faith in 



invisible powers, and ultimately through these lessons to 
see him "who is invisible," with the eyes of their 
understanding. 

The Telephone, by which men hundreds of miles 
apart, may speak to each other through little boxes on their 
office walls, and recognize each other's voices, tells us, suggestively, 
that God can hear infinitely better, and without 
the wires and batteries necessary to our service. 

The Phonograph, recording our words and tones, preserving 
them if needful for years, and repeating them with 
their original emphasis and intonation, reminds us, suggestively, 
that similarly our brains are much more delicately 
constructed, and can not only record words but also thoughts 
and feelings, and classify these, and lay them away for future 
use, subject to the call of memory. It gives us a hint, also, 
of how simple a matter it will be for God to resurrect 

R1935 : page 28 

the dead, by creating new bodies with brains having similar 
convolutions to the deceased, which, thus revived by the 
breath of life, would reproduce beings which would recognize 
and identify themselves by the memory of their past 
thoughts and experiences. 

Machinery and cars moved by the invisible electric 
current of power are common everywhere to-day, though 
undreamed of fifty years ago. And through these we and 
all men have illustration of the invisible power divine, 
"which holds all nature up," and runs the vast machinery 
of the universe. 

These lessons to the child of God enforce the salutary 
thought that God hears the "groaning of the prisoners" 
of sin and death, the prayers or the murmurs, the thanks 
or the sighs of his children; that "Thou God seest me;" 
that "the eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding 
the evil and the good;" and that divine power, although 
invisible, is omnipotent and everywhere present. The same 
lessons will be valuable to the world, by and by, when 
God's Kingdom shall shine forth and chase away the night-shades 
of sin and sorrow: but meantime the Prince of 
darkness will no doubt continue to deceive many, and will 
use even these wonderful signs of the Millennial dawn to 
support delusions and to oppose the truth. For instance, 
the natural man, not led by the spirit of God, will thereby 
be led, by the Adversary, toward Spiritism, Theosophy, etc. 



The Superior Council of the "American Protective 
Association," commonly known as the "A. P. A.," met 
in annual session on Jan. 28 and 29 at Rochester, N.Y. 
This association, formed to offset the oppression of Papacy, 
especially against the Public School system, has been growing 
greatly but noiselessly for the past five years, and now 
claims to represent a voting strength of 3,500,000. These 
large figures will be a general surprise— not only to its 



enemies of Rome, but to its friends as well. 

The American Protective Association demands as the 
consideration for its support of any party for President, 
that the platform of the national convention of that party 
shall reaffirm the principle of the total separation of Church 
and State, the restriction of immigration, and the reform 
of the laws regarding citizenship and right of franchise. 
Such party, too, shall reaffirm its faith in the American 
school system as the basis of liberty and prosperity. 

One of the delegates to the Convention gave the following 
as the voting strength of this and other "allied 
orders"— 

American Protective Association 3,500,000 

Nat. League for Protection of American 
Institutions 1,590,000 

Junior Order United American Mechanics.... 500,000 

Patriotic Sons of America 350,000 

Order of Deputies 125,000 

Various other Patriotic orders 250,000 

Total 6,315,000 

It was reported at the Council that one hundred and 
eight members of Congress, the Governors of four states, 
majorities in the Legislatures of several States, the school 
boards of two hundred and fourteen cities and towns, and 
a majority of city and town officials in every central and 
western state were members of or allied with the American 
Protective Association. 

These facts, seemingly authentic, indicate that some 
have learned not to trust Papacy's recent professions of 
love for the Bible and education, but to stand guard over 
their own liberties. Although we may recognize the hand 
of Providence in this, and all such affairs, we are to remember, 
still, that the saints of God are enlisted in another 
branch of divine service. If it is the service of some 
to manage homes and orphanages, and hospitals, and reformatories, 
and temperance work, and liberty protections, 
we know that our commission is to preach the Gospel. We 
who are "ambassadors for God" are to wait upon our 
ministry (service) and not upon another, however much we 
may sympathize with or feel interested in every good work. 
We advise, therefore, that those who have been favored 
with the truth and the divine commission of ambassadors 
of it give it all their energies, aside from the providing of 

R1936 : page 28 

things needful, to this service. And we here remark, that 
if any understood our words in our issue of June 15, '95 
to be a commendation of Beneficiary Societies and an advice 
to join them, they misunderstood our meaning. Said 
societies are not without their good features while matters 
run along smoothly, but when the time of trouble will 
shortly overspread the world, all of these societies which 
depend upon assessments will quickly crumble; and then 
those who are leaning upon them will be most wretchedly 



disappointed, and many of them will by their despair be 
helped toward anarchism. 



R1936 : page 28 

THE SURE MERCIES OF DAVID. 



"And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, 
even the sure mercies of David."— Isa. 55:3. 

IF THE faith of any of God's children needs reinforcement 
from the Word of God, let him turn to the 
Lord's gracious invitation through the Prophet Isaiah to 
partake of the bounties therein offered. The call is not to 
every man, but to a certain class— "Ho every one that 
thirsteth!" (Vs. 1.) There is a blessing for the thirsty 
soul. "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness [Observe, not only after truth with a curiosity 
interest, but after that righteousness which comes through 
a knowledge of the truth]; for they shall be filled." The 
invitation is not to those who are satisfied with sin, but to 
those who have learned the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and 

R1936 : page 29 

whose aspirations are toward God; who thirst after God and 
his truth and his righteousness. It is to the class which the 
Psalmist describes as saying, "As the hart panteth after 
the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. 
My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall 
I come and appear before God?"— Psa. 42:1,2. 

Are you of this class? then hearken to the gracious 
invitation— "Ho, every one that thirsteth [The call is to 
you], come ye to the waters [the refreshing waters of divine 
truth]; and he that hath no money [None of us have 
aught to offer as an equivalent for this priceless treasure: it 
is God's free gift to all the thirsty]; come ye, buy and eat; 
yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without 
price." 

And not only is the invitation thus liberal, but the 
Lord also condescends to reason with those of this class who 
still have some hope of finding the satisfying bread and 
water of life where already they have long looked for them 
in vain. He graciously inquires, "Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread? and your labor for 
that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me, and 
eat ye that which is good [the "meat in due season" provided 
by the Lord for the household of faith], and let your 
soul delight itself in fatness. [The portion which the Lord 
supplies is a satisfying portion; and the soul that is fed at 
his table is not lean.] Incline your ear, and come unto me: 
hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting 



covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David." 

Turning to Psalm 89:19-37 we find the sure mercies 
of David enumerated. David is introduced here as a 
typical character representing Christ— primarily our Lord 
Jesus, but subsequently the Christ complete— Head and 
body. In the meekness of his youth, his loyalty to God, 
his faithfulness, zeal, courage and wise discretion, David's 
character was a very beautiful type of the beloved One, to 
whom God referred when he said, "I have laid help upon 
one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the 
people. I have found David my servant; with my holy 
oil have I anointed him." 

Our Lord Jesus is the mighty One upon whom the help of 
the world is laid. He is the great deliverer, but it has 
pleased God also to associate with him in this great work 
the Church of the Gospel age, the elect "little flock," 
whose names are written in heaven. These, all chosen out 
of the people, constitute that one body, which, with Christ 
Jesus their Head, shall bless all the families of the earth. 
These all possess the characteristics enumerated above, which 
are preeminently the characteristics of their Head. All, therefore, 
who hunger and thirst after righteousness, whose souls 
thirst after God as the hart for the water-brook, and who, 
having found him, have consecrated themselves to him and 
received the anointing of the holy spirit, witnessing with 
their spirits that they are the sons of God, and who as 
anointed sons can discover in themselves the worthy traits 
of true sons, enumerated above,— loyalty, faithfulness, zeal, 
energy, courage, discretion, etc.,— these constitute the 
class with whom the Lord has made an everlasting covenant 
and to whom belong "the sure mercies of David." 

Hear them— "With whom my hand [my power, dominion, 
kingdom] shall be established: mine arm [of support 
and strength] also shall strengthen him [to perform 
the great preparatory work of sacrifice]. The enemy shall 
have no advantage over him, nor the son of iniquity have 
power to hurt him. [All things, even the deep and wicked 
designs of the adversary, shall be so overruled by God as 
to work together for good to this David class]. 

"And I will beat down his foes before his face, and 
plague them that hate him. But my faithfulness and my 
mercy shall be with him; and in my name shall his horn 
[his authority and power] be exalted. I will set his hand 
also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. [His power 
will in due time control all the restless, ungovernable masses 
of the world, which like the raging sea will make great 
commotion in the time of trouble with which this age 
closes.] 

"He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, 
and the rock of my salvation. [Even in the midst of their 
earthly course of trial and sacrifice they shall have communion 
and fellowship with God: they shall realize his 
fatherly love and care and rejoice in his salvation.] 

"Also I will make him, my firstborn ["the Church of 
the firstborn"], higher than the kings of the earth. My 
mercy will I keep for him forevermore, and my covenant 



shall stand fast with him. His seed also [redeemed and 

restored mankind to whom Christ will be "the everlasting 

father"— Isa. 9:6; Psa. 45:16] will I make to endure 

forever [they shall have everlasting life], and his throne as 

the days of heaven. If his children forsake my law and 

walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and 

keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression 

with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 

Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take 

from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. [This has reference 

principally to the fleshly people of God, and partially 

to the world during the Millennium.] 

"My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing 
that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my 
holiness, that I will not lie unto David [Christ]. His seed 
shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me. 
It shall be established forever as the moon, and as a faithful 
witness in heaven." 

Such are the "sure mercies of David" thus divinely 
assured to the Gospel Church, Head and body. 



"When I stand before the throne, 
Dressed in beauty not my own, 
When I see thee as thou art, 
Love thee with unsinning heart, 
Then, Lord, I shall fully know- 
Not till then— how much I owe. 

"When the praise of heaven I hear, 
Grand as anthems on the ear, 
Loud as many waters' noise, 
Sweet as harps' melodious voice, 
Then, Lord, shall I fully know- 
Not till then— how much I owe." 



R1876 : page 30 

THE PEACE OF CHRIST. 



"My peace I give unto you."— John 14:27. 

Sweet gift of Christ! O blessed thought! 
The peace of mind that God hath wrought! 
No earthly passion's half so sweet, 
No joy on earth is so complete, 
As that the loving Father gives 
To those in whom the spirit lives— 
The peace of Christ. 

O weary one upon life's sea, 

That hast no Christ to comfort thee, 

Remember when the billows roll, 



Surge upon surge, about thy soul, 
That there's a harbor safe and sure, 
Wherein thy heart may rest secure— 
The peace of Christ. 

O loving heart that trembles yet, 
Half fearful that it may forget; 
Afraid that it may miss the way, 
Doubting, wavering, all the day- 
Remember that it is to thee 
This gift of gifts is offered free— 
The peace of Christ. 

O Christian with the brow severe, 
With eyes that seldom drop a tear, 
With lips that smiling have forgot, 
Remember that it is thy lot 
To have within a joy divine; 
Open thy heart and make it thine— 
The peace of Christ. 

The love of God! How its dimension 
Reaches above our comprehension; 
And who of us can understand 
The workings of his mighty hand? 
But rest, my soul, and quiet be, 
Thou knowest this he giveth thee— 
The peace of Christ. 

So then, my soul, upon his breast 
Thy troubles cast, and be at rest. 
Though sorrow wrings the heart, and pain 
Saps life and strength with steady drain, 
O'er all these griefs and cares of thine 
God pours the healing balm divine— 
The peace of Christ. 

—Selected. 



R1937 : page 30 

BY THY WORDS ACQUITTED; BY THY WORDS CONDEMNED. 



"Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man 
out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things; and 
an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. 
But I say unto you, that every idle [unprofitable or pernicious] 
word that men shall speak, they shall give account 
thereof on a day of judgment. For by thy words thou wilt 
be acquitted, and by thy words thou 
wilt be condemned. "-Matt. 12:34-37. 

REALIZING that we, the Church, are at the present 



time under the inspection of our kingly Bridegroom, 
who is now present (Matt. 22:1 1) to gather out of 
his Kingdom [in its present embryo or formative condition] 
all things that offend" (Matt. 13:41), and to gather unto 
himself his jewels, his bride (Mai. 3:17), we cannot too 
carefully consider the principles upon which this judgment 
and this selection are made. 

The above words of our Lord indicate that the heart 
and the mouth are under very special scrutiny, the former 
representing the individual character, and the latter being 
an index of the character. It is in this same view of the 
matter that those words of wisdom were penned,— "Keep 
thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of 
life. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse 
lips put far from thee." (Prov. 4:23,24.) The indication 
is clear that a right condition of heart is necessary to 
right words; for "out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh," as experience testifies to every man. It 
is therefore just that our words should be a criterion of judgment 
in the Lord's estimation, as he tells us they are. True, 
honied words are sometimes only the masks of deep hypocrisy; 
but the mask is sure to drop off some time, as soon 
as selfish policy renders a change of tactics necessary. The 
fact therefore remains that the words, the entire course of 
conversation and conduct, are an index of the heart. 

Our first concern, then, should be for the heart— that 
its affections and dispositions may be fully under the control 
of divine grace; that every principle of truth and 
righteousness may be enthroned there; that justice, mercy, 
benevolence, brotherly kindness, love, faith, meekness, 
temperance, supreme reverence for God and Christ, and a 
fervent love for all the beauties of holiness, may be firmly 
fixed as the governing principles of life. If these principles 
be fixed, established, in the heart, then out of the good 
treasure of the heart the mouth will speak forth words of 
truth, soberness, wisdom and grace. 

Concerning our Lord Jesus, whose heart was perfect 
—in whom was no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 
it was said, "Grace is poured into thy lips;" and again, 
"All bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words 
that proceeded out of his mouth." (Psa. 45:2; Luke 4:22.) 
Moses, personating Christ, foretold the blessed 
influences of the Lord's words, saying, "My doctrine shall 
drop as the rain; my speech shall distil as the dew, as the 
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon 
the grass." (Deut. 32:2.) And Jesus said, "The words 
that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life." 

R1937 : page 31 

(John 6:63.) So wise, just and true were the Lord's words, 
that, though his enemies were continually seeking to find 
some fault, it is said, "They could not take hold of his 
words before the people; and they marveled at his answers 
and held their peace." (Luke 20:26.) And others said, 
"Never man spake like this man."— John 7:46. 



Thus our Lord left a worthy example to his people, 
which the Apostle urges all to follow, saying, "Let your 
speech be always with grace [with manifest love and kindness], 
seasoned with salt [a purifying and preservative influence]." 
(Col. 4:6.) And Peter adds, "If any man 
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God,"— wisely, and 
in accordance with the spirit and Word of the Lord. Again, 
it is written, "Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips 
from speaking guile [deceit]." "Whoso keepeth his mouth 
and his tongue, keepeth his soul from troubles." "The 
words of a wise man's mouth are gracious words: but the 
lips of a fool [an unwise, reckless talker] will swallow up 
himself. The beginning of the words of his mouth is 
foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness." 
"Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be 
hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in heaven, 
and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few."— 
Psa. 34:13; Prov. 21:23; Eccl. 10:12,13; 5:2. 

Job, in the midst of all his afflictions, was very careful 
not to sin with his lips. (Job 2:10; 31:30; 1:21,22.) 
He knew that his words would be taken by the Lord as an 
index of his heart, and he was careful to keep both the 
heart and the words right, saying, "What! shall we receive 
good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil 
[calamities, troubles— for discipline or refining]?... 
The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be 
the name of the Lord." There was no spirit of rebellion 
in a heart out of whose abundance came such words of loving 
submission, patience and faith under severe testings, 
and that, too, without a clear apprehension of the divine 
wisdom in permitting them. 

The Psalmist puts into the mouth of God's consecrated 
and tried people these words of firm resolution:— "I said, 
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. 
I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked [who 
tempts and tries the righteous] is before me."— Psa. 39:1. 

How necessary to the stability of Christian character 
is such a resolution, and the self control which develops 
under a firm adherence to it. In an unfriendly world we 
can expect to receive only the reproaches of our Master; 
for the servant is not above his Lord. The world, the 
flesh and the devil oppose our way: there are fightings 
within and fears without, and many are the arrows and fiery 
darts aimed at the righteous. But what is the safe attitude 
of the soul under afflictions and severe testings? Is it not 
in silence before God, waiting and watching first to see 
his leading, his will, in every matter before presuming to 
touch things that often involve so much? So the Psalmist 
suggests, saying, "I was dumb with silence: I held my 
peace, even from good [even from doing or saying what 
seemed good in my own sight]; and my sorrow was stirred. 
My heart was hot within me, and in my self-communing 
there burnt a fire [description of a fiery trial]. Then spake 
I with my tongue"— not to the revilers, nor to others, but 
to the Lord. 

Yes, it is always our blessed privilege to carry our 



sorrows and vexations to the Lord; 

"For he knows 
How to steal the bitter from life's woes." 
He does it, as the Psalmist suggests (vs. 4-6), by showing 
us, through experience, the vanity of all earthly things and 
their utter inability to satisfy the soul's cravings, or to comfort 
the wounded spirit. Then comes the thought that the 
present life, with its cares, vexations and sorrows is passing 
away, that our days are but as a handbreadth, and however 
vexing our experiences, they will soon be over; and if we 
permit them to do so they will only work out in us the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness, and develop in us strong 
and noble characters, disciplined to thorough self-control, 
thoughtful consideration, patient endurance of affliction 
and loving loyalty and faithfulness and trust in God. Then 
the assurances of the blessed rewards of righteousness in 
the life to come begin to have a new and deeper significance, 
and we are made to realize that this is not our continuing 
city, but we seek one to come. Thus the heart is separated 
from earthly things, and made to realize the superior worth 
of heavenly things. Nothing but the Lord himself can 
satisfy the longings of the soul, which, tempest-tossed and 
tried, comes to realize— 

"How vain is all beneath the skies, 

How transient every earthly bliss, 
How slender all the fondest ties, 

That bind me to a world like this!" 
Thus chastened and comforted, we learn to look beyond 
the present to the glory that shall by and by be revealed 
in the faithful overcomers, who, by patient continuance in 
well-doing in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, 
seek for the prize revealed to faith alone. Thus disciplined 
and blessed under fiery trials by going to the Lord 
for comfort and help, the child of God begins to realize 
what it means to be dead to the world and alive toward 
God, with a keen appreciation of his love and goodness 
and grace; and being thus separated from the world, and 
more firmly united to Christ, the language of the heart is, 
as the Psalmist further suggests, "And now, Lord, what 
wait I for? my hope is in thee." (Vs. 7.) Thus 
"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 

We never saw by day." 
Such is the blessed result of bridling the tongue under 
circumstances of trial and vexation, and humbly taking 
all our cares to the Lord in prayer, to the end that, when 
we speak, our speech may be with grace, seasoned with salt, 

R1937 : page 32 

and that under all circumstances we may speak as the 

R1938 : page 32 

oracles of God. 



Considering our Lord's words above quoted— that we 
must give an account for "every idle [unprofitable or pernicious] 
word"— in view of the fact that the present is our 
(the Church's) judgment day, we see what great importance 
attaches to our words. All our words are taken by the Lord 
as an index of our hearts. If our words are rebellious, or 
disloyal, or frivolous, or flippant, or unkind, unthankful, 
unholy or impure, the heart is judged accordingly, on the 
principle that, "out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." Thus our words, in all the varied circumstances 
of our daily life, are bearing testimony continually 
before God of the condition of our hearts. So our 
Lord's words imply: and in this view of the case how 
timely is the admonition,— "Be not rash with thy mouth; 
and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before 
God [And remember that "all things are naked and opened 
to the eyes of him with whom we have to do."— Heb. 4:13]; 
for God [our Judge] is in heaven [upon the throne], 
and thou upon earth [under trial before the bar of God]: 
therefore let thy words be few." Let them be thoughtful 
and wise, as uttered before God, and not rash, hasty and 
illy considered. 

Again, in harmony with the Lord's statement of the 
responsibility incurred by our words, it is also written, 
"He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his life: but he that 
openeth wide his lips shall have destruction." (Prov. 13:3.) 
What a fearful responsibility attaches to the tongue that 
wags in an evil, or even in a flippant, way, which is 
also dishonoring to God! And how necessary is the injunction 
of the Apostle Peter, "Be sober and watch unto 
prayer !"~1 Pet. 4:7; 1:13; 5:8. 

The Psalmist puts this prayer into the lips of all who 
feel this responsibility, "Set a watch, O Lord, before my 
mouth: keep a guard at the door of my lips. Permit not 
my heart to incline after any evil thing." "Let the words 
of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable 
in thy sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer." 
"My lips shall utter praise when thou hast taught me thy 
statutes. My tongue shall speak of thy word; for all thy 
commandments are righteousness. Let thy hand help me; 
for I have chosen thy precepts. I have longed for thy salvation 
[from all sin, and for the perfection and beauty of 
holiness], O Lord; and thy law is my delight."— Psa. 141:3,4; 
19:14; 119:171-174. 

That, as imperfect beings, we may always be perfect 
in word and deed is not possible. Despite our best endeavors 
we will sometimes err in word as well as in deed, 
yet the perfect mastery of our words and ways is the thing 
to be sought by vigilant and faithful effort. But, nevertheless, 
for every idle word we must give an account in this 
our day of judgment. If, in the daily scrutiny of our ways, 
which is the duty of every Christian, we discover that in 
any particular our words have been dishonoring to the 
Lord, we should remember that, "If any man sin, we have 
an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous" 
(1 John 2:1); and in the name of our Advocate we may 



approach the throne of grace, explain to our Heavenly 
Father our realization of the error, our deep regret at our 
failure to honor his name and his cause by a holy walk and 
conversation, and humbly request that the sin be not laid 
to our charge, but that it may be blotted out through his 
gracious provision for our cleansing through Christ, humbly 
claiming that in his precious blood is all our hope and trust. 

Thus we should render up our account for every idle 
word; and by our words of repentance, supplemented by 
the merits of Christ applied by faith, shall we be acquitted. 
Otherwise the idle words, dishonoring to the Lord, will 
stand against us and condemn us, and we will be obliged 
to suffer the consequences. The first consequence will be 
self-injury, for every evil thought or word indulged hardens 
the character and inclines it the more toward unrighteousness. 
The second consequence is a bad example to others, 
and the stirring up of evil in them. "A soft answer turneth 
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger." (Prov. 15:1.) 
Thus, as the result of unwise or unkind words, 
we may stir up about us difficulties which will become the 
agents of retributive justice to teach us the lesson of self-control, 
and consideration for the feelings and opinions of 
others. It is often the case that the Lord (or the devil) 
is blamed for sending trials which are simply the natural 
results of our own mistakes. And those who fail to locate 
the root of the trouble (in themselves) pray in vain for 
the Lord to remove miraculously what they themselves 
could obviate by obedience to the Word, and vigorous self-discipline. 
"If we would judge [and correct] ourselves, 
we should not be judged; but when we are judged we are 
chastened of the Lord [largely by the experiences through 
which our own faults put us], that we should not be condemned 
with the world." (1 Cor. 11:31,32.) But even 
should it be admitted that the difficulties are not directly 
caused by God, or the devil ("Every man is tempted [tried] 
when he is drawn away of his own lusts [desires] and enticed"), 
the natural tendency is to blame the matter on some 
one else, and to think that our loss of patience, our hasty 
word or act was the fault of another. How many deceive 
and encourage themselves with the thought: "If every 
body else had as reasonable and generous a nature as I have 
our family or church gathering or community would be a 
veritable heaven upon earth!" Beloved, let us examine 
ourselves, let us be very humble, lest the very words of self-congratulation 
and self-satisfaction which we consider in 

our hearts (if we do not utter them aloud) bring our condemnation. 
"If ye love them which love you, what thank 
have ye? for sinners also love those that love them. And 
if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank 
have ye [what merit is there in it]?" (Luke 6:33-38.) It 
is only when we "endure grief, suffering wrongfully," that 
our suffering is acceptable to God as a sacrifice of sweet 

R1938 : page 33 

incense. "What glory is it if, when ye be buffeted for your 



faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and 
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with 
God; for even hereunto were ye called." (1 Pet. 2:19-21.) 
Beloved, let us see to it that our sufferings are for righteousness' 
sake only, and let us not charge God or our neighbors 
for tribulations resulting from the indulgence of our 
inherited or cultivated faults. 

"In many things we are all faulty. If any one does not 
err in word, he is a perfect man, able to control the whole 
body." (Jas. 3:2.) But such a man does not exist. We 
all need and must continually plead the merit of our Redeemer 
and Advocate, while we strive daily to bring every 
thought into captivity to the will of Christ, and to perfect 
holiness in the fear (reverence) of the Lord. 

In view of this fact, which we trust all of the Lord's 
people will endeavor more and more fully to realize, viz., 
that we now stand before the bar of judgment, we inquire, 
in the words of Peter, "What manner of persons ought ye 
to be in all holy conversation and godliness?" God-likeness 
certainly cannot include any harmful gossip, any unclean 
or unholy conversation, any disloyal or rebellious words. 
Let such things be put far away from all who name the 
name of Christ in sincerity and truth. And let us remember 
daily to settle our accounts with the Lord, to make 
sure that no record of idle words, unrepented of, and consequently 
unforgiven, stands against us. "Let your conversation 
be as becometh the gospel of Christ." "Whatsoever 
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, 
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things." 
Thus out of the good treasure of the heart we shall be able 
to speak the words of truth and soberness, to honor our 
Lord by a godly walk and conversation, to subdue the evil 
tendencies of our fallen nature, and to have our conversation 
"honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak 
against you as evil doers, they may, by your good works 
which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation." 
-Phil. 1:27; 4:8; 1 Pet. 2:12. 

If daily we render up our accounts to God and seek 
his grace for greater overcoming power with each succeeding 
day, we shall be acquitted in judgment and stand approved 
before God through Christ, having the testimony 
of his holy spirit with our spirits that we are pleasing and 
acceptable to him. 



R1938 : page 33 

FAITH ENCOURAGED. 

-FEB. 23. -Luke 8:43-55.- 

Golden Text— "Thy faith hath made thee 
whole: go in peace."— Luke 8:48. 



NO ESSENTIAL element of Christian character is 

given greater prominence in the Scriptures 

than faith. "Without faith it is impossible to please God." 

In this requirement we see the condescending grace of our 

heavenly Father, who, though so far above us, yet, like a 

tender parent, desires the reciprocal love and implicit confidence 

of his intelligent creatures. Since Christ is the 

appointed agent of God in his dealings with men, whom 

God bids all men to honor, even as they honor the Father, 

and since he is the appointed way of access to God, faith 

in Christ is necessarily a part of our faith in God. Those 

who believe in Christ, believe the testimony which God 

gave of his Son through the prophets and through Christ's 

R1939 : page 33 

own teachings and the mighty works which God wrought 
by him, to the end that men might believe, having a sure 
and abundant ground for confidence; so that faith might 
not be mere credulity, but a reasonable thing. 

To believe in Jesus in those days, when his mighty 
works astonished the people, and the beauty of his holiness 
impressed every beholder, was most reasonable to those 
of simple hearts, who desired only to know the truth of 
God and to obey it, and who therefore had no crossgrained 
will or prejudice of their own to oppose it. Nor are the 
evidences, the foundation of faith in Christ, any less reliable 
to-day than they were then. On the contrary, they 
are still more abundant and strong,— a firm foundation that 
can never be moved. In simple faith, reliance upon the 
testimony of Christ, the sick woman came to Jesus, so 
fully assured of his power that she did not wait even to 
call his attention to herself when the multitudes thronged 
about him; "for she said, If I may touch but his clothes, 
I shall be whole;" and she was instantly healed. And 
Jesus, perceiving her faith, said unto her, "Daughter, be 
of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go 
in peace." 

This miracle was immediately followed by another, 
still more wonderful— the raising of the dead to life. Faith 
had brought an anxious father to Jesus to request the healing 
of his daughter. But while he was making the request, a messenger 
came to him saying, "Thy daughter is dead, trouble 
not the Master." The messenger evidently knew nothing 
of Jesus' power to raise the dead, and the anxious father 
would probably have abandoned all hope except for the 
Lord's reassurance of his faith, "Fear not: believe only, 
and she shall be made whole." 

In the former instance the faith was exercised by the 
patient; but in this case it was exercised by another on 
behalf of the patient, who, being dead, had no ability to 
exercise faith. Yet the faith in the power of Jesus of those 
who had requested the healing was a very weak faith, and 
when they saw the child was dead all hope departed. They 
had considerable faith in Christ, but they did not believe 



that his power extended to the raising of the dead, and 
were quite incredulous at the suggestion of the Lord's 
words,— "Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth,"— 
knowing that she was dead. As in the case of Lazarus, our 
Lord here referred to death as a sleep, in view of the fact 
of the resurrection. The term is similarly applicable to 
the whole human family in the death that came upon all 
through Adam; because there shall be an awakening, a 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and the unjust. 
The second death, from which there shall be no resurrection, 

R1939 : page 34 

is never likened to a sleep, anywhere in the Bible. 

It is worthy of note, that while our Lord took with 
him the parents and three of his disciples into the chamber 
of death, that they might witness the awakening, when 
they manifested their lack of faith he put them all out, and 
then recalled the dead to life, and permitted them afterward 
to come in and minister to her. Thus, while he rewarded 
their faith, weak though it was, he reproved them 
also, and gave them overwhelming evidence of his mighty 
power. 

The statement of verse 55, when relieved of the mists 
of a false theology, is very clear. "And her spirit came 
again," simply signifies, "And her breath returned," and 
is so rendered in the Emphatic Diaglott, the Greek word 
"pneuma," translated "spirit" in the common version, 
signifying breath, wind, or the spirit or breath of life. 
With the reinstituting of the breathing process and the 
healing of the physical organism came reanimation, restored 
intelligence, and the dead lived again. Thus the 
Lord rewarded even the weak faith, and gave them additional 
and overwhelming evidence to strengthen and establish 
their faith. The Lord did not expect or desire the 
people to have faith without good substantial evidence upon 
which to base it; but he did desire and reward the faith 
that was exercised to the extent of the evidence. A faith 
without substantial evidence upon which to base it, is mere 
credulity, and generally degenerates into gross superstition 
unworthy of the intelligence which God has given us. 



R1939 : page 34 

JESUS THE MESSIAH. 

-MARCH 1. -Luke 9:18-27.- 

Golden Text— "This is my beloved Son: hear him."— Luke 9:35. 

FOR treatment of the major part of this lesson see 
our issue of January 15, 1895— "The Good 
Confession." 
The Lord's command to his disciples to refrain from 



bold assertions that he was the Christ, which, coming from 
them, his intimate friends and disciples, would have had 
about the same effect as if coming from himself, was a wise 
one. He preferred to give the people the evidences, rather 
than the assertions, of his Messiahship, and to let the logic 
of his mighty works lead them to the only reasonable 
conclusions. 

Our Lord's words following this command to tell no 
man, show the reasonings on which it was based— "The 
Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the 
elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be 
raised the third day." Consequently if any followed him 
from any other motives than those of deep conviction and 
a heart desire to be in harmony with God, the trial coming 
would sweep them all away as chaff before the wind. 
But those who would follow him from a heart and head 
conviction of the truth, drawn from the clear testimony of 
the Scriptures and of his mighty works, would thus, by 
their settled convictions, be enabled to stand the tests of 
faith and endurance which must shortly follow. Even with 
this care, the faith of most of those who believed proved 
very superficial. They were swayed in judgment by the 
opposition of their leaders, and only a few stood firm in 
the midst of the trials following. 

The Lord plainly taught his disciples that following 
him meant daily self-denial and cross-bearing. He showed 
them how he must suffer reproaches and persecutions, and 
that from a source whence it might least be expected— from 
the leaders and religious teachers of his day, who were 
moved with envy and consequent hatred of one whose 
power and wisdom so far outstripped their own as to detract 
from their honor and esteem among the people. He showed 
them how he must suffer, even unto death, and that if they 
would follow him and continue to be his disciples, they 
must do as he did,— they must be willing to bear reproaches, 
and to suffer persecution even unto death. If they were 
not willing to do this, they were not worthy to be his disciples. 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny 
himself and take up his cross daily and follow me." 

The statement of verse 24 is applicable to those who, 
having entered into covenant relations with the Lord to lay 
down their lives in his service, subsequently ignore their 
covenant while they seek to save that which they had consecrated 
to God even unto death. Faithfulness to our 
covenant of sacrifice insures eternal life as spiritual beings; 
while the repudiation of it would surely forfeit that life. 
And since by our covenant we have given up all claim upon 
the humanity and its hopes and aims, which we engaged to 
sacrifice, the result must be as the Lord states it:— "Whosoever 
will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever will 
lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it." The 
reasoning of verse 25 is unanswerable, and should have its 
full weight with every consecrated soul. The assurances 
of verse 26 also claim most careful consideration. 

The reference of verse 27 was to the vision of the 
Kingdom of God given typically on the mount of the 



transfiguration. On this subject see our issue of Jan. 
15, '95. 



R1939 : page 34 

TRUE LOVE TO ONE'S NEIGHBOR. 

--MARCH 8.-Luke 10:25-37.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; 
and thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

THE insincerity and evil disposition toward Jesus on 
the part of the Jewish teachers (doctors of the law, 
scribes and Pharisees) was very manifest in the questions 
they publicly propounded to him, for the evident purpose 
of entrapping him in his words and thus hindering his influence 
among the people. It was for this purpose that they 
mingled with the multitudes who witnessed his miracles and 
attended his preaching. But Jesus was more than a match 
for their cunning craftiness; and we admire the adroitness 
with which he ever thwarted their purposes. 

R1939 : page 35 

The question on this occasion was, "Master, what 
shall I do to inherit eternal life?" The questioner probably 
thought he would say, You must believe that I am the 
Son of God, the promised Messiah. Then they would 
have said, "He repudiates the law. The law says that the 
man that doeth the things contained therein shall live by 
them." This, to the people, would have seemed a strong 
argument against Jesus, before they had become sufficiently 
acquainted with him and his teachings. While such a claim 
on the part of Jesus would have been the truth, the people 
were not yet prepared to understand and receive it. They 

R1940 : page 35 

needed continued and repeated evidences, not assertions, 
to convince them; and the Lord modestly and wisely gave 
them what they needed, and with great tact and skill 
avoided the interference with his purpose on the part of 
his enemies. 

Jesus' answer referred the questioner to the law, saying, 
"What is written in the law? how readest thou?" They 
gave the answer from the law— Thou shalt love the Lord 
with all thy heart, etc., and thy neighbor as thyself,— and 
Jesus said they had answered correctly, and that if they 
would do that, they should have eternal life. 

But the answer was not satisfactory to any one, not 
even to the questioner, who was doubtless anxious to make 
a show of his zeal for the law; but the thoughts now revolving 



in every mind must have been the disconsolate 

remembrance of the fact that, though thousands had endeavored 

to merit life through the keeping of the law, not 

one had ever yet succeeded in retaining life beyond the 

usual allotment. And so they understood the Lord's 

words to imply that if they could keep the law perfectly, 

then they should receive the life; but that "if" was insurmountable: 

they could not keep it, and there seemed to be 

no hope of life unless this great teacher might have something 

else to suggest. 

Even the questioner betrayed some anxiety in the 
matter, as though he felt that his own conduct toward God 
and his fellow-men might not stand the scrutiny of the law, 
even as judged by those about him. Possibly some were 
present, who, by their incredulous faces, indicated that they 
did not think this man always acted as if he loved his 
neighbor as himself, and God supremely. So, to justify 
himself in the estimation of such, this doctor of the law 
endeavored to give the impression that the word "neighbor" 
had some restricted meaning which permitted the 
exercise of a good deal of selfishness. 

The illustration which followed forced from the questioner 
himself the admission of the truth that every man 
is neighbor to every other man; that our common humanity 
is the neighborly bond, and that only those who recognize 
the bond of human brotherhood, and act accordingly, 
are worthy of the name "neighbor." To ignore the claims 
of human brotherhood is meanly selfish and inhuman. Yet 
that was just what the proud, boastful, hypocritical teachers 
of that day were doing (Matt. 23:14,23): they were 
scrupulously tithing their mint and anise and cummin, and 
omitting the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy 
and faith. 

The truth thus wisely put, and by logical argument 
forced home to the hearts of all, exposed the hypocrisy of 
the caviling questioner, and drew from himself the admission 
of the truth. "Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and 
do thou likewise." Thus the evil designs of the unbeliever 
were frustrated and the truth was triumphant. 



R1940 : page 35 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



New York. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I arrived home a few days 
ago, and I think you will be interested to hear my general 
experience in the colporteur work, and what my future intentions 
are. I am willing to go wherever the Lord 

wishes, for he knows where the most good can be accomplished; 
and I am taking it to him in prayer, that he will 
guide and direct me. 



In reviewing the last few months, I must acknowledge 
that the Lord has wonderfully watched over and blessed 
me in this great harvest work, and I thank him that he has 
counted me worthy to labor in his vineyard. I must confess 
that I am very weak and can do nothing of myself; 
but if I put my trust fully in the Lord, and do the work 
through him to glorify his name, I have the assurance that 
he will not forsake me. Whatever talent he has given me, 
if it be only one, I want to use it to win others; for I know 
the Lord's words are true, that if a person does not work 
with the one talent he has, he will certainly not have others 
given to him, and the only one he has will also finally be 
taken away. 

In less than four months I have put out about 700 
DAWNS, and I hope that through them some may come to 
the knowledge of the truth. I think myself that, as you 
remarked in your letter, a great many true Christians are 
still in the nominal churches, and it seems to me that (by 
such at least) the truth will be more appreciated in the 
future, because I have found a great many whose hunger 
cannot be satisfied there, and who are looking for the truth. 

Enclosed you will find Twenty Dollars, not to add to 
my account, but to use for the spread of the truth wherever 
you think it will accomplish the most good. As I have 
said before, I did not engage in the work to make money, 
and this is about what I made over and above my expenses. 

Wishing that the Lord may spare you, and use you to 
bring these glad tidings (which shall in due time be to all 
people) to a great many more, I remain, in Christ our Redeemer, 
your brother, F. KNAUSS. 



page 35 

California. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I heartily approve of the sentiments 
expressed in TOWER of Nov. 15. The Church question is 
one of great importance, and the term "church" needs to 
be clearly defined. Satan endeavors to take Christians the 
full swing of the pendulum; i.e., from the chains of sects 
to the license of "comeoutism." 

One of the worst weapons which the sects have used 
against us is that we were "comeouters." A sort of stigma 
attaches to that name, because of the actions of the real 
"comeouters;" and when it is applied to us it does great 
damage to the cause of the truth. My influence was hurt 
in this locality by the report becoming current that I was a 
"comeouter," and I was under the necessity of publicly 
disavowing any connection with them. 

I am fully convinced that sectarianism is sin, so much 
so that I would stand alone forever, before I would knowingly 
join any sect. But I am just as fully convinced 
that "comeoutism," as it finds expression in many, is the 

page 36 



other swing of the pendulum, and that the church is not 
an incongruous mass of irresponsible nondescripts. The 
New Testament Church is a New Testament reality, and 
occupies the golden mean betwixt the two extremes. 

But I can give a hearty "amen" to all you say in the 
Nov. 15 issue. It will do a great deal of good, and will 
help to remove the distrust with which we are viewed. God 
bless you and guide you! I know, as you say, that the 
time is short; but not too short in which to be right. God 
expects us to be right, to make plain paths for our feet, 
lest the lame be turned out of the way, but let it rather be 
healed. 

I thank God that Millennial truths are finding some 
lodgment in this neighborhood. I thank God daily that 
he has given wife and myself this "hearing ear." Like 
the Psalmist, we have set the Lord always before us; and 
when we go to God, it is always by the way of the cross. 

We pray much for you, that he will keep you unchangeably 
loyal to the truth. The position you occupy 
demands it for the glory of his name. 

Pray for us. R. F. CROOKS. 



British Columbia. 

DEAR SIR:-I regret my last contribution to ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER having been so long ago, and also that 
during the interval my reading of your periodical publications 
has been interrupted much more than I would have 
wished. My interest in your writings continues unabated 
—recognizing, as I do, your acquaintance with the whole 
Bible, and rare power in explaining in simple language its 
spirit and meaning. May your labors, and those of all 
other faithful workers in his vineyard, be abundantly blessed 
by God. 

Will you pardon me if I hint (from the best motives but 
with great diffidence) my fear that some of your correspondents, 
whose letters I see in the TOWER, may be in 
danger of deceiving themselves by assuming, on insufficient 
grounds, that their salvation is sure. Good works 
(for example those of colporteurs and others, in commending 
and circulating the Word of God) are of course meritorious; 
but this of itself cannot warrant the firm confidence 
with which not a few of the correspondents appear 
to me content to rely on efforts of their own. 

Can it be possible that your theology— with all its 
grand views of what Christ has done and suffered to redeem 
sinners— still has in it something relaxing, upon which 
poor, erring human nature may be deluding itself? I hope 
you quite understand that my remarks are made in all 
charity. I have no wish to be, nor to appear as, an 
accuser in any sense. 

Yours very truly, 

[IN REPLY:— We fully agree, dear Brother, that none 
have cause for boasting except in and through Christ. But 



we do believe that those who are true branches in the "true 
Vine" should know of this union with Christ, and should 
be able to "glory in the Lord," with a "full assurance of 
faith," "nothing doubting;" realizing that "he who hath 
begun a good work [in them] is able to complete it." So 
far as we know the brethren whose letters we publish, they 
rejoice in the grace of God in Christ through the redemption 
and the remission of sins. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 

Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word! 

What more can he say than to you he hath said? 

You, who unto Jesus for refuge have fled." EDITOR.] 



R1940 : page 36 

Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Lord has specially 
blessed my efforts of late in selling DAWNS during morning, 
noon and evening hours. Sold 11 volumes last Friday, 
16 Saturday, 10 yesterday. This morning I took an order 
for a set, and this noon I went to a sash and door factory 
and got orders for 32 volumes; and several more may buy 
when I deliver, next week. 

I see more clearly now than ever before the race we 
are running for the glorious high calling in Christ, and that 
each and every day shall tell whether we are among the 
overcomers or not. I realize more than ever before the 
great privilege which God in his infinite mercy has conferred 
upon us, a few, a small band, to give us his unadulterated 
gospel, and how glad we ought to be to run and do 
the Master's will, when we know what it is, and that it is 
so glorious towards all men, and that the days are evil. 
As the Apostle says, "We must buy it," or "Let us purchase 
the acceptable time, as the days are evil." (Norwegian 
trans.) I clearly see, that we, who have once voluntarily 
offered ourselves a living, holy sacrifice to do God's will 
only, henceforth and forever, are passed through the 
Adamic death, and if we wilfully sin, and count the blood 
of Jesus Christ, with which we were sanctified, a common 
thing, "there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," and 
we certainly would be unfit to live on any plane. But, 
blessed be God! he judgeth our hearts, and if we will walk 
humbly by faith, God's Word shall truly light us home. 
God shall be our strength and our refuge; and if we abide 
under the shadow of his mighty wing, nothing shall tear 
us away. But it behooves us to be watchful, and faithful 
unto death, as only the faithful will receive the crown. 
Since we have been made free indeed, we feel the power 
of the devil and his unseen host trying every way to retard 
our progress; but, blessed be God! "We overcome in all 
things through Christ who strengtheneth us." 

Yours in the race, M. P. THORI. 



Florida. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose a few clippings. 
As the N.Y. World admits a great many interesting articles 
on religious subjects, why not take advantage of its world-wide 
reputation and liberality to spread the truth? There 
were several articles lately on the missionary question that 
put the orthodox people in a "box." It has always seemed 
strange to me that more of the DAWN people do not write 
in the public press, where I see all shades of opinions represented, 
but rarely see any reference to the DAWNS or 
the truths taught in them. 

Wishing you all the Lord's continued blessing, 
Yours in the faith, W. A. WHITCOMB. 

[We commend this suggestion to all who have the 
talent to express the truth wisely, kindly, fluently and 
pointedly. We are glad to say that several Brethren are 
active in such directions. They usually send us the papers 
containing their articles, which often contain some reference 
to MILLENNIAL DAWN, or a quotation from it, and close 
with a promise to send reading matter free, and the writer's 
address. The securing of the addresses of the interested 
is very important, for you cannot hope to thoroughly convince 
any one by a short article or two. We are glad to 
cooperate by furnishing and mailing tracts, etc., to all the 
addresses you can send us. Let the light shine out in 
every way that you can.— EDITOR.] 



page 37 
VOL. XVII. MARCH 1, 1896. No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 38 

Views from the Tower 39 

The Memorial of Our Lord's Death 42 

Gold Tried in the Fire 43 

Bible Study: Lord, Teach Us to Pray 45 

Bible Study: "That Servant" 47 

Bible Study: Review 47 

Encouraging Letters 48 

page 38 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



READ THIS AND ACT AT ONCE! 



THE Postoffice Department has for years given us more or less 
trouble and expense by narrow interpretations of the liberal laws 
made by Congress, to foster the cheap circulation of good literature 
among the people. Up to the present time we have succeeded in getting 
our rights; but now we are menaced with an order which prevents 
us from mailing back issues of the Old Theology Tracts at the cheap 
or "pound" rates, while novels and trash in general are unhampered. 

The present liberal law was evidently designed by Congress to facilitate 
and increase the circulation of legitimate literature of all kinds. The 
effort of the P.O. officials evidently is to restrict and hinder it in every 
possible manner. The fact is, that the P.O. Department has not quite 
paid expenses lately, because of the enormous charges paid to the railroads; 
and rather than reduce the R.R. rates pro rata to the increase 
of mail matter, it is the dear public that is inconvenienced and made to 



pay extra, by ruling that if it wants many extra copies for friends it must 
pay extra rates, because these are henceforth in violation of the spirit and 
intent of the law, to be ruled against as "reprints." 

We learn that a bill is soon to come before Congress relating to 
"Second Class Mail Matter;" and we request that EVERY READER 
OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and also every friend of the cause it represents, 
residing within these United States, do something suggested 
below for its relief, immediately, at a cost of four cents and a little time 
and ink. Our request is that you (subscribers), with as many friends 
of the cause as will join, each send four postal cards: one addressed to 
the Congressman representing your district, another each to the two 
Senators from your State, and the fourth to Hon. Wm. L. Wilson, Post 
Master General. Address them all to Washington, D.C. 

Please write in substance the following on each of the above mentioned 
cards, signing your name. You will need to get large Postal 
Cards and to write a small hand in order to get this on. Otherwise 
write letters. 

Honorable Sir:— As my representative, I ask your influence on 
the subject of "Second Class Mail Matter," so that Religious Matter 
(including tracts, etc.) be given every advantage of the Act of Congress 
of July 16, 1894; and that every hindrance to the printing 
(and mailing at pound rates) of back numbers be removed while said 
publication continues to issue at least four numbers per year. 

Yours Resp'y, . 

Where there are a number of friends at one place it would do 
equally well to start four papers with the above letter and get all the 
friends to sign each of them. 

Join with us also in prayer to God, daily, for at least one week from 
the time you receive this TOWER, that he will preserve to us this "door" 
of opportunity for service, until all of his antitypical Israel shall have 
been sealed with the Present Truth, intellectually,— "in their foreheads." 
-Rev. 7:3. 



R1940 : page 39 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



OUR Lord declared that his mission, and that of his 
gospel, was "to preach the gospel to the meek, to 
bind up the broken hearted." And under his commission 
the gospel is no longer to be confined to Israel, the natural 
seed of Abraham, but may now be preached "to every 
creature," that whosoever "hath an ear to hear" may 
hear. He clearly announced, however, that only a limited 
class was intended to be drawn to him, and received by 
him as disciples in this age, saying:— 

"No man can come to me, except the Father which 
hath sent me draw him. ...Every man therefore that 
hath heard and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto 

R1941 : page 39 



me." "All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; 
and him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out." 
-John 6:37,44,45. 

If all Christian people understood and remembered 
these inspired words of their Master, many of their missionary 
efforts would differ greatly from the present methods. 
If they understood these Scriptures they would be in better 
condition to realize that this Gospel age is not the only 
age of salvation and drawing, but that by and by, in the 
Millennial age, Christ will draw all men unto himself 
(John 12:32), after the same manner that the Father now 
draws a few, "a little flock," of a special class, and presents 
them to Christ. This would help them over their 
great delusion that the "undrawn" and "uncalled" 
(Acts 2:39) of the present time, the vast majority of the 
human family, are not reprobated to an eternity of torture, 
but will be given a fair and gracious trial for life in a coming 
"day of judgment" when the Father-drawn "little 
flock" shall, with Christ, be their gracious and merciful 
judges as well as their kings and priests.— 1 Cor. 6:2; 
Rev. 1:6. 

But not knowing the Scriptures and the plan of God 
sufficiently, they have a zeal that is not according to 
knowledge, and are attempting to bring to Christ now 
those whom the Father has not drawn. Much better would 
it be that much of the present mission work should wait a 
few years longer, until the body of Christ, the Church, 
shall be "lifted up" and associated with the head in the 
glory and power of the Millennial Kingdom, and then share 
in the drawing which shall exert an influence for good upon 
"all men." (But this will not be an irresistible influence, 
even as the present drawing of the Father is not 
irresistible.) 

A Brother in the truth, residing in Cape Colony, South 
Africa, sends us a clipping from the Natal Mercury, which 
tells of a Missionary Meeting held in the Presbyterian 
church there, at which the following statement was made: 
"There are still eight hundred and fifty millions of people 
unevangelized, over two hundred millions being in Africa. 
The heathen have increased during the last one hundred 
years over two hundred millions, and the Christians to the 
extent of three millions. The heathen rate of increase 
was thus seventy times greater than the Christian. More 
zeal for foreign missions is now shown than at any past 
period, but there is need for these increasing a thousand 
fold." 

From early life our sympathies for the heathen and 
for those who give their lives to serve them have been 
very strong; and they will always continue so. Yet, even 
as a child, we wondered why God seemed so indifferent to 
the welfare of the masses of the human family. Now, thank 
God, the light of divine truth shining forth shows us that 
all of the race of Adam were redeemed with the precious 
blood of Christ, and that in God's due time Christ, as the 
"true Light," shall enlighten every man that has come into 
the world. (John 1:9.) We see now that God's people have 



R1941 : page 40 

not studied his Word with sufficient care, and hence the 

distress and confusion of many zealous souls today as they 

note the failure of their hopes and efforts. They first overlooked 

the fact that the Gospel is only "unto as many as 

the Lord your God shall call;" and that no man can come 

to Christ except the Father draw him; and that the Father 

is not drawing all men, but is leaving the vast majority to 

be drawn similarly, and by other means, by Christ and 

his Church, in the next age. Thus, by getting false 

ideas of their own, to the effect that God had commissioned 

them to do all the drawing and converting in the 

present age, many are led to doubt and trouble of soul. 

And finding that they cannot accomplish what they had 

hoped, some lower their standard of righteousness and 

acceptableness with God, and conclude that the future 

companions of the "little flock" in heaven will be millions 

and billions of the most degraded savages; saved, not by 

faith, but by their ignorance. 

Others charge the failure upon God's plan or upon his 
Church for not doing the impossible. Note the unscripturalness 
and unreasonableness of the following verses of a 
hymn sung at a Missionary Meeting of the Christian 
Alliance, held a few weeks ago in Montreal, Canada, sent 
us by a Brother in the truth who was present, but who 
could not join in the song. 

"A hundred thousand souls a day 
Are passing one by one away, 

In Christless guilt and gloom; 
Without one ray of hope or light, 
With future dark as endless night, 

They're passing to their doom." 

"They're passing, passing fast away, 
A hundred thousand souls a day, 

In Christless guilt and gloom. 
O Church of Christ, what wilt thou say, 
When in the awful judgment day 

They charge thee with their doom?" 

It is blasphemous to charge that God has made the 
everlasting bliss or pain of billions of his creatures dependent 
upon impotent fellow creatures. As Peter said to 
the Jews who crucified Jesus, so we can think of many of 
those who sang, "I wot that in ignorance ye did it." 

We do feel a very warm love for those who are specially 
spending themselves in any department of the Lord's 
service, at a cost of discomfort and self-denial whether at 
home or abroad, as missionaries or colporteurs, or otherwise. 
If the good accomplished is small so far as the 
heathen are concerned, it has undoubtedly been large so 
far as some of the missionaries themselves, and some of 
those who paid their expenses, are concerned. 



Now, however, the Lord points us to the fact that 
"harvesting" is the special work in order, and we advise 
all who have the Lord's spirit and his truth to rejoice 
through their tears over their failure to convert the world, 
and to look up and see the rainbow which God hath set 
for us, promising that after the "elect" church has been 
called, drawn, chastened, taught and polished, she, with 
her Lord and Redeemer shall be the great light— the Sun 
of Righteousness which shall "draw," "bless" and "heal" 
all for whom there could be any hope. If our past efforts 
did not save the world from eternal torment, let us thank 
God that there was no such danger as we had apprehended, 
and let us the more appreciate our Creator and his perfect 
rule of love and justice. If we did not convert the 
world, let us thank God that we did "witness," as he declared 
we should do, and that in so doing we were blest. 
And let us quickly wipe our tears and rejoice in the present 
truth; let us enter the harvest work of perfecting holiness 
in ourselves and others of the saints, and preparing 
for the marriage of the Lamb.— Rev. 19:7. 



Recently the French Representative at the Papal court 
was recalled. This means the severance of a long standing 
friendship. Now we get the following in the same 
direction. 

"A cable to the New York World of Jan. 26 states 
that Premier Bourgeois of France has announced the introduction 
of a bill 'to separate church and state,' and that 
he will make vigorous war on Roman Catholic monasteries, 
convents and other religious houses. Money left to members 
of religious societies by bequest, for the use of such 
societies, shall be confiscated to the use of the natural 
heirs. It is hoped,' says the premier, 'to cripple 
the church as a political machine, and render innocuous 
the Pope's influence in France.' Religious houses holding 
millions in money will be required to make returns of their 
wealth to the government, preparatory to the imposition of 
a tax on such property." 

The Roman Catholic clergy have been giving support 
to representatives of monarchy, and the Pope now 
claims that this has been in violation of his recommendations. 
At all events a desperate struggle between the 
French party in power and the Roman church is begun, 
and both will use every measure to win. Knowing the 
resources and intrigues of priestcraft, we fear for the safety of 
the Republic, unless it modifies its plans. The French 
are mostly Catholics, and have been used for centuries to 
having the churches, clergy, etc., supported by government 
money; and now, under the new laws, if executed, they 
will be obliged to pay their own priests, or have none; and 
their superstitions respecting "holy water," "holy candles," 
"masses," etc., etc., are so deeply grounded that they are 
still considered necessities to them, which probably will 
not be relinquished readily,— especially while the priests 



are among them to threaten them with hell and purgatory. 



It is remarkable that while Catholic countries are 
striving to get rid of Catholic domination, Protestant 
countries are welcoming the Church of Rome. For instance, 
Norway, that has been ultra-Protestant, to the degree that 
fifty years ago Romish Priests could not enter the country 
under pain of death, is now undergoing a reaction, and 
recently, in Christiansand, when a large church edifice and 

R1941 : page 41 

hospital were dedicated, thousands of Protestants, including 
the officials of the province, were present. The same 
is true in Scotland. In Glasgow, where a Roman Catholic 
church edifice was unknown a century ago, there are now 
about twenty of them. 

The fact is that where Papacy predominates and has 
the control it is terribly corrupt, so as to become a stench 
even to the worldly masses; but where she is in the minority 
she is under such crafty management that to the worldly 
she appears "as good as any," and indeed is preferred 

R1942:page41 

sometimes because of her greater power over her more 
superstitious votaries. 



Rev. C. H. Sprecher, in a recent sermon, said:— 
"With characteristic openness to western ideas, the 
Japanese received our religion with our civilization. But 
these sprightly people introduced innovations. They rebelled 
against our denominationalism. Christian missionaries 
have had to drop very generally denominational 
names. Most of the churches call themselves United 
churches or Associated. They would not even take the name 
of Congregational churches. 

"They also look with little favor upon the abstruse 
doctrines of systematic theology. They talk of the Christianity 
of Christ, and of the religion of Jesus, pure and 
simple, as the faith which they want and which is suited to 
their nation." 



Thos. Edison, the inventor and electrician, of Phonograph 
and Telephone fame, has been experimenting with 
the new light "X Rays" and has succeeded in taking a 
photograph through oak eight inches thick. But, as suggested 
in our last issue, Theosophists and others are claiming 
the new discovery as a part of their deception outfit. 
The Scriptures forewarn us that Satan will bring to bear 



strong delusions in this our day. Thank God, they shall 

not deceive "the very elect." Obedience, faithfulness to 

the end, is the condition upon which we may make our calling 

and election sure. In other words, if we are faithful 

to the Word and Spirit of the Lord he will carry us 

through. 



A new lymph treatment for all germ diseases is announced 
in New York. The antitoxine is of mineral and 
carbolic acid compound, called Aseptolin. Great things 
are hoped for it as an arrester of diseases. No doubt recent 
discoveries are but preparations for the Millennial blessing, 
so that when, twenty years from now, the times of restitution 
shall be fully ushered in, and none except wilful sinners 
will die, it will not appear so strange to mankind, and still 
leave room for faith respecting the real source of all 
blessings. 



Baron Hirsch, a Jew, four years ago undertook the 
colonizing of Russian Jews in Argentine Republic, S.A., 
setting apart ten million dollars for the purpose. A recent 
official report shows that two million dollars have been 
spent, and that only twelve hundred and twenty-two families 
have been located in Argentine; and for the present no 
new settlers are being forwarded from Russia. On the 
other hand, without this special aid about thirty thousand 
Russian Jews came to the United States during last year 
alone. 

In our issue of December, 1891, we gave a copy of a 
letter which we sent to Baron Hirsch on the subject of Jewish 
colonization, recommending a plan for the autonomy 
of Palestine and the turning of immigration thither. Some 
such plan, we believe, will soon be adopted, and the land 
of Palestine be thrown open, not merely to Russian Jews, 
but also to Austrian, Hungarian, German and French Jews; 
all of whom will surely be persecuted in the near future to 
dislodge them and cause them to return to Palestine, as 
foretold in the Scriptures. 



At the State Convention of the New Jersey Young 
Men's Christian Association, in session at Jersey City, 
Feb. 14, its President, Elijah S. Cowles, suggested the introduction 
of pool and billiard tables to the Y.M.C.A. 
attractions for young men. A few members from the 
southern part of the State protested, and one of them said 
that he had formerly been a saloon-keeper, and gave it as 
his opinion that it was useless to hope to lead young men 
to heavenly things by the aid of the billiard table. To 
clinch the argument in favor of billiards the South Jersey 
Delegates were escorted to the People's Palace, an auxiliary 



to the Tabernacle Church, and there were shown billiard 
and pool tables, with boys playing about them. 

Comment on this is almost unnecessary. "Lovers of 
pleasure more than lovers of God," is written all over this 
and the various "Church entertainments," minstrels, etc. If 
the contention were proved true, that men and boys are kept 
out of saloons by this means, still there is no excuse for associating 
with these things the name of Christ's Church, nor 
of calling such things young men's Christian associations 
and amusements. 

Let us ever remember that morality is not synonymous 
with Christianity. The Christian is one who has passed 
through the strait gate and into the narrow way of self-denial 
—one who, having taken up his cross to follow his 
Lord, has left all for this blessed service. Such have other 
uses for their consecrated time and talents than killing 
them in playing even innocent games. As the poet says, 
"We are living, we are dwelling, 

In a grand and awful time: 
In an age on ages telling, 
To be living is sublime." 

The steward of God's favors who hides his talent in 
the earth, or in a billiard parlor, or in business, or in pride 
and show, will be termed a "wicked and slothful servant," 
and only those who have used, and thus increased their 
talents, will hear the longed-for words,— "Well done, 
good, faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord."— 
Matt. 25:23-30. 



R1942:page42 

THE MEMORIAL OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 



FEW and simple are the memorials of the true Church 
in contrast with those of heathendom and formalistic 
nominal Christendom. Instead of the numerous fast 
and feast days and weeks, we have only three memorials: 

(1) Baptism, the symbol of the death and burial of 
the already justified human will into the will of God in 
Christ. 

(2) The Memorial Supper, emblemizing the literal 
breaking of our Lord's body and shedding of his blood 
(his death as "the man Christ Jesus" at Calvary),— and 
reviving our covenant to "be dead with him" that we may 
also live with him," to "suffer with him" that we may also 
be glorified together." 

(3) The memorial of our Lord's resurrection on the 
First-day of the week, now commonly called Sunday. 

Our Lord instituted all three beautiful, yet simple, 
memorials. His baptism was different from the baptism of 
John, preached to Jews only, a "baptism unto repentance;" 
for he had no sins to repent of. His was the first baptism 



of the new order, symbolizing the death of the will of a 
justified human being, already acceptable to the Father, 
and full submission to God's will, a full surrender, complete 
consecration.* It took the place of "John's baptism." 
-Acts 19:3-5. 

Our Lord instituted the observance of the first day of 
the week, in the same manner that he instituted the Memorial 
Supper and Baptism; namely, not by command, but by 
example. He met with the disciples on the first day of 
the week, immediately after his resurrection; with Mary 
near the Sepulchre, with Simon Peter, with the two who 
went to Emmaus, and with the ten disciples in the upper 
room. (John 20:1,14,19; Luke 24:13-31,34,36.) Then 
he waited another week, and again appeared to them on 
the eighth day, probably meaning the day after the seventh, 
the first day of the week. (John 20:26.) The disciples 
seem to have expected something of the kind and had 
come together, and thereafter remembering the opening of 
their eyes of understanding to know him, that it was in 
connection with the "breaking of bread," they afterward 
not only met regularly on the first day, but regularly had 
a simple meal together, called "breaking of bread." This 
some in our day have mistaken for a commemoration of the 
Last Supper. The two, however, were totally different;— 
the one commemorating the death, and the other celebrating 
with joy the resurrection. The first day of the week 
was not only honored as the memorial of our Lord's resurrection 
and manifestation and communion, but was again 
marked by divine favor at Pentecost, and became the memorial 
of the outpouring of the holy Spirit.— Acts 2:1; 
20:7; 1 Cor. 16:2. 

Our Lord instituted the Memorial Supper after, and to 
take the place of, the Jewish Passover supper. The killing 
of the Passover lamb was to be done on the fourteenth 
day of the first month of each Jewish year, in commemoration 
of the deliverance of Israel's firstborn from the last 
plague of Egypt, and subsequently the deliverance of the 
entire nation from slavery. Our Lord was himself the 
antitype of the Lamb. His Church is the antitype of the 
spared firstborn of Israel; and the near approaching "restitution," 
in which all who love God will be delivered 
from the slavery of Sin and Death under Satan, will be the 
antitype of the deliverance of the nation. 

The Memorial Supper, with its unleavened bread and 
wine, representing the flesh and blood of the Lamb of God, 
whose sacrifice takes away the sin of the world, making 
reconciliation for iniquity, was intended to keep fresh before 
the memory of the Church of the firstborn the remembrance 
of her purchase price, and to pledge her to 
fellowship in the sufferings of Christ. (1 Cor. 10:16,17; 
11:26.) It was instituted, therefore, in the same night 
in which our Lord was betrayed, in the same day in which 
he was crucified (the Hebrew day counting from six p.m. 
until six p.m.). 

It was not the intention of our Lord to commemorate 
the feast of Passover, which began on the 15th of Nisan 



and lasted for an entire week, but merely to give us a 



*See TOWER for June 15, '93,— "Baptism and Its Import." 

R1943 : page 42 

memorial of his death on the 14th of Nisan. So far from 
being a feast of rejoicing, it was an occasion of sorrow 
and perplexity to the early Church. Jesus himself was 
"exceeding sorrowful." 

Seeing that this Memorial celebrates the antitype of 
the killing of the Passover lamb, we can see that it is properly 
celebrated on its anniversary,— not monthly, quarterly, 
weekly nor daily, but yearly,— and properly at the 
same time of the year at which our Lord died, and at which 
he instituted the memorial. This was the custom of the 
early Church, which reckoned its date according to 
the Jewish method of reckoning time. The first deviation 
from this was by the churches represented by the 
Bishop of Rome, which substituted, appointed and observed 
the nearest Friday, when the 14th of Nisan fell on some other 
day, as it most frequently did. This was the origin of "Good 
Friday," and the third day following was known as Passover 
Sunday, and later as "Easter Sunday." Later, by the 
decree of the Council of Nice (A.D. 325), and still later 
under the revision of the calendar by Pope Gregory XIII. , 
the so-called Catholic churches have been brought into 
practical agreement, and annually fix dates for "Good 
Friday" and "Easter Sunday." 

For the past twenty years we who are seeking the "old 
paths" (Jer. 6:16) have celebrated the Memorial Supper 
upon its anniversary, as reckoned according to the Hebrew 
usage, which was recognized by our Lord and the Apostles. 
Theirs is an easy and simple method. They begin their 
year (Nisan being their first month) with the new 

R1943 : page 43 

moon at the Spring Equinox and on the night of the 14th, 
at six p.m., commences the 15th, which is the first day 
of their Passover feast— Exod. 12:2. 

This year the Equinoxial moon, or month Nisan, begins 
March 15th; hence its 15th day or the beginning of the 
Hebrew Passover week will be on the 29th. The 14th of 
Nisan, on which they killed the Paschal lamb, the anniversary 
of the death of our Lord, "the Lamb of God," will be 
March 28th, beginning, according to Hebrew reckoning, on 
the 27th at sundown. Since our Lord instituted the Memorial 
on the evening preceeding, we celebrate it 
correspondingly. 

Following this honored custom, therefore, the Church 
at Allegheny will meet on the evening of March 27th, at 
8.00 o'clock, to commemorate the greatest transaction 
known to mankind. As heretofore our services will be 



very simple, consisting of praise, prayer, a review of the 
significance of the emblems and the realities celebrated, 
partaking of the emblems, "Passover-bread" (i.e., unleavened 
bread), and "fruit of the vine." (For "fruit of 
the vine" we prefer unfermented grape juice or raisin juice 
rather than wine, because if the liquor habit has a hold 
upon any one we would avoid the temptation to such- 
adding a spoonful of wine for the sake of those who consider 
that nothing but wine would fill the prescription, 
"fruit of the vine." As for the unleavened bread, what is 
needed can readily be purchased from almost any Hebrew 
family; if not, "soda crackers" or "water crackers" are 
an unleavened bread, and will serve every purpose.) 

The special feature of the occasion is the heart communion 
with the Lord, facilitated by the appreciation of 
the significance of the emblems revealed in the Word. They 
are to be appreciated, not only as representing our Redeemer's 
sacrifice, but also as representing our privilege of 
fellowship with him in suffering for righteousness' sake, as 
members of his body, the Church,— our individual share 
in it. The cup of blessing for which we bless God,— is it 
not a participation of the blood of Christ? The loaf 
which we break,— is it not a participation of the body of 
Christ?" (1 Cor. 10:16,17.) Concluding with an appropriate 
hymn of praise we seek to avoid conversation, 
and to perpetuate the "communion" by thoughts respecting 
the great event just commemorated, and to follow our 
Lord reflectively to Gethsemane, and the day following to 
Calvary, thinking meanwhile of how little we are able to 
do to show our love for him, and resolving to be more 
jealously careful in the use of every hour and every mite 
of influence in his service. 

Any friends who trust in the "precious blood" will be 
cordially welcome to meet with us. We advise, however, that 
brethren and sisters, so far as possible, should not desert 
little groups at home to enjoy the privileges of meeting with 
a larger company. Where two or three meet in the Lord's 
name he blesses them. Let each one be thoroughly willing to 
sacrifice his own preferences in the interest of the fellow-members 
of the body of Christ. This is being broken for 
others, as set forth in the preceding quotation, and the 
results are always blessed. 

Remember all the dear flock of the Lord, not forgetting 
us, here, at Allegheny, in your prayers, and we will 
remember you all. 

Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation. 

Let each one be on guard against the wiles of the devil. 
Remember that we near the anniversary not only of our 
Lord's sufferings, but also of Judas' treachery and false 
kiss, and question "Is it I?" Let each one examine his 
heart and see that it is in such an attitude of love and devotion 
to the Lord, and to every member of "his body," 
that he can have communion with the Lord and all who 
are truly his. In any other attitude there is danger that 
Satan "enter in." (Luke 22:3.) "The last state of that 
man is worse than the first."— Matt. 12:45; Luke 11:26. 



R1943 : page 43 

GOLD TRIED IN THE FIRE. 



"I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the 
fire, that thou mayest be rich."— Rev. 3:18. 

IN OUR study of the typical tabernacle, which was a 
shadow of good things to come, we have seen that 
everything inside the tabernacle was made of gold. The 
boards of which the tabernacle was constructed were overlaid 
with gold. The furniture also was of gold. There 
stood the golden candlestick, the golden table, the golden 
altar of incense, the golden ark of the testimony and the 
golden cherubim. Gold was also prominent in the typically 
glorious robes of the high priest. The fringe upon the upper 
robe was of golden bells and pomegranates; the texture 
of the ephod was interwoven with golden threads, and it 

R1944:page43 

was fastened on the shoulders with golden clasps; and 

upon his head was the golden crown, upon which was inscribed, 

"Holiness to the Lord." 

All this was in striking contrast with the metals used 
elsewhere about the structure, its typical significance here 
being that all within "the Holy," which represented the 
present condition of truly consecrated believers, and within 
the "Most Holy," which represented the glorious 
condition of the Church triumphant, pertains to the divine 
nature, gold being a symbol of divinity. All who are 
privileged to enter the antitypical Holy and Most Holy 
are also to be, as Peter tells us, "partakers of the divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) They are members of the body of the 
great Highpriest whose divine nature was symbolized in the 
gold of the typical highpriest's typically glorious garments. 

It is in harmony with this same symbolic meaning of 
gold, that the Revelator says of the heavenly city, the New 

R1944 : page 44 

Jerusalem, "And the city was pure gold [a divine institution], 
...and the street of the city was pure gold [all its 
highways are of divine appointment]." (Rev. 21:18,21.) 
And the Psalmist, referring to the privileged class who, 
when glorified, shall constitute that heavenly city, government 
or kingdom of God,— the members of the body or 
bride of Christ, partakers of the divine nature,— says, 
"Upon thy right hand did stand the queen, in gold of Ophir. 
...Her clothing is of wrought gold."— Psa. 45:9,13. 
It is to the same apt symbolism that our Lord also refers 



in addressing his people in our text,— "I counsel 

thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire." These words, 

be it remembered, are not addressed to the world, but to 

the Lord's people, justified and consecrated. (Rev. 1:1; 

3:14.) This call is an exhortation to them to faithfully 

fulfil their covenant, to submit themselves fully and unreservedly 

to the discipline of the Lord, which is necessary 

for their perfecting in holiness, and for making them ready 

to reign with him as his bride and joint-heir in the glory 

of the divine Kingdom. 

Not until we lay hold by faith upon the exceeding great 
and precious promises— of joint-heirship with Christ in his 
coming Kingdom and glory— which promises lead us to 
fulfil their conditions of consecration and self-sacrifice even 
unto death, is there any of the "gold" of the "divine 
nature" in us. This treasure can be purchased only at the 
cost of entire consecration or sacrifice of all that we have, to 
Christ. Previous to our justification by faith in Christ we 
had nothing to sacrifice, all that we had being under condemnation; 
but, being justified, we may present our bodies 
living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, and our reasonable 
service. Thus the treasure of the new, divine nature, 
the gold, is given us. Thus we "buy" the gold. 

But we have this treasure in the earthen vessels, and 
there is consequently much of alloy mixed with it. 
Hence the necessity that the gold be cast into the crucible 
for refining. And if we would purchase the "gold tried 
in the fire," it must be at the cost of faithful and constant 
submission to the discipline of the Lord in the fiery trials 
which are necessary to consume our dross and refine our 
gold. Wherefore Peter says, "Beloved, think it not strange 
concerning the fiery trial that is to try you, as though some 
strange thing happened unto you." (1 Pet. 4:12.) And 
Paul reminds us of the counsel of wisdom (Prov. 3:11,12; 
Heb. 12:5-8),— "My son, despise not thou the chastening 
of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; 
for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 

Peter also reminds us that the trial of our faith is 
much more precious than that of gold that perisheth, and that 
the end sought through such trial is that we may be "found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ." (1 Pet. 1:7.) It would be idle for any of the 
Lord's consecrated people to hope to be made meet for the 
glorious inheritance of the saints without the refining processes 
of fiery trial; for Paul tells us that "the fire shall 
try every man's work, of what sort it is." "If ye receive 
not chastisement [discipline, fiery trial], whereof all are 
partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons." (1 Cor. 3:13; 
Heb. 12:6-8.) And through the Prophet Isaiah 
the Lord tells his spiritual Israel, as well as his typical 
fleshly Israel, "I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely 
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy sin." (Isa. 1:25.) 
The Prophet Malachi, making special reference to 
the last days of this age, the days of the Lord's presence, 
and the great refining work to be accomplished then, says, 
"Who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall 



stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and 
like fullers' soap. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier 
of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and 
purge them as gold and silver."— Mai. 3:2,3. 

Fiery trials are therefore to be expected by all of the 
Lord's people, especially in this day of the Lord. As surely 
as we are sons of God we shall have them; and when they 
come we should promptly recognize their mission to us and 
see that we are exercised by them unto godliness, sobriety 
and deep and fervent piety. "Now no chastening [discipline] 
for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: 
nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of 
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby."— 
Heb. 12:11. 

It is in the school of experience that we learn our 
most valuable lessons; and the ripest saints, in whom we 
find the deepest sympathy, the most patient forbearance, 
and the most tender helpfulness and consideration, are 
those who have been through the fire of affliction, and who 
have been rightly exercised thereby. It was when the 
cross grew heaviest and the clouds were darkest, and when 
the tempest was highest, that the Master's presence was most 
sensibly realized, and the blessed lessons of faith and trust 
and of the Lord's tender, personal love were sealed upon 
the hearts of the disciples. It is under such discipline that 
the soul is mellowed to a loving submission that calmly says, I 
can do all things, bear all things, through Christ who strengtheneth 
me. As gradually the dross of the old nature is consumed, 
and the gold becomes more and more manifest, these 
precious souls become ever dearer to their loving Lord. So 
dear are they to him that in every affliction he is near with 
his grace to sustain and his presence to cheer; and the 
deepest shades of sorrow become memory's most hallowed 
resting places, where the Day Star shines the brightest. 

Whenever a new trial is presented to the Christian, if 
he will but call to mind this precept of the Lord, "I counsel 
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire," it will stimulate 
courage, nerve to patient endurance, and quicken to 
self-sacrifice. "Gold tried in the fire!" How can it be 
tried without the crucible and the flame? How otherwise 
can the dross be eliminated? There is no other way. 
"Wherefore, think it not strange:" let the fire burn; let 
the dross be consumed; and see to it, beloved, that in the 
heat of the flame you remove not the "living sacrifice" 

R1944 : page 45 

from the altar. Remember that the eye of the great 
Refiner is upon you; and as the refiner of gold watches 
the metal in the crucible to see his image reflected in it, so 
the Lord, the great Refiner, has his eye upon you. He is 
watching to see how the precious metal of your character 
reflects his image. Or, in plain language, in every trial 
he watches to see what influences control our actions, 
whether they be influences of present advantage, or worldly 
policy, or personal friendship, or earthly loves— of husband, 



or wife, or children, or houses, or lands, or whether they 
be honor among men, or love of ease, or love of peace at 
any cost; or whether, on the other hand, we are controlled 
by the naked principles of truth and righteousness; and 
whether we will defend these principles with zeal and 
energy at any cost of labor or suffering, or both, and so 
fight the good fight of faith to the bitter end— even 
unto death. 

Those who do so, reflect the Master's image. Like 
him they are loyal to God, loyal to the principles of truth 
and righteousness, brave, obedient, faithful. These are the 
overcomers. They overcome by faith; for without a strong 
reliant faith they could not thus endure hardness as good 
soldiers, and pursue to the end a course which is continually 
against the current of the old human nature. Faith 
buckles on the armor of God and goes forth to the battle 
with firm and steady tread, quickened by the inspiring 
melody,— 

"Awake my soul, stretch every nerve, 

And press with vigor on; 
A heavenly race demands thy zeal, 
And an immortal crown." 

The Christian course of self-sacrifice cannot be one 
of ease and continuous smooth-sailing and peace. There 
may be a calm now and then, but storms and battles are 
the rule; and he who courts ease and peace at the expense 
of the principles of truth and righteousness, or who is so 
indifferent to the value of those principles as not to study 
to discern them in order to defend them, is not a faithful, 
overcoming soldier of the cross. 

"Ne'er think the victory won, nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous work will not be done till thou hast gained thy crown. 

Jesus said, "Think not that I am come to send peace 
on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I 
am come to set a man at variance against his father, and 
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law 
against her mother-in-law; and a man's foes shall be they 
of his own household. He that loveth father or mother 
more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth 
son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. And 
he that taketh not his cross and followeth after me, is not 
worthy of me." "If any man come to me, and hate not 
[i.e., and love me not more than*] his father and mother 



*See EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT-foot note. 

R1945 : page 45 

and wife and children and brethren and sisters; yea, and 
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. ...Whosoever 
he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he 
cannot be my disciple. ...He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear."-Matt. 10:34-38; Luke 14:26,33,35. 
Oh, how necessary is the hearing of faith to the victory 



of faith— to that victory which makes every other love 
subservient to the love of God, which makes every other 
interest bend to the interests of his great work, and which 
cheerfully sacrifices every other interest to the interests 
which center in Christ and in his coming Kingdom. The 
ear of faith must be attuned to the melodies of divine 
truth if the soul would catch its blessed inspiration; and 
the eye of faith must discern the symmetry of truth and 
the beauty of holiness, if the soul would be filled with a 
burning zeal for God— for his truth and his righteousness. 
But let the soul be thus inspired with deep and abiding 
love for the melody of truth and the beauty of holiness, 
and filled with a holy zeal for God, then everything else 
takes a secondary place, and we have the victory by faith 
in every encounter with the enemy. The soul thus stayed 
upon God can always trustfully sing,— 

"If on a quiet sea toward home I calmly sail, 

With grateful heart, O God, to thee, I'll own the favoring gale. 

But should the surges rise, and rest delay to come, 

Blest be the tempest, kind the storm, which drives me nearer home. 



R1945 : page 45 

LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY. 

-MARCH. 15.-Luke 11:1-13.- 

Golden Text.— "Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye 
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you."— Luke 11:9. 

THE first suggestion of this lesson is the inquiry, Why 

did the disciples ask the Lord to teach them how to 

pray? were not the Jews a praying people, and were not 

the prayers of the righteous acceptable to God from the beginning 

of the world? Yes, the Jews were a praying people, 

and their prayers, when devout and sincere, and in harmony 

with the expressed will of God, were acceptable, and were 

answered. So also were the prayers of others before the 

Jewish age began. Adam communed with God in Eden 

until sin separated him from God and he was cast out of 

Paradise. After he had sinned, he heard and promptly 

recognized the voice of God as he and Eve walked in the 

cool of the day. They feared the voice then because they 

had sinned, but their prompt recognition of it indicated 

that it was familiar to them, and that often before they had 

delighted to hear it. 

The first act of God's mercy after the penalty had been 
pronounced, and the promise had been given of a coming 
deliverer— "the seed of the woman"— was to clothe each 
of the penitent pair with a garment of skins, provided by 
a sacrifice, which prefigured the sacrificed "Lamb of God 
that taketh away the sins of the world." We confidently 
say the penitent pair, because had they been rebellious and 



defiant, instead of penitent, God could not have dealt thus 
mercifully and kindly with them. He would not have 
forced them to wear the typical robe, nor have rewarded 

R1945 : page 46 

them with the hope of a future deliverance. Evidently they 
still had faith in God, and repented that they had hearkened 
to the voice of the tempter and forfeited the divine favor 
by disobedience; and they were anxious to find some way 
of return to that favor, since God in his mercy had given 
them a ray of hope which lifted them out of the slough of 
despair; and they desired, if possible, to have some recognition, 
some way of access to God, to reassure their hearts 
from time to time that they were not cast off forever. Such 
reassurance of hope for the race was given in the institution 
of the typical sacrifices, which began in the clothing of 
Adam and Eve in the skin of the sacrificed animal, the robe 
thus provided typifying the imputed righteousness of the 
sacrificed Lamb of God, Christ Jesus. 

So we find those descendants of Adam who had respect 
to the will and promise of God offering to God acceptable 
typical sacrifices in harmony with his arrangement, thereby 
expressing both their faith in the promise, and their desire 
for full harmony and communion. Thus Abel and Seth 
and all the godly ancients sacrificed; and through these 
typical sacrifices they approached God, they walked with 
God, and had the evidence in their own hearts that they 
pleased God, as it is written,— "By faith Abel offered... 
sacrifice... by which he obtained witness that he was 
righteous, God testifying of his gifts. By faith, Enoch, 
...before his translation had this testimony, that he 
pleased God. By faith, Noah. ..became heir of the 
righteousness which is by faith."— Heb. 11:5-8. 

Thus there was a typical justification and way of access 
to God open to faithful individuals long before the law of 
Moses instituted the typical national sacrifices, which brought 
that people, as a nation, near to God and secured a measure 
of his temporal favor to them, which, in turn, were also 
typical of the greater favors to come by and by, when the 
typical sacrifices should give place to the antitypical sacrifice, 
the real sin-offering which takes away the sin of the world, 
which the blood of bulls and goats could only prefigure, 
but could never accomplish. 

With the typical adoption by God of Abraham's family 
and the institution by the law of Moses of the typical 
national sacrifices, the privileges of approach to God 
through these, and of communion with him, was systematically 
taught by the law and the prophets. Consequently, in 
the nation of Israel we have multiplied instances of earnest 
and believing prayer; and instances, too, thank God, of the 
gracious hearing and answering of their prayers. And not 
only so, but some of the believing Gentiles, seeing what 
God had wrought in Israel, believed on him, and also 
caught the spirit of prayer; and, though unjustified even 
typically by the typical sacrifices, their prayers were heard, 



and God kept them in remembrance until the time appointed 
for his favor to turn to the Gentiles. 

Of this class were Cornelius and his friends (Acts 10). 
Of Cornelius it is said that he was a "devout man, and one 
that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms 
to the people, and prayed to God alway." And when the 
time arrived, when, consistently with his plan, God could 
answer the prayers of Cornelius, he did so, saying, "Cornelius, 
...Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a 
memorial before God;" and shortly after the great blessing 
came in abundant measure. Praise the Lord! "A bruised 
reed he will not break, and smoking flax he will not quench." 
Wherever there is a humble, contrite, faithful heart, God's 
love takes cognizance of it, and in his own good time and 
way confers his blessing. If their prayers cannot be immediately 
answered, they are not forgotten, but are kept as 
memorials until the right time comes for their answer. 

Therefore it was not because the disciples had never 
been taught to pray to God, that they inquired of Jesus as 
to the acceptable way; but, perceiving his intimate communion 
with God, and that God always promptly heard 
and answered him, they evidently felt that there must be 
something in his manner of approach to God which secured 
such prompt recognition and answers, and they would know 
the secret of his power. The secret of his power with God 
was in the fact of his full and complete harmony with the 
will of God; and this likewise is the secret of power among 
all of God's people. True, we, being imperfect, cannot 
say, as did he, "I do always those things that please him" 
(John 8:29); but, realizing our imperfection, we can come 
with humble confessions of our shortcomings and with faith 
in his love and mercy to be exercised toward us in his own 
appointed way. And then we are acceptable in the beloved 
One. 

Jesus taught us how to pray by a simple illustration 
which shows (1) The proper reverential attitude of the believer 
toward God,— "Our Father which art in heaven, 
hallowed be thy name." (2) A full acquiescence in, and 
perfect accord with, the will of God for the blessing of the 
whole world through the coming Kingdom of Christ, which 
is also a recognition of the preparatory redemptive work by 
his sacrificial death— "Thy Kingdom come." (3) The 
earnest desire that the will of God may be done in earth as 
it is done in heaven. (4) An expression of our dependence 
upon God for the supply of our daily needs, with an acknowledgement 
that we do not need luxuries, but will be 
content with the "bread and water" assured through the 
Prophet. This may also be considered a petition for the 
bread of life for our spiritual sustenance— "Give us this 
day our daily bread." (5) Request for forgiveness of sins 
in his own appointed way (through Christ), at the same 
time impressing upon ourselves the necessity for exercising 
toward others the same spirit of forgiveness, and stating 
that we have thus forgiven all our debtors— "Blessed are 
the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy." (6) Earnest 
desire for his assistance in the hour of temptation or trial, 



that we may not be overcome by it, and thus led to sin and 
thus brought under the power of the Evil One— "Abandon 
us not in temptation [or trial], but deliver us from 
evil." This implies a determination to resist sin, as well as 
a leaning upon God for assistance. Such must be the attitude 
of the soul in every approach toward God in prayer. 

R1946 : page 46 

Verses 5-13 are blessed assurances of our Heavenly 
Father's love and solicitude for us, which should fill our 
hearts with the deepest gratitude and responsive love, and 
which should strengthen our faith and our earnest desire to 
come often to his footstool and tarry long in his presence, 
assured that if we come in the frame of mind indicated by 
our blessed Lord, we shall never be turned away empty; 
"for every one that asketh [thus], receiveth; and he that 
seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be 
opened." And the thing received will be neither harmful 
nor useless. It will not be a stone for bread, nor a serpent 
for a fish, nor a scorpion for an egg; but it will be something 
good and wholesome; for the Lord "knows how to 
give good gifts unto his children." Christian, we need not 
tell you this: you have proved it well. And yet, praise the 
Lord! we have not exhausted his bountiful grace. "Still 
there's more to follow." "Ask, and it shall be given you: 
seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you." "Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may 
be full." The thing we need most, for which our Father 
is most pleased to have us seek and pray, is the spirit of his 
holiness.— Verse 13. 



R1946 : page 47 

"THAT SERVANT." 

-MARCH 22.-Luke 12:37-48; Matt. 24:42-51.- 

THIS lesson, from Matthew's account (Matt. 24:42-51), 

was treated in our issue of April 1, '95. We 

have no further comment to make except upon one point: 

"that [special] servant." In our examination of this text we 

seem to have treated the term "that servant" as though the 

Spirit had erred in saying "that servant" when it meant servants 

(plural), and we applied it to all true servants of God. 

Since then we have been met from various quarters with 

objections to so general an application, and the suggestion 

that it would be wrong to allow modesty or any other consideration, 

good or bad, to warp our judgment in the exposition 

of the inspired Word; to which proposition we agree. 

God evidently has some purpose in all that he has caused to 

be written for our admonition; and faithfulness as servants 

requires that we deliver to the household the Lord's word, 

as he gives it. 



Being unable to answer the objections and arguments 
raised, we candidly present them to the "fellow-servants" 
and to the "household" of faith as part of the Lord's message: 
the subject being forced upon us by its recurrence in the 
International S.S. Lessons, as well as by inquiries by letter. 
Let each "fellow servant" and each member of the "household 
of faith" use his consecrated judgment in accepting 
or rejecting this exposition, or any other exposition we may 
ever offer, according to his ability or inability to recognize 
in it the voice of our great Shepherd. 

The objection urged is that the Lord's words clearly 
mention and distinguish between his "household" (his faithful 
people in general), the "fellow servants" (plural), 
and "that servant" specially indicated as the Lord's agent 
in dispensing present truth as food to his "fellow servants" 
and the "household." It is admitted that in many Scriptures 
the consecrated are addressed individually when all of 
a class are meant,— as, for instance, "To him that overcometh 
I will grant to sit with me in my throne." This, 
according to the rules of language, means— "To each one 
who overcomes," etc. And in the texts under consideration, 
it is held that if neither the "household" nor "fellow 
servants" were mentioned, it might be questionable whether 
the expression "that servant" referred to one or to all faithful 
servants; but that when "that servant" and "his fellow servants" 
and the "household" are all mentioned in one connection, 
and in contrast, it would be a perversion of the rules 
of language and interpretation to mix and confound that 
which the holy spirit has so emphatically marked as distinct. 
It is further urged that to apply the term "his household" to 
nominal Christian professors in general could not be correct, 
because the "meat in due season" is intended only for the 
Lord's truth-hungry, "watching" people; and hence among 
these must be sought the "household" to be fed, the 
"servants" (plural) to do the feeding, and "that servant" 
at whose hands our present Lord will dispense the food to 
"his fellow servants" for "the household;" and who thus 
is constituted a general steward, overseer and dispenser of 
the Lord's "goods." 

It is urged, further, that the manifest fulfilment of this, 
during this "harvest" and time of the Lord's presence, should 
assist in the correct understanding of the promise; and that 
when we see things come to pass we should be able to recognize 
them whether we discerned their meaning in advance 
or not. Indeed, the demonstration seems to have 
forced the true interpretation, rather than that an interpretation 
led to the fulfilment;— which makes the matter really 
the stronger, now that it is seen. 

It is further suggested that whoever occupies the position 
of "that servant" occupies a place of special danger, 
as well as of special privilege; that only by humility and 
faithfulness can he continue; and that, although not so 
stated in the Scriptures, it may be inferred that if the 
chosen one should fail, another would be chosen to be "that 
servant" or steward through whom the Master would continue 
to supply the "meat in due season" to those deemed 



worthy to continue at his table. 

We submit the argument without comment. 

It is well to notice that these words are not a parable, 
but an explanation of a parable (Luke 12:41) recorded in 
preceding verses (36-40). The parable had set forth the 
fact that the "powers that be" (ecclesiastical, social and 
political) would be unaware of our Lord's second advent 
when it would take place; and that the times and seasons 
were kept secret specially on their account; because if they 
were fully convinced of the great events of that time, and 
their own dissolution to make ready for the Kingdom of 
God, the "new heavens and new earth," they would alter 
their course from fear, to perpetuate the present imperfect 
order, and to hinder the establishment of the better Kingdom. 
In view of this, our Lord indicates the necessity for 
faithfulness and watchfulness on the part of his servants, 
that they may be in such condition as to be quickly and 
readily made aware of the presence of their Master, while 
"the powers that be"— the present householder— sleeps in 
ignorance of the true state of affairs, and dreams of his own 
greatness and prosperity. The parable enforces the necessity 
that all of God's faithful servants be constantly prepared 
and ready, so that as soon as the "knock" is given, they 
may recognize it, and open their hearts and minds to the 
fact of the Lord's presence, and, as his "household," all sit 
down to enjoy the meat in due season which he will then 
serve, through his visible, human agencies. 

After hearing the parable, and perceiving that only the 
faithful were to know of the matter, Peter was perplexed, 
and wondered whether the Lord meant that "all [faithful 
brethren]" would sit down to meat and be served by the 
Master, or whether only "us [the twelve];" for he had 
already discerned that the Lord had some special favors for 
"the twelve" alone. Of course, if Peter had known that 
the parable would not be fulfilled for over eighteen hundred 
years, after all the twelve would have died, he would not 
have asked the question in that form. But our Lord, without 
correcting his error, explained this feature of the parable 
for our information. His answer in verses 42 to 48 (and 
Matt. 24:44-49) declares that while He will be the real 
Provider and Servant, yet the food will be dispensed through 
a steward to "fellow servants" and the "household" in 
general. 

The word "ruler" in verses 42,44 and Matt. 24:45,47, 
of the common version, does not properly express the 
thought of the original: the Revised Version is preferable: 
"set over his household to give them meat" as a "steward," 
not as a lord or master— rather a general servant, or servant 
of all. 



page 47 

REVIEW-MARCH 29. 



Golden Text— "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall 
the Son of man also confess before the angels of God."— Luke 12:8. 

This will be the blessed reward of faithful loyalty. The 
opposite will be true of all the disloyal.— "But he that 
denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of 
God."— Verse 9. 



R1946 : page 48 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



page 48 

West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Please send me an outfit of tracts 
suited especially for introduction. I agree with you fully 
in the proposition that the printed page should accompany 
the public declaration of truth; but in this country we cannot 
sell DAWNS nor take subscriptions to the TOWER till we 
have evangelized gratuitously. Hence I cannot hope to 
sell very many; but will use them to the best advantage. 

The Lord has been prospering our little effort exceedingly 
this winter. I baptized four new converts to Christianity 
recently, and expect soon to baptize a community of 
ten or fifteen aged persons, who were Methodists until present 
truth reached them. Opposition and persecution increase 
as signs of progress of the truth are manifested. 

We have ordered our church work; that is, we have 
recognized an "elder" and two "evangelists," and have arranged 
to give attention to particular features of the work 
at stated Sundays, with other regulations along this line. 

Your brother in Christ, C. A. McCLUNG. 



R1946 : page 48 

Kansas. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I am truly 
thankful to both the Lord and yourselves for the good that 
you by the grace of God have done me through MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Experience, as 
well as the Word of God, teaches us that we are living in 
perilous times, in a time that tries men's souls. And while 
it is true that the light shines from God's Word much more 
clearly than ever before, some who have received present 
truth to some extent are getting it mixed with spiritism and 
other false "isms." 

When the Bible says "try the spirits" (1 John 4:1), 



does it mean we should investigate spiritism? 
J. E. CHAMBERLIN. 
REPLY:— When Satan and his present spurious Spiritism 
shall be bound and deceive the nations no more, there will 
no doubt be some communication established between the 
spirit-beings constituting the glorified Church, the Kings 
and Priests, and the world of mankind progressing in righteousness 
and restitution; just as there was communion between 
God and his creatures in Eden. But nothing of this 
kind should be expected now. The Church from first to last 

R1947 : page 48 

is to "walk by faith, not by sight." The body of Christ in 
the flesh is to have spiritual communion only with its Head, 
the Lord and with him only in prayer. We are specially 
warned, too, that Satan may even endeavor to counterfeit 
the Lord; and we are warned against those who claim to 
see him in the secret chamber (in seances), and are told 
that his revelation or manifestation in his day will, on 
the contrary, be "as the lightning"— really as the sunlight 
—filling the whole world with knowledge, light, truth. 
This scripture applies to the glorified members of the body 
as well as to the Head, Christ Jesus.— Matt. 13:43. 

The scripture which says, "Try the spirits, whether 
they be of God," refers to doctrines, as is clearly indicated 
by the context. Furthermore, there is in the character and 
personal bearing of all spirit-mediums that which should impress 
unfavorably every child of God, who knows what to 
regard as the spirit (disposition) of Christ. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his;" and such 
will never be used as his mediums of communication.— 
EDITOR.] 



AN EXPLANATION. 



In our issue of Feb. 1, '92 we published the following 
letter:— California. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must write to tell you 
how exceedingly interested I have been in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. III., which I spied out in a book store in Los 
Angeles. I enclose 50 cents, for which I would like you to 
send me, at once, VOLS. I. and II. of the series. I would 
also much like a sample or two of your paper— ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER-for if it is what I expect it to be, after 
DAWN VOL. III., I shall at once become a subscriber. VOL. 
III. is already circulating among my friends. 

Yours in the waiting for Christ's Kingdom, 

PASTOR FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH. 

Our correspondent requested that until otherwise notified 
his correspondence be considered confidential; and 



therefore when shortly afterward we received a letter from 
Rev. Mr. Reed, Pastor of the First Baptist Church of Los 
Angeles, stating that he had been considered the writer of 
this letter, and requesting that we make known the name 
of the writer, we replied that we were not at liberty to reveal 
his identity. We also stated that he was Pastor of the 
First Baptist Church of a neighboring city who had "spied 
out" the book while in Los Angeles; and we remarked 
that we thought the wording of the letter sufficient to show 
this, since a resident of L.A. would have said "this 
city." We did not therefore see any necessity for publishing 
Dr. Reed's denial, which he was abundantly able to do, 
and did do, through the Minister's meeting, and various of 
the religious press. 

Notwithstanding this explanation, Dr. Reed and 
others have continued to make capital out of the letter, 
accusing us of various dishonorable and unchristian 
motives and acts. We therefore have pleasure in publishing 
herewith a later communication from the writer of the 
aforesaid letter, which we trust will set the matter right before 
all who have been misinformed on the subject. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In reply to your request 
regarding the letter published in the TOWER of Feb. 1, '92, 
and signed "Pastor First Baptist Church," while I was in 
California, I may say I have nothing to retract from what I 
then said, but regret to learn from you that any one else 
has suffered in any way as the supposed writer of the letter 
in question; and though I have since left California and the 
Baptist ministry, I have no hesitation in acknowledging 
the authorship, if it will relieve another from a false 
imputation. 

Yours in Christian fellowship, 

Jan. 27, '96. W. DE RONDEN POS. 



page 49 
VOL. XVII. MARCH 15, 1896. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 50 

Views from the Tower 51 

The Christian's Joy 53 

Trials of Faith— Why Permitted 54 

Poem: The Great Pyramid 56 

Christadelphian Views 56 

Bible Study: Strive to Enter In at 

the Strait Gate 57 

Encouraging Letters 58 



page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1947 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE Evangelical Alliance is prosecuting its scheme 
for the union of protestants. It is organizing 
"Local Alliances" in all parts of the United States, having 
in view the following objects:— 

(1) "To bring conscience to bear on the life of the 
nation." 

(2) "To close the chasm between the churches and 
workingmen." 

(3) "To gain the strength which comes from 
organization." 

(4) "To prevent the indefinite multiplication of 
organizations." 

"What is much needed, in the interest both of economy 
and of effectiveness, is a common center where efforts 
to improve the community may be coordinated and adjusted 
to each other in some comprehensive plan— an organization 
which can survey the whole field and throw united 
effort into any one of many directions at the opportune 
moment." 

(5) "To prevent competition and waste in locating 
missions and churches." 

(6) "To cultivate Christian fellowship between different 
churches and different denominations." 

(7) "To reach homes with elevating and transforming 
influences." 

"Without some such organization as is proposed the 
churches cannot accomplish their social redemptive work." 
On this latter subject it proposes that— 
"Instead of going into politics the Alliance will 
aim... to separate municipal elections from state and 
national politics. It will insist on official fitness of candidates, 



oppose incompetent and corrupt men, and sustain 

the constituted authorities in a faithful administration of 

the public service. 

"The Alliance will seek to aid labor reforms, to encourage 
the arbitration of labor difficulties, to establish 
labor bureaus, form working-girl's clubs, encourage cooperative 
housekeeping for self-supporting girls, oppose the 
sweating evil and child labor, and demonstrate to workingmen 
the desire of the churches to serve them in any 
legitimate way." 

The circulars of the Alliance, setting forth these objects 
and giving advise relative to local organizations, etc., 
are being widely circulated. One of these says:— 

"The Church of Christ has availed herself of the increased 
facilities for inter-communication among the peoples 
of the earth, and of the increase of knowledge; while in 
the longing for union among believers we cannot but discern 
a token of the presence of Him who walks in the midst 
of the seven golden candlesticks. 

"On the other hand, the shadows darken. It cannot 
be denied that we are in the presence of those signs of the 
'perilous times' of which St. Paul speaks to Timothy. 
Nor can we shut our eyes to the increase of sacramentarianism 
and infidelity, which, from opposite sides, seek 'to corrupt 
our minds from the simplicity that is in Christ.' Many 
tokens seems to herald the approach of the final great 
struggle between the powers of light and the powers of 
darkness. 

'"Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, 
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day.' 'Praying 
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, 
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication 
for all saints.'" 

The gentlemen connected with this Evangelical Alliance 
are beginning to fear as they realize that the powers 
of the heavens (ecclesiastical powers) are being shaken. 
(Matt. 24:29.) They realize to some extent that the "great 
day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" 
(Rev. 6:17.) They are attempting to roll together the 
heavens (ecclesiastical systems) as a scroll; because they 
believe that in union there is strength.— Isa. 34:4; 
Rev. 6:14. 

Their methods are not only worldly-wise, but in many 
respects good. But going about to establish their own 
plans for conquering the world for Christ by denominational 

R1947 : page 52 

alliance, they have not submitted themselves to the will 
and Word of God. They see the impending trouble, and 
remember the Lord's prayer that ultimately his followers 
all may be one with each other and with him and the 
Father. They overlook the fact that it is individually, 
and not as denominations, that the Lord's people are to be 
united to him and he with them, as branches in the true 
vine. They overlook the fact that the great union prayed 



for will be fulfilled only by the process outlined by the 
great Teacher himself under the parable of the wheat and 
the tares,— that the "tares" must be gathered and burned 
in the great time of trouble already impending, while the 
"wheat" are being gathered into the "barn" preparatory 
to their shining forth, with Christ the only Head, as the 
Sun of righteousness to bless and heal the world's woes- 
social, financial, political and religious. 

That the Alliance will succeed in doing some good we 
do not question; but that the general results will be pernicious 
is clearly pointed out in Scripture. Thus it is with 

R1948 : page 52 

all wrong methods— all methods that are not God-directed 
—"There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the 
end thereof is death." The child of God therefore must be 
careful to examine his course, not only to see if his motives 
and actions are right, but above all to see that he is working 
the work of him that sent him. God's work will not 
fail; but all works in conflict with it will soon or later 
come to naught and prove injurious to all associated in it. 

The Scriptures represent that in the present time there 
are two great opposing forces in conflict,— Christ and the 
soldiers of his cross, and Satan and the powers of darkness 
(Eph. 6:12); that all mankind are serving one or the 
other of these causes (Rom. 6:16), though many, on 
both sides, serve ignorantly (2 Cor. 4:4; 11:14; Psa. 76:10; 
Joel 2:1 1); but it is the privilege of all who are 
"sons" of God to be so led of the Spirit and Word of 
the Father as to understand his purposes and be enabled always 
to be workers together with God. He will show 
them "things to come;" he will make known to them "the 
mysteries of his will;" and they shall not be in darkness 
with the world, because they are "brethren" of Christ and 
walk in the light. -Matt. 13:11; John 16:13; 
1 Thes. 5:4,5. 

The Scriptures, in portraying the success of the Evangelical 
Alliance, show that the results will be a religious oppression 
and tyranny similar to that of Papacy; and that 
however harmless it may seem to make an image of the 
papal beast, the time will come when the image will get 
life, and with it power, and when its power, like that of 
Papacy when in power, will be used against the liberties of 
God's truth and of the people.-See MILLENNIAL DAWN 
VOL. III., Chap. 4; Rev. 13:14-17; Isa. 8:12. 



The people of Germany are awaking to the fact 
that their theological schools and colleges are turning 
out Infidels with ministerial titles, Doctors of Divinity, 
etc. True, the German people are religiously quite formalistic 
and drowsy, but they are not quite prepared to admit 
the claims of the "higher critics" of Germany and America, 
that the Bible is a mass of rubbish, uninspired. 



The Lutheran Kirchenzeitung (Leipsic) recently published 
an article warning young men against this kind of 
instruction, from which we take the following paragraph:— 

"Our congregations are not so ignorant. They meet 
the young candidate with some questions and problems. 
That which is taught in the theological lecture-rooms is no 
longer a secret among our congregations. Even the congregations 
in the backwoods have heard of these things. 
The more a congregation is matured in the knowledge of 
Christian truth, all the more careful will it be in the acceptance 
of a candidate as a new pastor. Our people demand 
a clear and ringing answer to the questions: 'What think 
you of Christ?' and 'What think you of the Scriptures?' 
Is the candidate honestly and openly to confess that in his 
convictions the Fathers of the Church have for centuries 
been blundering grievously when they accepted the divinity 
of the Scriptures as the revealed Word of God; that the 
Scriptures from the mythological account of the Creation 
to the close of the 'unauthentic' Apocalypse is full of 
human errors, irregularities, contradictions, fables and 
legends, from which, with great difficulty, the Word of 
God is to be hulled out? Is he to tell the people that their 
faith in the atoning death of Christ, in his resurrection, in 
the power of the Sacraments, is groundless and to be cast 
aside?" 

But the schools and seminaries of Germany are under 
government patronage and the professors as well as the 
ministers and churches are supported by the government, 
so that protests will be of no avail. The leaven (corruption) 
is spreading everywhere amongst the "upper classes." 
By and by it will reach the lower classes, and when they 
become Infidels, disbelievers in the Word of God, they 
will doubt everything; and anarchy and riot will speedily 
follow. 



"Mr. Rabbinowitz says the Jews have kept up great 
questionings and controversies about the meaning of Zech. 12:10: 
'They shall look upon ME whom they have pierced.' 
They will not admit that it is Jehovah whom they have 
pierced, hence the dispute as to who is meant. Mr. R. 
points out that the word used consists of the first and last 
letters of the Hebrew alphabet, Aleph Tay, and adds: 'Do 
you wonder, then, that I was filled with awe and astonishment 
when I opened to Rev. 1:7,8, and read these words 
of Zechariah quoted by John, 'Behold, he cometh... 
and every eye shall see him, and they also that pierced 
him,' and then heard the glorified Lord saying, ...'I 
am the Alpha and Omega.' Jesus seemed to say to me, 
'Do you doubt who it is you have pierced? I am the 
Aleph Tay, the Alpha Omega.'" 



Amongst the many evidences of preparation for the 



"times of restitution" "when the wilderness shall blossom 
as the rose, and the wilderness shall smile," are advances 

R1948 : page 53 

and inventions along the line of horticulture, and 

for the destruction of farm pests. Of the latter a notable 

one is a weed destroyer which kills weeds, to the very roots, 

—even the noxious Russian and Canadian thistles. It is 

the invention of Prof. Woodworth, of Michigan College, 

and is reported to be both cheap and effective. A wheelbarrow 

or cart is loaded with storage batteries from which 

long wires trail along the ground to be cleared, and wherever 

the wires touch a weed it is killed clear to the roots. 



An article by Rev. Dr. Haweis [Episcopalean] in the 
Contemporary Review has excited considerable attention. 
Among other things he says:— 

"The man in the pew thinks he has a right to remonstrate 
with the man in the pulpit who denounces him 
as an unbeliever. He may fairly say to his clergyman: 
You complain of me for not believing what you call 
church doctrines; how much do you believe yourself? Now, 
you don't actually believe that after this life, without further 
explanation, the population of the world will be divided 
into two parts, the converted and the unconverted, and 
that one half will go straight to heaven and be happy forever, 
and the other half will be sent straight to hell to be 
tormented forever. You don't believe that yourself, because 
you are not such a fool; then why do you expect me 
to sit in church and listen to you patiently while you preach 
it?' It has come to this: the laity not only despise the 
clergy for their affirmations, but still more for their reticences, 
and yet few (some do) have the heart to condemn 
them as unscrupulous hypocrites— they are really often such 
nice fellows in many ways, and moral fellows, too; so 
people don't like to think they are liars, and cannot quite 
believe they are idiots." 

This gentleman's eyes are opening to the fact that the 
deceptions so long practiced by his craft upon their flocks 
are losing their power. Many will be forced to honesty to retain 
respect and support. It is remarkable that men whose 
leisure and education should make them teachers of those 
who confide in them for instruction in Scriptural doctrine 
should so impose upon their sheep; until forced by the 
growth of intelligence to admit that they have for years 
professed and taught what they have not believed. Surely 
every honest man, worthy of the truth from God or 
confidence from fellow men, should publicly avow the truth, 
and disavow the error, as soon as the true light, which 
harmonizes God's word, reaches him. 



R1948 : page 53 

THE CHRISTIAN'S JOY. 



"Thou wilt show me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of 
joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures forevermore."— Psa. 16:11. 

WHEN we consider how much is said in the Scriptures 
about joy and rejoicing among God's people, 
we are deeply impressed with the thought that our heavenly 
Father is very solicitous for the happiness of his children, 
even in the present life. The worldly minded cannot see 
this, they look upon the lot of God's children as a hard 
and joyless one, and upon God as a hard Master, without 
concern for the happiness of his children. This, however, 
is only because the natural man cannot receive the things 
of the spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned. 
But the spiritual-minded have meat to eat that the world 
knows not of; and their hearts rejoice, and their joy no 
man taketh from them. 

How strange it seems! says the world. Why, there was 
Paul, a man of great talent and opportunity who might 
have been somebody in the world: he wasted his talents, 
was a poor man all his days, homeless, friendless, knocked 
about and persecuted, a sort of religious fanatic. But Paul, 
viewing the matter from the standpoint of his spiritual 
discernment, said, "I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation" 
(2 Cor. 7:4); for he was one of that anointed 
body who, like his Lord and Head, could say, "I foresaw 
the Lord always before my face; for he is on my right 
hand, that I should not be moved. Therefore did my heart 
rejoice, and my tongue was glad."— Acts 2:25,26. 

So the Psalmist bids all the anointed body rejoice, saying, 
"Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; for praise is 

R1949 : page 53 

comely for the upright." (Psa. 33:1.) And Isaiah, speaking 
for the same class, says, "I will greatly rejoice in the 
Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath 
clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered 
me with the robe of righteousness as a bridegroom decketh 
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself 
with jewels."— Isa. 61:10. 

This blessed joy, which so wonderfully lifts the soul 
above all the vicissitudes of the present life, is, as the 
prophet expresses it, joy in the Lord, not a joy in earthly 
possessions, or earthly hopes or ambitions. These earthly 
things are all so transitory and so changeable that a single 
blast of adversity may sweep them all from us; but not so 
is it with those whose hearts are centered in God and to 
whom he has shown the path of life. These have learned 
to estimate the things of this present life according to their 
true values; they see that all of its joys are both transient 



and unsatisfactory and that the only real value in it is in 
the opportunities it affords for experience and discipline and 
education in the things of God and for hearing the call of 
God and making our calling and election sure. In thus 
making the proper use of the present life— walking in the 
path of life which God shows us through his Word— we have 
the present joys of hope and faith in the things unseen, 
but sure and eternal; knowing also that by and by in the 
immediate presence of God we shall have fulness of joy, and 
pleasures for evermore at his right hand— the chief place 
of favor. 

But while the fulness of joy in its widest sense is reserved 
for that blessed time when we shall be like the Lord 
and see him as he is (1 John 3:1,2) and be in his presence 

R1949 : page 54 

and at his right hand (in his chief favor), there is a fulness 
of joy in the presence and favor of God which is the privilege 
of every Christian now. Our capacity for joy now is 
not what it will be by and by, but it is possible now to have 
our little earthen vessels as full as they can hold of the joy 
of the Lord. And day by day it is our privilege to realize 
the presence and favor of God, if, by walking in the path 
of life, the path of obedience and loving service, we draw 
near to God. "If a man love me," said our Lord Jesus, 
"he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, 
and we will come unto him and make our abode with 
him. "-John 14:23. 

In such company as this, can any Christian fail utterly 
to realize some measure of joy in the Lord? No, if his 
faith grasps the promise and holds it, the realization of joy 
in the Lord is sure to follow, and the more firmly his faith 
lays hold upon the promise the more will he realize its fulfilment, 
and the more fully will his joys abound; for in the 
presence of the Lord is fulness of joy, no matter what may 
be the conditions and circumstances. 

In the blessed realization of this experience and the assurance 
of faith which it gave, in the midst of all his labors, 
Paul exclaimed, "Who shall lay any thing to the charge 
of God's elect?. ..Who shall separate us from the love 
of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors through him that loved 
us. For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other 
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."— Rom. 8:33-39. 

It was this strong persuasion, this confident faith, of 
the Apostle that gave him such joy in the midst of all his 
tribulations. His faith laid hold upon the promises of God 
with a strong and steady grasp, and love and gratitude impelled 
him to prompt obedience to the will of God and 
ardent zeal in his service; and evidently the Lord's promise 
was fulfilled to him in the abiding presence of Father and 



Son with him at all times and under all circumstances. 

This blessed privilege is ours also, if by faith we enter 
fully into the Lord's will and favor. And with a blessed 
realization of the abiding presence of our heavenly Father, 
and our Lord Jesus at all times, and of their love and favor, 
and a faith that lays hold of all the exceeding great and 
precious promises of God, what soul may not rejoice and 
be glad, even in the midst of deep sorrow or great tribulation? 
In the Lord's presence, no matter where we are, is 
fulness of joy. Let us cultivate the Lord's acquaintance 
more, drawing near to him in prayer, in the study of his 
precious Word, in meditation upon all his goodness, his 
providential care, the marked manifestations of his grace 
in our own individual experiences, and his precious promises 
which are all yea and amen in Christ Jesus. Thus "draw 
nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you" (James 4:8), 
he will manifest himself to you and take up his abode with 
you. 

It is indeed the will of God that all his children should 
be happy in him, that they should be always rejoicing; and 
if any one lacks this blessing, he is living below his privileges. 
Beloved, let us not be contented to live beneath 
our privileges. Let us appreciate the favor of God to the 
extent of seeking for it more and more diligently, remembering 
the exhortation, "Seek and ye shall find, knock and 
it shall be opened unto you." All the riches of divine 
favor are ours if in faith and humility we claim them and 
place ourselves in position to receive them as directed 
through the Word of God. "Ask and receive, that your 
joy may be full." And your joy can no man take from 
you, so long as you abide in Him who is our life, our joy, 
our rest, our hope. 

"Why should the children of the King 
Go mourning all the day?" 

"Children of the Heavenly King, 
As we j ourney let us sing ! " 



R1949 : page 54 

TRIALS OF FAITH--WHY PERMITTED. 



MANY are perplexed as to why false doctrines are 

permitted to annoy and confuse God's people. 

On receiving the truth and rejoicing in it they seem to 

think they have at last come to the end of all controversy, 

and have entered the Beulah land of rest and peace, thenceforth 

never again to be disturbed. But this is quite a 

mistake: our great adversary, Satan, is not disposed to let 

the children of light walk on undisturbed into the heavenly 

kingdom. Against that kingdom and its establishment, 



and against all its prospective probationary heirs, he is an 
inveterate enemy, and his power is not yet bound. The 
children of light, the heirs of the kingdom, are, therefore, 
the special targets against which his fiery darts are aimed. 
As soon as they escape from the kingdom of darkness and 
begin to walk in the light, they may therefore expect to 
find snares spread for their feet and stumbling blocks placed 
in their way. The work is done with subtlety, too, that, 
if possible, the escaped bird may be deceived and caught 
unawares. And, as a matter of fact, thousands are so caught, 
and only a few escape the "strong delusions" of this "evil 
day" of Satanic wrath and power. 

It is a fair and reasonable question therefore, Why 
does the Lord permit the strong delusions and trials of 
faith of this evil day, when they actually do overthrow the 
faith of many and severely test all? To this inquiry the 
Apostle Paul (2 Thes. 2:10-12) makes answer, saying, 

R1949 : page 55 

"For this cause, God, shall send them [Whom?— Those 
"who received not the love of the truth that they might be 
saved"] strong delusions, that they should believe a lie; 
that they all might be condemned who believe not the 
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 

Thus plainly we are told that God not only permits, 
but that he also desires, that the faith of his professed 
people should be severely tried. And if the thousands fall 
by these fiery darts of the enemy, it is because they are unworthy 
of the truth, not having received it in the love of 
it. Many indeed receive the truth very much as a child 
receives a new toy. It is a curiosity, something new, to 
be enjoyed for a season and then laid aside to be superseded 
by something else that temporarily pleases the fancy. 
Or, it is valued as a cudgel wherewith to gain the honors of 
victory in argument with disputing opponents. Or, again, 
it affords relief to some from a long imposed bondage of 
fear of eternal torment, and for this alone it is chiefly valued. 
They never did enjoy such a prospect, and often 
feared they were not quite good enough to escape torment 
and get inside the door of heaven. 

All who thus lightly esteem the truth, merely to minister 
to their selfishness, are unworthy of it; and it is the 
will of God that all such should lose it. Hence the divinely 
permitted and desired testing of faith— the strong delusions, 
which, "if it were possible, would deceive the very elect," 
—those who have received the truth in the love of it, and 
not in any mean, selfish spirit. The truth was never intended 
for the listless, nor for the wicked. The former 
are unworthy of it and the latter are better without it until 
taught to use and not abuse the liberty it brings. "Light 
[truth] is sown for the righteous, and joy [the joys of the 
truth] for the upright in heart." It is just as well that others, 
especially the wicked, should remain under the bondage of 
errors which to some extent control them until the strong 



R1950 : page 55 

power of Christ's kingdom is due to take the control of the 

world. For this reason God has permitted the superstitions 

of the past to fetter men's minds, and only in the 

present close proximity to the kingdom is he allowing some 

of the shackles of error to be loosened; and in the great 

time of trouble this will be seen to be the unchaining of 

the tiger of human passions, which would be disastrous in 

the extreme, were it not for the strong rule of the iron rod 

which will shortly command order, and say to the warring 

elements, "Peace, be still!" To the listless and selfish 

who are not grossly wicked, the truth is only made to 

minister to pride and selfishness, and hence it is the will of 

God that all such should lose it, as they do in pursuance 

of their natural dispositions with reference to it. But the 

true children of God love the truth because they have an 

affinity for it. They love righteousness, they love their 

fellow men, and desire to bless and help them. They have 

large benevolence and brotherly kindness. They are meek, 

too, and not anxious to make a show of self and to glory 

over their fellows in argument; nor are they mere curiosity-hunters. 

When they have found the truth they recognize 

its value; they prize it and meditate upon it; they view it 

as a grand and systematic embodiment of the highest ideal 

of righteousness, love and benevolence. They rejoice not 

only in its gracious provisions for the elect joint-heirs with 

Christ, but also for all mankind, as well as in the merciful 

dealings of God with the finally incorrigibly wicked whom 

he will mercifully destroy, but not torment. They say, It 

is just like God: it is the manifestation of his glorious 

goodness, the reflection of his loving, benevolent, wise and 

just character. And therefore they love the truth and the 

God who gave it: they treasure it up in their hearts and 

con it over again and again; and as they look into it, and 

admire all its symmetry and beauty, they strive more and 

more to conform their own characters to the same lines of 

beauty and seek to commend it by word and conduct to 

others, that they also may be blessed by it. 

This is what it is to receive the truth into good and 
honest hearts. For such the truth was intended; and it is 
not possible for them to be deceived by the sophistries of 
error. They know a good thing when they have it, and therefore 
hold it fast. They cling to it just as steel filings cling 
to a magnet, because they have an affinity for it. If you 
run a magnet through a box of sawdust and steel filings 
it will come out covered with the steel filings. A little 
sawdust may rest lightly on it, too, just as some people associate 
themselves with the truth and with those who hold 
it very dear; but the sawdust is easily blown off, while the 
steel filings hold fast. Just so multitudes of those who associate 
themselves with the Lord's people are easily carried 
away with a little wind of new false doctrine. And though 
they do not all disappear with the first breeze, a few more 
breezes will carry them all away. But the true ones God 
will not permit to be tempted above what they are able to 



bear; for he has given his angels a charge concerning them, 
and in their hands they shall bear them up lest at any time 
they should dash their feet against a stone. 

The angel or messenger thus commissioned may be 
some well-instructed brother who has studied to show himself 
a workman approved unto God, rightly dividing the 
Word of truth, and ever ready to feed the flock of God, 
or some faithful sister, ever watchful with motherly interest 
over the lambs of the flock. Albeit, the Lord will always 
provide for his own elect, and they shall not stumble nor fall. 

The one thing for all the called to look to first is that 
they have received, and that they still hold, the truth in 
the love of it. Freely imbibe its blessed spirit and live in 
its hallowed atmosphere; "for, if any man have not the 
spirit of Christ, he is none of his." "Through sanctification 
of the spirit and belief of the truth" you are chosen 
to the great salvation now shortly to be revealed (2 Thes. 2:13.) 
But the belief of the truth will avail nothing if it 
be not permitted to produce its legitimate fruit in a good 
and honest heart— viz., sanctification of the spirit, a complete 
setting apart to the divine will and service. Let us 
lay this lesson well to heart, and so run as to obtain the 
prize of our high calling. "Buy the truth" at any cost of 
self-sacrifice, "and sell it not" for any paltry present 
advantage. 

R1950 : page 56 

THE GREAT PYRAMID. 



O mighty structure of a time 
When nations dead were in their prime; 
Whose lines and measurements immense 
Were fashioned by Omnipotence, 
And laid, without a word to check, 
By king and priest Melchizedek! 
What precious symbols long unknown 
Were built beneath thy corner stone! 
How faultless, graceful, every line, 
In those stupendous walls of thine! 
A sign and wonder, heaven-planned, 
For saints, if wise, to understand; 
An altar and a pillar tall, 
To warn, instruct and comfort all, 
Who faithful all their talents give 
And, dying daily, die to live. 

A witness mute, yet eloquent, 
A marvel and a monument, 
Upreared by hands inspired to prove 
That God Eternal reigns in Love; 
For in thy labyrinths we trace 
His dealings with the human race— 
The path to glory hard to tread, 



The death of those to goodness dead, 

The rough hewn narrowness of ways 

That lead to life and endless days; 

The step on step to life complete, 

The Head, the Body and the Feet, 

Of a great following joined in one 

Eclipsing many a dazzling sun; 

The depths unfath'mable profound, 

Without an echo or a sound, 

A symbol of the death of One, 

Our Savior and Jehovah's Son; 

With signs and tokens scattered round 

To prove He burst each icy bond 

Of death the conqueror, conquered then, 

For sinful and believing men; 

The planes and parallels to guide 

His Church elect and faithful Bride. 

Its sure foundation solid rock, 
Like faith impregnable. No shock— 
Of 'whelming flood, or raging storm- 
Can shake an atom, or deform 
That towering witness strong, divine, 
To us a miracle— and sign 
Of promised blessings sure to come, 
A guide omnipotent to home. — R. S. FOSTER. 



R1950 : page 56 

CHRISTADELPHIAN VIEWS. 



HERE and there are to be found people who hold 
what are known as Christadelphian views, 
which are in some respects much like the views advocated 
in ZION'S WATCH TOWER, and in other respects the very 
opposite. Their views, briefly stated, are (1) That the 
Church is chosen or elected (according to the foreknowledge 
of God) through the truth; and that in all it is a "little 
flock," heirs of the Kingdom. (2) They hold, however, that 
the Kingdom will be a visible, earthly throne, on which 
Christ will sit with his apostles, and that somehow all 
Christadelphians will be "joint-heirs," who will "sit every 
man under his own vine and fig tree," plant, build, etc., 
and long enjoy the work of their hands. (3) As for the 
dead Christadelphians, they will be resurrected to share 
these blessings, but for all other dead people, good or bad, 
they see no hope, no resurrection. (4) A great catastrophy 
at the second coming of Christ will destroy nearly all of 
the living except the Christadelphians, and the few spared 
will merely be spared so as to be the everlasting servants of 
the Christadelphians— their hewers of wood and drawers 



of water,— their slaves. 

Lest some generous soul should suppose that they use 
the term "Christadelphian" in a broad sense to mean all 
true Christians, we answer, No; the term Christadelphian 
is used in the narrowest sense, applicable only to those who 
have believed as foregoing, and who then have been immersed, 
and who do not change their faith afterward. 
Other portions of their creed, made very prominent, are, 
that our Lord Jesus never had an existence before he was 
born in Bethlehem, and that there is no devil. They also 
deny the ransom. 

R1951 : page 56 

Anyone can see at a glance, when these views are thus 
concisely stated, the very wide difference between them 
and the views presented in the TOWER and in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN as Scriptural. But the policy of advocates of all false 
systems is to avoid a full, plain statement of their theory, 
and, covering the features of which they are properly somewhat 
ashamed, they proceed to fasten it on others piecemeal 
as they themselves received it. And thus they occasionally 
get some confused with the following texts of Scripture: 
Isa. 26:14; 43:17; Jer. 51:39,57. These are quoted 
in opposition to the teaching that, because our Lord Jesus 
gave himself a ransom for all, therefore all must have a 
full opportunity to obtain eternal life by resurrection. We 
will examine them in the above order: 

(1) Isaiah 26: 14. The first nine verses of this chapter 
are a prophetic description of the Millennial day,— when 
the land of Judah has been reclaimed (verse 1) and when 
the nations of earth are walking in the light (teaching) of 
the glorified Church— the New Jerusalem. (Compare verse 2 
and Rev. 21:24-26 and Isa. 60:1 1,18-22.) Verse 5 
describes the humbling of the proud and the fall of mystic 
Babylon. Verse 9 shows how some (the body of Christ) 
have desired and prayed "thy Kingdom come" throughout 
the "night" of the Gospel age while waiting for the Millennial 
dawning; and how the judgments of the "day of 

R1951 : page 57 

trouble" which introduces the Millennial reign are necessary 

to teach the world righteousness. Verses 10 and 1 1 

show, however, that even those terrible lessons will be insufficient 

for some who even in the land of uprightness 

(the Millennial or "new earth" state), will be unjust still, 

and refuse to recognize the mighty "hand" of God. 

Yet they shall see, and eventually all enemies of the Lord 

shall be destroyed. 

Verses 12-15 represent the faithful taking a glance 
backward, and acknowledging that the deliverance has 
been wholly God's work. "O Lord our God, other lords 
[rulers, powers] have had dominion over us [Sin, the 
great task -master, and his representatives in civil, ecclesiastical 
and financial despotism, including trusts, combines 



and every evil system which oppresses men at 
the present time;— some of which are now highly esteemed 
among the oppressed]; but of Thee only would we make 
mention [now as our ruler]— of thy name. They are dead, 
they will not live again; they are departed, they will not 
arise again: because thou hast visited and destroyed them 
and made every memorial of them to perish."— See 
Leeser's translation. 

Ah, yes! every power of evil and oppression shall be 
destroyed forever, never to rise again, when the kingdom 
is the Lord's and he is the Governor amongst the nations. 

(2) Isaiah 43:17. The Lord is encouraging Israel by 
reminding her of his deliverances and helps in the past, and 
incidentally teaches us something of the larger meaning of 
those deliverances. 

Verses 16 and 17 remind them of how God opened 
for Israel a path through the waters of the Red Sea; and 
how he vanquished their enemies, Pharaoh and his army, in 
the Red Sea, utterly cutting them off from power to reenslave 
them, by drowning them, extinguishing the life from 
an entire army suddenly. Do ye not remember the former 
things, neither the things of old? 

Yet verses 19-25 show that the deliverance from 
Egypt and the journey through the wilderness were 
but foreshadowings of future blessings upon all who shall 
become true Israelites, who were typified by Israel in 
bondage. The greater taskmaster than Pharaoh is Satan 
with his servants. The greater deliverer than Moses is 
Christ (Head and Body); the greater overthrow than that of 
Pharaoh and his army will be the overthrow of sin and 
Satan in the time of trouble already begun; the leading 
and care and miracles greater than those through the 
Wilderness will be those of the Millennium; and the 
greater Canaan beyond will be the condition of everlasting 
perfection to be entered by the worthy of mankind at the 
close of the Millennium. 

(3) Jeremiah 5 1 :39,57. The description of the fall 

of Babylon here given applies only partially to the literal 
city— chiefly to the fall of "Babylon the Great, the mother 
of harlots and abominations of the earth," the mystic city; 
and the language is correspondingly figurative. Babylon's 
great ones, highly esteemed by her deluded subjects, are 
called by various dignified and high-sounding titles, from 
"the Lord's anointed" down to Reverend and Doctor 
of Divinity. These as such shall all perish with the fall of 
Babylon (Rev. 18), and as such they shall never awake or 
exist again. In their awakening they will see matters more 
clearly in the light of the Millennial day— the sun of righteousness 
—and will be ashamed of the titles and offices now 
"highly esteemed among men." 

The unprejudiced reader will confess that nothing 
in these proof-texts intimates that only Christadelphians 
will have a future life, experience a resurrection from death. 
The Scriptures assure us that "Christ died for the ungodly," 
for those who aside from his redemption were 
"without God and having no hope." He "tasted death 



for every man," and is the true light which must soon or 
later enlighten every man that has ever been born. The 
only ones for whom there is absolutely no hope in the 
future are those for whom "there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sin." (Heb. 6:4-10; 10:26-31.) These are not the 
ignorant ones whom the "god of this world hath blinded," 
but those who have seen, who have tasted, who have in the 
present life received the grace of God, but have received 
it in vain, received it to reject it and to count the blood 
of the [New] covenant, wherewith they were sanctified a 
common thing. These wilful sinners of the Gospel age 
will have no resurrection privileges in the future, because 
they have enjoyed those privileges in the present life and 
have wilfully despised and misused them. 

All who now hear the joyful message of salvation 
through the precious blood of Christ, and by acceptance 
pass from death unto life (justification by faith), have received 
an awakening equivalent to what all mankind will 
enjoy in the Millennium; and whether the life-offer be 
intelligently spurned now or then the result will be the 
same: to such there will remain no more interest or share in 
the great sacrifice for sins, and hence nothing but destruction. 



R1951 : page 57 

STRIVE TO ENTER IN AT THE STRAIT GATE. 

-APRIL 5. -Luke 13:22-30.- 

THE question, "Lord, are there few that be saved?" 

our Lord did not answer directly. The time had 

come for preaching the Kingdom, and inviting those who 

had "an ear to hear" the call to enter in. The call for 

the time was limited to the high calling of joint-heirship 

with Christ in the Millennial Kingdom; and it has so continued 

ever since. There is but the one call during this 

age. "Ye are all called in one hope of your calling." 

The fact that God has in purpose another call, to another 

class, in the Millennial age, may cheer and comfort us now, 

and enable us to see harmony and consistency in the divine 

character and arrangement, but it should not encourage 

R1951 : page 58 

any one to reject a present call and to hope for another. 
He who "hears" the present call has no right whatever to 
hope for another if he spurns what has been put within his 
reach. As the Apostle said, "How shall we escape [destruction] 
if we neglect so great salvation?" 

Our Lord taught the Apostles much concerning his 
mission, his Kingdom and its object; but also said to 
them. "I have many things [yet] to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now; howbeit, when he the spirit of truth 
is come, he will guide you [gradually] into all truth." (John 16:13.) 



To have answered their question in full would 
have led to many other questions for whose answers they 
were not prepared, therefore our Lord wisely avoided their 
query, and merely told them what was their duty and proper 
course: "Strive [make great effort] to enter in at the 
strait [difficult] gate, for many, I say unto you, will seek to 
enter in and shall not be able, when once the Master of the 
house is risen up, and hath shut to the door." 

The illustration is that of an eastern wedding, as represented 
in the parable of the Ten Virgins. Those who 
were invited were expected to be ready before the coming 
of the bridegroom, and to enter with him. When he and 
his ready, accompanying friends have entered, the door is 
shut, and for the occasion all outside are treated as strangers, 
as unknown, and the festivities proceed without them. 

In all of his parables our Lord represented the Kingdom 
promised to his followers as to be gained at the end 
of the age, when the Nobleman would return from the far 
country, heaven, to take possession of his kingdom and to 
share its honors with those faithful to him during his absence. 
(Luke 19:12-27) Or, under other figures, he represented 
himself as the bridegroom coming to claim and 
take home his faithful, waiting, betrothed virgin. He gave 
them no definite information respecting the time of his coming, 
so that all might be constantly on the alert, not knowing 
at what hour their Lord might arrive;— nevertheless assured 
that all the ready, waiting, watching ones would get word 
in time and be able to enter in to the marriage. 

Hence the coming of the bridegroom, and the shutting 
of the door at the proper time, has reference to the 
close of this Gospel age, when the full predestinated number 
of the Church, the bride of Christ, has been called, 

R1952:page58 

chosen and found faithful. Then the "door" or opportunity 
to become a member of the bride and joint-heir with 
Christ in his Kingdom will be forever closed. There cannot 
be one additional member, even as there could not be one 
less than the predestinated number. 

We are down in the end of the age now; the Bridegroom-King 
has come; the wise virgins are trimming their 
lamps, examining the evidences of the Scriptures, and going 
forth as those who acknowledge his presence and avowedly 
are going to the wedding. Soon the last of this class will 
have gone in, and the door will be shut. Then the foolish 
virgins, drowsy and overcharged and lacking sufficient zeal, 
but nevertheless "virgins," will begin to bestir themselves; 
they will buy the oil in the market of experience; they will 
begin to realize that the end of the age is upon us, that the 
Bridegroom has come, and that the Kingdom feast is about 
to take place. But as they see the storm growing dark, 
they will hasten to go to the wedding, and many will find 
themselves debarred, refused admittance. They will then 
realize that they have failed to make their calling and election 
sure by so running as to obtain the prize of joint-heirship 



with Christ. 

"There shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of 
teeth." Yes, not alone will there be disappointment in 
losing the prize offered and sought (but sought too indifferently), 
but some of the wailing and tribulation will arise 
from another cause: they will find themselves suddenly in 
the midst of the great "time of trouble such as was not 
since there was a nation" (Dan. 12:1), a trouble that will 
be worldwide, and from which there will be no escape except 
by those who enter in before the door is shut— to whom 
it was said, "Watch,. ..that ye may be accounted worthy 
to escape all these things.— Luke 21:36. 

The angels are holding the "winds" of violence, until 
the full number of the elect have been sealed and have 
made their calling and election sure; and when this is 
finished we may expect that the trouble upon the world will 
come "as a whirlwind, suddenly." 

But the "foolish virgins" who have been of the household 
of faith, but slack and not "overcomers," are not 
the only ones who will find themselves shut out of the Kingdom. 
Many others— all workers (servants) of iniquity, 
whether Jews or Gentiles, will find themselves excluded and 
denied any part or lot in the Kingdom of God. 

In this discourse our Lord does not tell what great 
blessings are to follow the union of the Heavenly Bridegroom 
with his bride, but other Scriptures tell us that soon 
thereafter the whole world will be blessed; for the spirit 
and the bride will give the invitation, "Come!" and whosoever 
will (not merely an elect "little flock") may then 
come and take of the water of life freely. (Rev. 22:17.) 
Neither does the parable tell what became of the "foolish 
virgins;" but another Scripture shows them "saved so as 
by fire.-l Cor. 3:15. 



R1952:page58 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Major Whittle is drawing 
large audiences, but there is no excitement. He tells too 
much truth to work up an "old-fashioned revival." I was 
told that he said recently, "The longer I continue in this 
work, the less faith I have in exciting revivals." 

I heard his two lectures on the second coming of Christ. 
If he were not depending upon nominal Christendom for the 
sustenance of his wide reputation as an evangelist, I believe 
he would be able to see the truth. In a private conversation 
he said to me, "Aside from two things, I think 
Brother Russell is in harmony with the Scriptures." What 
do you think these two things are? "Future probation, and 
in regard to the divine, spiritual body of Christ." His 



argument is based upon Acts 1:11 and Luke 24:39. 
Yours in Christ, J. M. BLOSE. 

[REPLY:— We are gratified to learn of this approach 
to a clear appreciation of the great truths due in this harvest 
time on the part of one whom we have long esteemed as 
honest in his convictions, and fervent in spirit serving the 
Lord, although with a zeal that was not in accordance with 
a knowledge of many of the truths now due to the household 
of faith. Early teaching and long accustomed habits 
of thought are not easily overcome even by clear truth in 

R1952:page59 

minds that are naturally conservative, as most minds are. 

Yet even over these difficulties the honest-hearted will be 

led by the spirit of God slowly, if not rapidly, to clear apprehensions 

of the truth, which is unto all the household 

of faith meat in due season. 

We note the texts thought to be contrary to our teaching 
that our Lord is no longer a being of flesh— a human 
being. The brother has probably not taken into consideration 
the fact that before our Lord "was made flesh," he, in 
common with other spirit beings, angels, could assume a 
human body, a body of flesh and blood and bones (Gen. 18:19; 
Judges 13; Dan. 10:5-21), and that his subsequent 
humiliation in being "made flesh" (John 1:14) 
and thus becoming "the man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5) 
was a totally different thing from merely appearing in a 
body of flesh, like a man. Indeed, no Christian will dispute 
this difference, we presume; but when they come to 
consider Luke 24:39 they forget to apply the same rule. 
They forget that our Lord was "made flesh" only for a 
limited time, and was not humbled to a lower nature forever; 
and that the object of this humiliation is clearly stated 
to have been "for the suffering of death." (Heb. 2:9.) "He 
was put to death in the flesh, but quickened [made alive] 
in spirit." And as he said before his death, "Yet a little 
while and the world seeth me no more," so we find that he 
"showed himself" (made himself to appear) to none except 
his disciples after his resurrection, and to them only a 
few times, and not after his former manner;— coming in 
while the doors were shut and leaving them by vanishing: 
as though he would tell them thus,— I am "changed," I am 
now a "quickening spirit," yet what you see is flesh and 
bones and not spirit, so do not be affrighted, but permit me 
to talk with you and expound to you the Scriptures. 

The Apostle Paul expounds this subject thoroughly in 
Philippians 2:6-10. He shows our Lord's pre-human 
glory, his humiliation to be made a man, and then his still 
further humiliation to "the death of the cross," and then 
tells us that God exalted him subsequently to the highest 
glory. How inconsistent then to suppose him to still have 
the body of humiliation! He that ascended from the 
human nature is the same who first descended to the human 
nature. He is now glorified with the same spiritual glory 



which he had with the Father before the world was [made], 
but with added majesty. Our redemption cost enough at 
Calvary: it is not necessary that our Redeemer should bear 
a marred and scarred body of humiliation for our sakes for 
all eternity. 

The resurrected bodies of the Church are described 
particularly in 1 Cor. 15:42-44, as not only glorious, but 
spiritual. So then if our Redeemer have a scarred and 
fleshly body of humiliation while we have glorious, perfect, 
spirit bodies, the "body of Christ," the Church, would 
eclipse the "head" in glory. But not so: our Lord is now 
exalted, the express image of the Father's person; and we 
shall be like him. 

Respecting Acts 1:11. It seems strange that so many 
Bible students overlook the fact that the angel did not say 
anything about what kind of a body our Lord would have 
at his second coming, but merely that it would be "this 
same Jesus"— the same that was with the Father before the 
world was, and that for a time, and for a purpose, was made 
flesh and dwelt among us, and died for us and rose a quickening 
spirit: this same Jesus, whom, during the forty days 
since his resurrection, the world had not seen, and whom 
his disciples had seen only for a few times and for a few moments, 
when he occasionally "showed himself" to them, 
to demonstrate the fact that he was risen and changed: this 
same Jesus would come again. As to the "manner" in 
which he went away, it was quiet, unknown to the world, 
and so will be the manner of his second coming— unknown 
to any except the true disciples. 

Since "flesh" cannot "see," nor "enter into," nor 
"inherit" the Kingdom of God (John 3:3-8; 1 Cor. 15:50), 
we should not imagine the King himself to be flesh. And, 
thank God! the members of his body, the Church, who are 
now in the flesh, must be "changed" and be made "like him," 
and then we shall "see him as he is" (1 John 3:2), not as he 
was when a man. We shall see him whom Paul saw as one 
born before the time— the Lord of glory, in glory above 
the brightness of the Sun.] 



Denmark. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Some years ago a wealthy 
proprietor in Sweden, who had been a very pious gentleman, 
died, and left his son a loving admonition which I 
have translated into English, as follows:— 

"My dear son:— Hereby I give you on parting this 
kind admonition. Be never diverted from these three 
things: the Word of God, your faith in Jesus Christ and 

R1953 : page 59 

the true fear of God. Hold on to the holy Scriptures, the 
Old and New Testaments, and let them be a rule and guide 
for everything you think, believe, speak and do. Trust 
wholly in the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ for your hope 



of salvation. Strive daily after holiness, that you may more 
and more put off evil and increase doing good. If you 
continue these three things, you will never need to fear 
any error or seduction. But if you depart from the three 
things I have mentioned you are in danger of injuring your 
own soul, and of missing the eternal salvation. 

"I will particularly recommend you three practices of 
godliness: prayer, meditation on the Word of God and 
self-examination, thereby better to learn to know your 
faults and weaknesses. If you get sleepy or negligent in 
any of these three practices you may know that your 
Christianity is retrograding. But the more fervent you are 
in prayer, the more eagerly and diligently you ponder 
God's Word in your heart, the more candidly you test yourself 
before the Lord, and confess your sins before him, the 
more powerfully you shall experience the workings of divine 
grace by the holy spirit in your heart. Appear toward God 
as a pious and humble child, to your neighbor as a kind 
brother or compassionate father, and towards yourself, 
and with regard to your faults, as a severe judge; that you 
never gloss over them, but readily confess them, and ask 
for their forgiveness. Be a minister in your own house, 
and set a good example for your own family and servants 

R1953 : page 60 

in words and acts. Point them incessantly to the right way, 
read, pray and sing with them, according as God gives you 
grace and power to do, and ask the heavenly Father to draw 
the hearts of them all unto himself. Set a good example 
for all to follow after, in meekness, gentleness, longsuffering, 
patience and kindness. Then God shall give you 
blessing and favor to win yours for the kingdom of Christ. 

"Whenever God gives you an opportunity to show 
your affection, especially toward the poor, the sick and suffering 
ones, never let it pass you by; for he that dwelleth 
in love dwelleth in God, and this is the right mind for a 
Christian to have. Do not let it make you uneasy if you 
do not always feel joy in your heart, only be patient, and 
wait upon the Lord. He will surely in his own time make 
you glad again. Be not too hasty to judge another, for we 
judge a hundred times, and scarcely once hit the mark. 
Always leave to God what you do not understand. 

"Dear son, I know the Lord will be merciful unto 
you and take you unto himself, if you faithfully attend to 
all this; and I would be glad if you would, once a week, 
especially at its beginning or end, read and consider what 
I have written. Have no company with seductive men. 
Do no one injustice in trade or business, and purpose by the 
help of God to go out into the world as an honest and pious 
Christian. Keep God before your eyes and in your heart 
all through life, and beware not to consent to any sin." 

This seemed such excellent advice. I want you to see 
that some over here are friends of the Lord and of righteousness. 

Yours in the Redeemer, 

JOSEPH WINTER [Colporteur]. 



South Carolina. 
BROTHER RUSSELL AND FRIENDS OF TOWER OFFICE:- 

I write to tell you my supply of tracts is exhausted, and to 
ask for more. I give a large part of them to country people 
returning from town to their homes. 

I am kept so confined at home, and, seldom meeting 
any of the brethren of our hope and faith, I can make no 
report concerning the spread of the light here. Sometimes 
I have the unpleasing thought that there are too many DAWN 
and TOWER readers on whom the truth has taken but a 
slight hold, who in a languid sort of way apprehend the 
value of the harvest light, "approve the things that are 
excellent," but lack earnestness of conviction, and perhaps 
lack the zeal and ardor awakened in the heart by the good 
hope that cometh through grace— the "hope that maketh 
not ashamed." But I do not like to think thus, and am 
deterred from it by the sense of my own deficiencies and 
shortcomings. Many times I am caused to feel that the 
lines have fallen to me in grievous places, with bitter humiliations, 
tears and sorrows. An alternating and changeful 
experience is mine. Sometimes I am in the glooms and 
shadows, sometimes in enough of light to bring back to me 
the peace he gives to them who are his, enough to keep 
alive some courage, and prevent me from sinking. Meantime 
I am sensible of an increasing nearness to him, and a slow 
but perceptible growth in spiritual light and the assurance 
of the faith. But it seems to me that but very little is being 
done in the Master's work, and my own sphere of action 
and liberty of service in the harvest is so confined, that the 
distress and fear of coming short of the prize— the promise 
left to the faithful, the vigilant, the overcomers— will come 
over me at times. 

The TOWERS of 1895 are full of excellent matter. I now 
understand the Scripture term "the quick and the dead"— 
clearing up dark and difficult passages in harmony with the 
plan and system of revealed truth as a whole. This calls 
up the question relating to the meaning of the Master's 
words in Luke 17. In verse 5 the disciples desired of him 
an increase of their faith. Verse 6 can scarcely be called a 
reply. The question in the reader's mind is— Are verses 7 to 10 
to be taken as part of the reply to verse 5? If so, 
the meaning seems to be that a continuous, humble and 
faithful service and discharge of duty will result in an increase 
of one's faith, to a degree greater than indicated by 
the mustard seed, which is said to be the smallest of seeds. 

[We believe our brother has made the correct application 
of our Lord's words. We must not sit down and expect 
our Lord to serve us until after we have proved faithful 
in serving him. (See Luke 12:37.) And after having 
served him with our all, and to the best of our ability, 
we must not feel that he owes us a debt of gratitude, but 
rather that we have brought him nothing to which he was not 
already the rightful owner, since "ye are bought with a 



price." We will still be his debtors; and the more faithful 
and diligent we are in his service, the more will it be to 
our own profit— to the increase of our faith, as well as to 
our upbuilding in character.— EDITOR.] 

Pray ye, that my faith fail not; for I want to redeem 
as much of the time as possible, and use means and opportunities 
as the Lord will give me strength and grace to do so. 

Yours in reverent and grateful love of Him, 
D. M. FELTS 



page 60 

Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your kind letter at hand. 
We were glad to receive greetings from you, as we pray 
without ceasing for you and your household. 

On Jan. 1 the Church here called a special meeting at 

which Brother was elected "elder," Brothers and 

Sisters as assistants. 

I have so many engagements I know not which I should 
fill. I do not like to miss one evening at the depot, as I 
can put out from 50 to 125 tracts every evening. I also 
have parlor talks, reading the DAWNS and TOWERS and explaining 
the chart at different places; and I have a very 
good field to work at home, which I am afraid I am 
neglecting. 

I do wish you could see how my wife is growing in 
grace and in the spirit of Christ. My heart rejoices as she 
tells me how she goes to the Lord in prayer, and how she 
trusts him, and how the darkest hours are turned into 
brightness. My eyes overflow with tears of joy as I think 
during the day at work of going home in the evening to 
find her reading or singing praises to the Lord. Our 
home is a heaven, my life is sweeter than I could 
have hoped or even thought, but not without seasons of trial. 
My step-daughter and son are 18 and 15 years of age. 
So you see I have to be very careful in my conduct, and in 
their training. They appreciate our happy home, and 
speak of it to their friends, who wish theirs were the same. 
I thank the Lord often for the precious truths we receive 
in the TOWER to strengthen and rejoice our hearts, and ask 
Him to keep you humble and strengthen you that you may 
withstand all trials and be a faithful servant. Oh, may we 
all be patient and faithful, and meet with our Redeemer 
in glory! 



page 6 1 
VOL. XVII. APRIL 1, 1896. No. 7. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 62 

Views from the Tower 63 

The Reward of the Righteous 65 

Love Not the World 66 

"My Soul, be on thy Guard" 67 

After the Order of Melchisedec 68 

Laying On of Hands 69 

Bible Study: Parable of the Great 

Supper 70 

Bible Study: The Prodigal Received 71 

Encouraging Letters 72 

page 62 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE Passover Memorial celebration at Allegheny was a very enjoyable 
and impressive event. It was good to be there, we believe was 
the verdict of all present;— about one hundred and fifty. The dear 
ones scattered abroad were remembered. We trust that they all had 
the Master's blessing as we enjoyed it. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 



THIS pamphlet of 80 pages, a special issue of the OLD THEOLOGY 
QUARTERLY, examines every text of Scripture in which the word 
"hell" is found, and related passages. Extra copies furnished to subscribers 
at ten cents each, or seventy-five cents per dozen, or six dollars 
per hundred,— postpaid. 



R1955 : page 62 

NO SPECIAL FAVOR ASKED. 



THE friends of the cause who responded to our suggestion for prayers 
for tract work, and in petitioning the Postmaster General and the 
members of Congress, will be pleased to learn that one of the objectionable 
rulings of the P.O. Dep't. has been suspended for sixty days from 
March 19, meantime expecting some new laws from Congress. This 
lets the Old Theology Tracts go out at "pound rates" for the period 
mentioned. All who need tracts, especially friends at a distance, should 
order before the expiration of the period named. State particularly 
what quantities you can use judiciously. The DAWNS are still under 
embargo. Continue your prayers with ours for such privileges as the 
Lord may be pleased to grant. 

Two of our readers seemed to misunderstand the phraseology of the 
cards which we suggested should be sent to Congressmen. They got 
the impression that we were asking legislation specially favorable to religious 
literature, and feared that this would be asking the state to support 
the church. They were mistaken. The Act of Congress of July 
16, '94, extends special privileges to Benevolent Societies, Literary Societies 
and Lodges, of one thousand members or more. The framers of 
the law no doubt thought that the word literary would include religious 
literature, which should out-rank all other literature. But since the P.O. 
Dep't. does not so interpret the law, our request of Congress is that 
they specify religious literature, and thus put it on the same footing with 
lodge literature. This is not asking a special favor for religion, but 
simple equality and justice. We assume that the American people are 
not willing to put religion at a disadvantage. Such of the friends as 
have had favorable responses from Congressmen might, if they please, 
reply to them, and call special attention to the lack of explicitness in the 
Act of July 16, '94, and request that it be amended to specify religious 
literature. There is still time for more petitions from those who have 
not yet sent them in. 



R1953 : page 63 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



A FEVERISH ambition, pride and sensitiveness 
seems to be growing amongst nations as well as 
amongst individuals. Every one seems more than ever 
ready for a conflict on any and every pretext. During the 
short space of this year 1896, several immense wars have 
narrowly been averted,— between Russia and Japan, between 
Turkey and the combined powers of Europe, between 
Great Britain and the United States, between Great Britain 
and Germany and between the United States and Spain 
backed possibly by France; besides a number of smaller affairs. 



While pride and self-confidence have had to do with all 
these dangers of wars, fear of the terrible implements of 
modern warfare has doubtless had much to do with the 
avoidance of actual combat. But the pent up ambition 
and military feeling of Europe is finding a field for exercise 
in Africa, and British, Italian and French troops are finding 
plenty to do; while Spain has her hands overfull with 
Cuba; the Turks are conquering to death the Armenian 
Christians who refuse to become Mohammedans, and 
Russia is getting ready to seize Corea. 

How unlike is all this to what might have been hoped 
for as the result of eighteen centuries of Christian instruction. 
Humanly speaking it seems as though we were getting 
farther and farther away from the promised era of 
"peace on earth, good will toward men." How strange 
their own attitudes must seem to so-called Christian 
kingdoms! 

Thank God, our hopes of peace do not rest upon the 
expectation that the natural man, either individually or 
nationally, will grow just and merciful and loving and generous 
and peaceable. We find no ground for such hopes. 
On the contrary, it is still as true as eighteen centuries ago 
that the natural man appreciates not the things of the spirit 
of God, but is at enmity to them because they curb his desires 
and condemn his attitude and ambitions. It is still 
true that the carnal heart is boastful, proud, envious, vain-glorious, 
and that the carnally minded are despisers of them 
that are good (meek, loving, peaceable, etc.), and full of 
hatred and strife. 

No, thank God! our good hope of good things near at 
hand rests on a more reasonable basis— on the promised establishment 
of a strong, as well as a just and merciful, government 
—of God's Kingdom in the hands of the King of 
glory,— the Prince of the kings of the earth. To the 
rightly instructed these various signs, unfavorable to peace, 
are really harbingers of peace, since they corroborate the 

R1954:page63 

declarations of God's Word, that the reign of the Prince 
of Peace will be introduced by an unprecedented time of 
trouble and national and social disruption. 

In view of the general prevalence of the proud, boastful, 
self seeking and combative spirit (2 Tim. 3:1-5), 
let us who are seeking to walk close to the Lord, remember 
and continually practise the Apostle's injunction, 
"So far as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men." 



As we read recently of the gathering of a rough element 
outside a Presbyterian church in Chicago, probably drawn 
by curiosity to witness the drill of the Boy's Brigade, 
how they misused the janitor who attempted to quiet and 
disperse them, and how then the boy-soldiers came out 
and with fixed bayonets charged upon and dispersed the 



crowd, sustaining some slight bruises from sticks and stones, 
we were reminded of our Lord's words,— "They that take 
the sword shall perish with the sword."— Matt. 26:52. 

Neither the boys nor their religious instructors probably 
foresee the results of their present course. The 
blending of carnal with spiritual warfare is impossible, and 
such a course is sure to cultivate, more and more, the carnal 

R1954 : page 64 

mind. In the troublous times coming, the poor as well as 
the vicious will be only too ready to conclude that religion 
and civil government are banded together for their oppression. 
True Christians should keep themselves and their 
children free from all such evil entanglements. 

The Governors of some of the States are requiring 
all companies of the Boy's Brigade to take the oath of 
allegiance to the state, the same as the Militia; because, 
according to law, others are not allowed to drill with 
firearms. 



Mr. T. V. Powderly, formerly the chief executive of 
a powerful social order known as the Knights of Labor reports 
a tour among some churches thus: 

At the Episcopalian church "the minister was a 
good speaker. He spoke of church repairs and parsonage 
repairs. He spoke 45 minutes and never spoke of Christ 
nor his work. In our cathedral [Powderly is a Roman 
Catholic] the priest told the people to be good, but nothing 
of Christ— not a word. I went to the Presbyterian church 
and to every church in the city— all the same story: all for 
man, not one word about God; not one word to help the 
poor man." 

The need of to-day is the same as eighteen centuries 
ago. Our Master gave it as a sign of his Messiahship that 
"the poor have the gospel preached to them." We are told 
that "the common people heard him gladly." Now, as 
then, the chief priests and scribes and Pharisees have mistaught 
the poor, that after a life of trouble here ninety-nine 
of every hundred will find it worse hereafter, until the 
common people distrust and despise such bad tidings of 
great misery, falsely called gospel— good tidings. 

We advise co-laborers to search for the Lord's jewels 
among the humble. Remember the Apostle's words: Ye 
know your calling, brethren, how that not many great or 
wise or rich are called, but [chiefly] the poor, rich in faith. 
-James 2:5; 1 Cor. 1:26-29. 



The new X-ray is proving still more wonderful, in the 
new art of shadowgraph. Mr. Edison's latest announcement 
is that by placing a human being before a mineral 
coated screen he can pass the rays of light through the 



body so as to show the bones mirrored on the screen. By 
removing the subject further from the screen the bones become 
invisible, and the various organs are mirrored. 

Truly, as our Master foretold, we seem to be approaching 
a time when "every secret thing shall be made manifest." 
(Mark. 4:22; Eccl. 12:14; Matt. 10:26; 1 Cor. 4:5.) 
As a railway passenger remarked, recently, "A 
man needs to be very good these days or his sin, however 
secret, will find him out and expose him." 

Could we always remember that by powers yet more 
subtle than X-rays,— 

"God our inmost thoughts doth read," 
it would help us all to walk carefully, so that the "words 
of our mouths and the meditations of our hearts" might 
be acceptable to our Lord. 

Quite probably the restored man of the Millennial 
period will have considerable of the power of mind reading, 
and intuitive discernment, over the imperfect; as our 
Lord could read the thoughts of the Pharisees. And quite 
probably this will occasion a portion at least of the "shame 
and lasting contempt" of the awakened wicked. (Dan. 12:2.) 
Their mean, grovelling dispositions, debased by 
selfish indulgences, will shame them in their progress back 
to manhood, while it will serve as a lesson to others not so 
degraded. 



Mr. Rockefeller, one of the principal stockholders of 
the Standard Oil Company, recently received his quarterly 
dividend check for four million dollars. 

What a responsibility, what a care, what a burden, 
what a stewardship, what an accounting to the Lord is implied 
in this wealth! 

The Apostle says, "Charge them that are rich among 
you [they are not likely to be of you, for not many great 
or rich hath God called to joint-heirship with Christ], 
that they trust not in uncertain riches." Let us not be 
envious of those who have wealth, but sympathetic. The 
possession of wealth brings with it temptations to make it 
a treasure, a god. In many ways the position of the comparatively 
poor is far more favorable to grace. It is easier 
for them to cultivate meekness, patience, humility, brotherly 
kindness and all the graces of the spirit. Our Lord summed 
up the matter when he said, "How hardly [with what difficulty] 
shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom 
of God!" Yet there were none rich in that day in comparison 
with the very rich of to-day. 

Our Lord's words are applicable to all in proportion 
as they have the "good things" of this world. Let each 
be faithful in his stewardship; for he that is unfaithful in a 
little charge would be unfaithful to a greater trust. The 
demand of the Law upon the Jew was— one tenth of all his 
increase. The test of discipleship to Christ is the consecration 
of all that we possess, principal and increase, 
money, influence, time and talent, to be used as his 



stewardship,— 

"To be used in joyful service, 
For the glory of our King." 
In contrast with the wealth of some, note the fact that 
upon the lists of the WATCH TOWER are over three thousand 
too poor in this world's goods to pay for it, to whom it is 
provided out of the Tract Fund. Nevertheless, to some of 
these "poor" God has granted the "riches of his grace;" 
and has made them "rich in faith" and heirs of his coming 
Kingdom. To such of them as shall prove faithful to 
the end of their course he sends word through his Apostle, 
"All things are yours, for ye are Christ's and Christ is 
God's." Yes, thank God! many of these have received 
from the Lord a wealth of exceeding great and precious 
promises, the understanding and appreciation of which are 
beyond all price. 

R1954:page65 

Dismissing the question of whether or not a man can 
possess such enormous wealth honestly (for this dividend 
is only the interest, not the principal, and represents only 
one of Mr. Rockefeller's large investments) and supposing 
that every cent of it came justly: supposing also that Mr. 
R. is very charitable and generous, and uses his stewardship 
wisely, the question remains, Is there not something 
radically wrong with our present social and business laws 
and customs, when they leave it possible for one man to 
amass so great wealth while many find it impossible to 
earn a living? 

True, the laws are alike for all, and in one sense all 
have the same chance; but all are not equally endowed 
with perceptive and reasoning powers and judgment and acquisitive 
propensities; hence "the strong [mentally, physically 
and spiritually] ought [as a matter of equity] to bear the 
infirmities of the weak." (Rom. 15:1.) And the laws should 
compensate, somewhat, for mental and physical inequalities 
of the race. But such laws will never be enacted. Why? 
Because the well-to-do are strong-minded, forceful men, and 
the same intellectual activity and power which enables 
them to acquire more than average proportions of this 
world's goods make them the natural leaders, lawmakers 
and rulers of the less forceful; and it would be like "making 
water run up hill" to reverse this natural condition. 

But would not Love solve the problem? Yes; Love 
could solve the problem; but Love is not natural to the fallen 
race: Selfishness is the rule and law of life with all the 
fallen sons of Adam— except the few who have become new 
creatures in Christ, with whom Love is become the law of 
their hearts, and, so far as they are able, the controlling 
power in their mortal bodies also. (These, however, are 
a "little flock," and not a factor in the problem.) There 
is, therefore, no hope of a radical reform in this direction, 
unless we can convert the hearts of at least a majority of 
those who are able to profit by the present "free for all" 
race for wealth; and the Scriptures assure us that they are 



the class most difficult to touch with the Truth and its spirit. 

Is there then no hope? Yes, thank God! "Be patient 
brethren, the coming of the Lord [in the full glory of his 
Kingdom] draweth nigh." (Jas. 5:8.) He shall help the 

R1955 : page 65 

poor and the needy; and in his day equity and the righteous 
shall flourish. (Psa. 72:11-14.) He will exalt the 
humble and abase the proud, and cause the general 
levelling of society; and all the families of the earth shall 
be blest. The short, terrible struggle incident to the fall 
of the "powers that be" and the general spoliation of the 
present social structure (Mark 3:27) will be indeed a dark 
night, between now and the glorious Millennium of divine 
favor, in which the rich will "howl" for the loss of their 
treasures (Jas. 5:1); but doubtless many of them will 
then begin to search for the true riches, which moth and 
rust do not corrupt and which thieves cannot steal. Let 
us therefore have great sympathy for those who mistakenly 
are trusting in uncertain riches and are overlooking the 
riches of divine grace. 



R1956 : page 66 

THE REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS. 



"And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the 
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars 
forever and ever."— Dan. 12:3. 

IN CONSIDERING who are the wise here referred to 
we are forcibly reminded of Paul's significant inquiry 
—"Where is the wise? where is the scribe [who boasts of 
his wisdom]? where is the disputer of this world? hath 
not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after 
that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not 
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching [i.e., 
the preaching of this foolishness] to save them that believe." 
(1 Cor. 1:20,21.) And these believers are the 
truly wise ones to whom the Prophet makes reference. 

Those who so thoroughly believe the testimony of God 
as to yield themselves fully to his will are wise indeed. 
They have prudently chosen that good part which shall not 
be taken from them. In this present evil world, it is true 
that, like their Lord, they have tribulation; but if they 
endure it as good soldiers, faithful unto death, their eternal 
reward is sure. The reward promised is beyond this vale 
of tears, and the valley of the shadow of death. Then 
these that suffered here, meekly bearing the reproach of 
Christ; who took up their cross daily, and followed him; 
who nobly adhered to the principles of truth and righteousness, 



and faithfully conformed their lives thereto; who 
delighted themselves in the Lord, and daily meditated in 
his law; who devoted themselves faithfully to the doing of 
his will, sacrificing their own,— these shall by and by shine 
forth as the sun, as the brightness of the firmament, in the 
Kingdom of their Father. 

O, weary ones, look up; sad hearts, be glad; for even 
now your deliverance is nigh, even at the doors! Soon the 
sorrows of this earthly pilgrimage will be ended, and your 
glory will appear. 

It is a very noticeable fact, that the nearer we approach 
to the consummation of our glorious hopes, the 
opposition of the powers of darkness grows more and 
more severe as well as more subtle. And those who 
walk by faith alone must indeed have a very strong 
faith to be able to wage a successful warfare to the end, and 
win the victor's crown of glory. To this end, dearly beloved, 
let us keep these precious promises of God ever in 
mind. "Wherefore comfort one another with these words." 

While this glory that excelleth is to be manifested by 
and by in the overcoming gospel Church, there is a lesser, 

R1955 : page 66 

but nevertheless a great, glory to be manifested in all the 
lovers and doers of righteousness in all the ages past. 
Faithful Noah, a preacher and doer of righteousness; faithful 
Abraham, with whom the Lord's will was always paramount; 
faithful Enoch and Elijah and Moses and Aaron 
and Joshua and Caleb, and a host of others, of whom the 
world was not worthy, shall by and by gleam forth in the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom of God, as the stars forever 
and ever. 

When righteousness is finally established in the earth, 
and men have learned to appreciate the pure, the beautiful 
and the good, when generous love shall have displaced all 
selfishness, then indeed will the good deeds and blessed influences 
of those who, in the midst of sin and wickedness, 
sought to turn many to righteousness, come into remembrance 
and receive from all men their just reward of appreciation 
and praise. They shall shine as the stars forever 
and ever. 

How refreshing the prospect of the glorious consummation 
of the divine plan! Let us rejoice and be glad, and 
daily strive to prove ourselves worthy of the glory promised 
to them that love God, to the called according to his purpose. 



R1955 : page 66 

LOVE NOT THE WORLD. 



"Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any 



man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him."— 1 John 2:15. 

ONE can scarcely read this advice of the Apostle 

John without having another scripture suggested 

to his mind, which, at first sight, may seem contradictory; 

viz, "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten 

Son, that whosoever believeth on him might not 

perish, but have everlasting life." The two, however, are 

not antagonistic, but are in full harmony when rightly understood. 

If God so loved the world, even while they 

were yet sinners (Rom. 5:8), as to sacrifice the dearest 

treasure of his heart in order to redeem and save them, 

then such love and such benevolence toward the world on 

our part cannot be out of harmony with his will. Indeed, 

such is the direct teaching of the Word. "Do good to all 

men as you have opportunity;" "Love your enemies, do 

good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully 

use you and persecute you, that ye may be the 

children of your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh 

his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth 

rain on the just and on the unjust.. ..Be ye therefore 

perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." 

-Matt. 5:44-48. 

To love the world as God loves it, is not the sentiment 
against which the Apostle warns the Church, as the 
context clearly shows. That is a grand and ennobling 
love— a love which stands on the high plane of purity, and 
without having the least fellowship with the impure, nevertheless 
pities the fallen, and is active in efforts to rescue 
them from their degradation. This divine love, so worthy 
of our imitation, is that which benevolently ignores personal 
antagonisms and animosities, and, overleaping all 
selfish considerations and vengeful feelings, considers only 
the possibilities and the ways and means for peace and reformation 
and salvation. 

But the love of the world to which John refers, as 
the context shows, is the love of fellowship, which implies 
the partaking of its spirit— its aims, ambitions and hopes, 
and its methods of pursuing them. If any man love the 
world in this sense, surely the love of the Father is not in 
him; "For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, 
and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the 
Father, but is of the world [i.e., according to the spirit 
of this present evil world]. And the world passeth away, 
and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God 
abideth forever." 

R1956 : page 66 

As children of God we have been called to a position 
of great favor and advantage. Our Heavenly Father has 
revealed to us his plans and purposes and has condescended 
to take us into his fellowship and active cooperation; and 
so grand and extensive is our outlook of the future that we 
are able to view the present life in a very different light from 
that in which the world views it. The world walks on in 



darkness without the light of life, and consequently to them 
the things of this present life, which we have learned to count 
but as dross, are to them of great value, and they strive 
and run and contend for the delusive prizes that bring with 
them only labor and sorrow and quickly pass away. 

The Apostle has very briefly summed up the world's 
treasures as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life. The lust of the flesh includes all the 
fleshly appetites and passions, the merely animal instincts. 
To these thousands sacrifice all the higher interests. To 
fare sumptuously in eating and drinking and frolic and 
pleasure is their delight. The lust of the eyes demands 
luxury in dress and home appointments, and the gathering 
for self-gratification of all that is admired and 
desired. And the pride of life glories in the shame of 
that selfishness which has ignored the wants and woes of 
the needy and suffering, and complacently said to self, 
"Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take 
thine ease, eat, drink and be merry." And it goes further: 
it despises the poor and needy and oppresses them. 

Such is the spirit of this world. It is the very opposite 
of the spirit of God and of Christ; and those who 
are led of the spirit of God should keep as far from it as 
possible. Their conduct, their dress, their home-life and 
home appointments must all speak a different language. 
We are to mind not high things, but to condescend to men 
of low estate; to show no preference to the man that wears 

R1956 : page 67 

the fine clothing or the gold ring, but, like our Master, to 
regard with highest esteem and Christian love those who 
do the will of our Heavenly Father.— Rom. 12:16; 
James 2:1-5. 

"God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God in him. Herein is love with us made 
perfect [completed] that we may have boldness in the day 
of judgment; because as he [God] is, so are we in this 
world." As God is love, and is so manifested to all his 
creatures, so ought we to be love, and thus to shine as lights 
in the world. And if in this world we become living embodiments 
and representatives of love, we may be confident 
that at the end of our course we will stand approved 
before Him who seeks above all things to see in us this 
likeness to himself.— 1 John 4:16-18. 

To fellowship the world is to walk in harmony with 
its ideas and to conform to its ways. In this sense we may 
not love it, but must be apart from it and in opposition to 
it. The way thus pointed out to us is, in some respects at 
least, a difficult way, and a lonely way; but it is the only 
way of peace and lasting happiness. This world with the 
lust thereof is rapidly passing away: it is hollow and unsatisfying 
and eventually leads to disaster and ruin; but 
those whose delight is in the Lord's way have blessed communion 
and fellowship with him. Their joys come from 
a source which the world cannot comprehend. They live 



on a higher plane, breathe a purer atmosphere and enjoy a 
holier, sweeter friendship than the world could ever offer. 

But if any man in Christ descend from these high 
privileges to partake of the poor substitutes which the world 
has to offer, he is thereby proving his lack of appreciation, 
and hence his unworthiness of the heavenly things: the 
love of the Father is not in him; and he may well fear the 
verdict of the day of decision. 



R1956 : page 67 

"MY SOUL, BE ON THY GUARD. 



WHILE, as the Apostle predicted, "perilous times" 
are upon us, in which some in the Church will 
"stumble" and some "fall," and when "the love of 
many shall wax cold," let us not forget that it is "he that 
endureth [faithfully] to the end [of his trial], the same 
shall be saved." Remember the Apostle's advice, to take 
trials and oppositions and misrepresentations cheerfully, 
joyously, patiently, knowing that, so endured, they will 
"work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory." But, as the Apostle adds, to secure such blessed 
results from trials, persecutions and oppositions, we must 
remember to "look not at the things that are seen [earthly 
things and prospects], but at things that are unseen [the 
heavenly and eternal things]." We are to endure "as 
seeing him who is invisible." Greater is he that is with us 
than all that be against us. (Heb. 11:27; 1 John 4:4-8.) 
"Who is he that will harm you [really], if ye be followers 
of that which is good?" (Read 1 Pet. 3:13-16; Rom. 8:31-39.) 
The opposition of evil can work only good 
to "the elect," those who are called according to God's 
purpose. To all who are of the true Zion the promise is, 
"No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper." 

When that noble servant of God, John Wesley, was 
zealous in opposing Satan, and preaching a full consecration 
to God, he provoked Satan's enmity, and the latter 
found mouthpieces amongst ambitious and jealous "false 
brethren" who spread abroad vile rumors from time to 
time, not only assailing his teachings, but even his moral 
character. His plan was to make no defence. He argued 
that if he should engage in personal disputes it would be 
just what Satan would want— a hindrance to his work. 
Finally, however, when a most malicious rumor, reflecting 
on his moral character, was started by some prominent persons, 
and the entire work seemed likely to be greatly injured 
by it, his brother Charles and some others came to 
him, and said, John, you must answer this charge or your 
reputation is gone. 

John replied in substance thus,— No; I will keep right 
along with my work. When I consecrated myself to the 



Lord, I gave him my reputation as well as all else that I 
possess. The Lord is at the helm! Our Lord Jesus, by 
his faithfulness, "made himself of no reputation," and 
was crucified as a blasphemer and between outlaws, yet he 
opened not his mouth! No, I will make no defense. A 
certain class, evil at heart, would believe the evil reports 
regardless of my denials; and those thus alienated will no 
doubt, as in the early Church, go "out from us because they 
were not of us." "The Lord knoweth them that are 
his," and will keep his own; and none shall pluck them 
out of his hand. Besides, the Lord may see that some are 
thinking of me, rather than of him and his message which 
I seek to declare. 

The results we all know. The message of holiness 
with faith swept over the world, and its influence is not 
yet lost. And John Wesley is still loved for his work's 
sake in every civilized part of the world; but his traducers 
are forgotten. There is a lesson in this for all, as an illustration 
of the Lord's words— "In quietness and in confidence 
shall be your strength." 

Wherefore, dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which shall try you, as though some 
strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch 
as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his 
glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding 
joy.-l Pet. 4:12,13. 

Remembering that the Passover season is always one 
of Satanic activity and of special trial to God's people, 
we are praying for the dear flock, and for ourselves, as did 
our Master for Peter,— that faith fail not, and that whatever 
trials may come may only draw the sheep nearer to 
each other and to the great Chief Shepherd. But we should 
distinguish between the weak ones, and the wilfully wicked, 
like Judas. The former should be prayed for and helped, 
the latter should be left entirely to the Lord's judgment. 



R1956 : page 68 

AFTER THE ORDER OF MELCHISEDEC. 



"Jehovah hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest 
forever after the order of Melchisedek."— Psa. 1 10:4. 

A PRIEST, in the only true sense, is a mediator between 
God and fallen creatures, the object of such 
mediation being to restore and establish harmony on a 
legal basis. 

The office of the priest or mediator between God and 
man is to restore to perfection and consequent harmony 
with God a race of human beings condemned to death, and 
already dead or dying. Hence this priest must of necessity 
be "mighty to save." (Psa. 89:19.) He must have 



both the right and the power to recall the dead to life, and 
ability to instruct and discipline, and thus to lead every 
willing subject back to the perfect estate from which Adam 
and the race in him fell. To secure this right he must first 
satisfy the demands of Justice, which required the extinction 
of the human race; and these demands of Justice 
could only be met by a corresponding sacrifice— a human 
life for a human life. The life of Adam and all in him 
could be redeemed only by another perfect human being. 
And so it was— "Since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection from the dead." (1 Cor. 15:21.) 
By the sacrifice of a perfect human existence is secured the 
right of the priest to restore. 

But beyond the right or privilege of restoring, the 
priest must have the power, and power would of necessity 
presuppose his own everlasting existence. He must have 
power to create, since to restore to being that which had 
completely lost existence is to re-create it, and is a greater 
work even than the first creation; he must also have perfect 
knowledge, both of God's requirements and of human 
necessities, as well as perfect ability to guide a race so 
destitute back to the glorious heights of perfection and 
blessed harmony and communion with God. 

What an office! Who would presume to assume such 
a title? It belongs really and only to Jehovah's Anointed. 
Even Jesus, "the Anointed One, did not glorify himself 
to become a high priest," but he has "been declared by 
God a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec." 
(Heb. 5:4,5,10— Diaglott.) Jehovah honored him by 
inviting him to that position, and giving him all power to 
fill it. In harmony with God's plan, not only has Jesus, 
his Anointed one, been chosen as the chief, or high priest, 
but the "little flock," who follow him in sacrifice now, are 
called to be joint-heirs with him in the same honor. "If 
we suffer with him we shall also be glorified together." 
Jesus alone is the great High Priest; but the Gospel Church, 
redeemed by his death and associated with him now in 
sacrifice, and to be associated with him in divine power 
hereafter, is counted in with him, and, together with him, will 
constitute the great Prophet, Priest and King promised, to 
liberate and bless the groaning creation— the Seed of promise. 
-Gen. 22:18; 28:14; Gal. 3:29; Acts 3:20-23; 
Psa. 110:4. 

From these considerations it should be plain to all that 
our High Priest is truly a King, in whose hands absolute 
power is vested. And in looking back to the types God 
has given us, we find Melchisedec, to whom we are cited 
as an illustration of this priesthood both by the Psalmist 
and by the Apostle Paul. (Psa. 110:4; Heb. 5:5,10.) 
They show that Melchisedec, who was a priest upon his 
throne, represented the Christ in glory and power, while 
in the Aaronic Priesthood the special features of the redemptive 
sacrifice were shadowed forth— its perfection, its completeness, 
its acceptableness, as also the share which the 
Church has with Christ in that sacrifice. 

Christ was not constituted a priest of the Aaronic 



order: that priesthood was only the type or figure. The 
Aaronic priesthood sprang from the tribe of Levi, while 
"our Lord [according to the flesh] sprang from the tribe 
of Judah, of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning 
priesthood;" and the members of his body, the Church, are 
chosen chiefly from among the Gentiles. As a man, Jesus was 
not a priest, neither as men are the saints members of the 
royal priesthood; but as "new creatures" they hold and 
execute their office. Jesus as a "new creature," "partaker 
of the divine nature" (to which he was begotten at the 
time of his baptism), was the priest, and as a priest he offered 
up his perfect human nature an acceptable sacrifice to God. 
He consecrated or offered himself in sacrifice on becoming 
the priest, and he received a special anointing for the office 
which was necessary to enable him to accomplish the sacrifice 
as well as to apply its benefits to men. His human 
nature, when sacrificed, could do nothing more; it must 
remain a sacrifice forever; but the new nature, fully developed 
in the resurrection, has "all power in heaven and 
in earth. "--Matt. 28:18. 

The priestly office of the new nature is not of the 
Aaronic order: it does not trace its lineage to any human 
source. This fact is strikingly typified in the priesthood 
of Melchisedec, whose lineage and death are not recorded. 
He was a priest without having inherited the office from 
his father or his mother— thus typifying Christ's priesthood, 
which came not of the lineage of the flesh, as did the 
Aaronic priesthood, which Israel thought to be the real. 
Neither was Melchisedec's death recorded, nor a successor 
named (Heb. 7:3, Diaglott), that thus might be typified 
the continuity of Christ's priesthood. In this type the 
work of sacrifice is not shown, as Melchisedec represents 
the Christ glorified and reigning after the work of sacrifice 
has been completed, and the divine nature fully perfected. 

In Heb. 7:4-10 Melchisedec is declared to be greater 
than Abraham, thus showing that the divine Christ will be 
greater, and therefore able to bless every "friend of God" 
on the human plane. 

"Wherefore he [Christ] is able to save them to the 

R1956 : page 69 

uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth 
to make intercession for them. For such a High Priest became 
us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners, and made higher than the heavens [lifted higher 
than the highest— to the divine nature]." (Heb. 7:25-27.) 
And this blessed assurance of such a priest, so mighty to 
save, is confirmed unto us by the oath of Jehovah. (Heb. 7:21; 
Psa. 110:4.) What strong consolation, then, may 
those have, who have fled to Jehovah's Anointed for refuge: 
"Jehovah has sworn, and will not repent. Thou art a 
priest forever after the order of [or typified by] Melchisedec." 
What believer, justified by faith, who has offered 
himself as a living sacrifice, may not read his title clear to 
joint-heirship with the Head in that glorious anointed 



body? He is authorized and is able to save completely 

all that come unto God by him now, as well as all who shall 

hear and come in the Millennium. 

"Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly 
calling, consider the Apostle and High-Priest of our profession, 
Christ Jesus;. ..for we have become associates 
of the Anointed, if indeed we hold fast the beginning of 
our confidence, firm to the end."— Heb. 3:1,14, Diaglott. 

We conclude then, that while the Aaronic priesthood 
furnishes typical illustrations of the sacrifices and sufferings 
of Christ and the blessings to follow, it did not completely 
illustrate the glorious, everlasting and unchangeable character 
of his priesthood during the Millennial age; and for 
this cause Melchisedec was presented as a type, that thus 
might be shown his glorious office of priest and king— a 
priest upon his throne. Here, too, the body of Christ is 
no longer shown as separate individuals, but as one, complete. 
In the work of sacrifice we have seen the head or 
chief priest and the under priests more or less separately 
sacrificing, as represented in Aaron and the under priests; 
but all will unitedly share in the future glory represented 
in Melchisedec alone. 



R1956 : page 69 

LAYING ON OF HANDS. 



West Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-From the TOWER for Nov. 
15, '95, 1 was gratified to find that your mind and investigation 
upon the subject of "Order in the Church" coincides 
so exactly with our own. Before seeing anything from 
you at all on the subject, the Church here realized the necessity 
of more order, and was forced to examine the whole 
subject with the result you state. 

There is one item, however, that you seem to have 
overlooked or thought not necessary to discuss, upon which 
I greatly desire to have your opinion; that is, in regard to 
the custom of "laying on hands." 

I agree with you heartily in its being the best to follow 
the "pattern" as closely as possible, and in doing so I cannot 
avoid the conclusion that the recognition of God's 
gifts is expressed by the solemn formula of laying on hands 
of the presbytery. Now, if my conclusions are erroneous, 

R1957 : page 69 

please help me out. If in your understanding they are 
wrong, please explain the following texts: Acts 6:6; 1 Tim. 4:14; 
5:22. Are the terms "bishop" and "elder" 
synonymous? 
I am aware that in this ordinance the early Church 



conferred no special power, that it set up over them no 
ruler or lord; but did not this formula make the "elder" 
or "bishop" a representative or servant of those who 
lay on hands? We hope that your opinion, which we 
greatly respect, may help us out on this question. 

We have appointed three "elders"— one who takes 
oversight of the work at this place and two who work in 
the adjacent localities, I being one of the latter. I say appointed, 
but no hands have been laid on us; but the question 
is now being discussed by the brethren, and comes up 
for final settlement shortly. 

With fraternal love for you and yours, I remain, 
C. A. McCLUNG. 

[REPLY:— According to the Scripture use of the term 
the word "presbytery" signifies a "company of elders," 
the word coming from the Greek word which signifies "old 
man." The word "bishop" signifies "overseer," and is 
used with reference to elders in Acts 20:28, and is evidently 
another name for the elders mentioned in Phil. 1:1. 
The reference of 1 Tim. 5:22 may possibly be to ordination 
by laying on of hands; but this is uncertain. 

With regard to the laying on of hands of the presbytery 
(that is, the eldership) upon Timothy: the eldership 
in this case probably referred to the Apostles who were still 
living. Timothy was chosen by Paul as his successor to 
carry on the work which he began, and he evidently desired 
that the Apostles in general should recognize Timothy. 
Besides it was the custom in those days for the Apostles to 
lay hands upon all who believed, and thus to communicate 
to them a gift of the spirit. Paul reminds Timothy that he 
had received such a gift. In evidence that only the Apostles 
could confer these gifts we recall the fact that 
Simon Magus offered the Apostles money in exchange 
for the power that they possessed, so that upon whomsoever 
he might lay hands he would receive a gift of 
the spirit. We remember also the case mentioned in Acts 19:6, 
also Acts 8:12-19, in which it is shown that although 
Philip (the evangelist) had preached Christ to the Samaritans, 
and they had believed and been baptized, yet Philip 
did not lay hands upon them nor communicate the holy 
spirit, but sent word to Peter and John who were apostles, 
and who went down and prayed with them and communicated 
the gifts of the spirit. 

All of this seems to indicate clearly that only the apostles 
had the power to communicate these gifts of the spirit, 
although the apostles might very properly be called, and 
did call themselves, elders or presbyters. But since they 
are no longer living there are none who can convey the gifts 
of the spirit by the laying on of hands. 

R1957 : page 70 

But notice that in the early Church the laying on of 
hands was used also to indicate consent; as, for instance, in 
the case of the Church at Antioch when it chose Paul and 
Barnabas to be its missionaries and representatives in 



Gospel work. This congregation fasted and prayed and 

laid their hands upon Paul and Barnabas, and thus sent 

them away. The laying on of hands in this case did not 

imply the communication of any gift, but merely denoted 

representation, as in the case of the priests of old, when 

the offerer laid his hands upon the animal before it was slain, 

it represented that the animal or person upon whom the 

hands were laid was thenceforth recognized as the representative 

of the person who laid hands upon it or him. Thus 

the congregation at Antioch sent forth two from their midst 

as their representatives in the work. No doubt they also 

furnished them money for their travel, and after they had 

performed their journey Paul and Barnabas returned to the 

Church at Antioch and gave them a report of the work 

done as their representatives as well as the Lord's representatives. 

--See Acts 14:26,27; Also 15:3. 

Applying these things to the present time we would say: 
In Europe and America the custom of laying on hands to 
indicate representation is no longer followed, just as kissing 
among men is no longer a custom, although both customs 
are still in vogue in the far East. We suggest, therefore, 
that in our judgment the choosing and fasting and prayer 
are still the proper acts in connection with the congregational 
recognition of the elders— whether local or traveling; 
but that the laying on of hands, which could communicate 
no gift of the spirit, and which in the custom of our country 
no longer indicates representation, is no longer the proper 
thing. Indeed, we consider it the improper thing in view 
of the customs and practices in general, because it would 
be liable to be misunderstood, and to give the impression 
that the users hold the theory in common with many that 
an apostolic succession has been continued with power to 
authorize and commission and to imbue the subjects with 
supernatural abilities; for instance, as do the Roman Catholics, 
Greek Catholics, Episcopalians, Mormons and to a 
lesser extent nearly all other denominations.] 



R1957 : page 70 

PARABLE OF THE GREAT SUPPER. 

-APRIL 12. -Luke 14:15-24.- 

Golden Text— "Come, for all things are now ready."— Luke 14:17. 

THE feast of this parable is not the feast of Isa. 25:6. 

That is to be a feast for all people and points forward 

to the Millennial age and its blessings, when the Kingdom 

of God will be established for the blessing of all the families 

of the earth:— "And in this mountain [Kingdom] shall 

the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, 

a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, 

of wines on the lees well refined." That will be a feast of 

joy and gladness such as earth has never known, the blessed 



tidings of which were proclaimed by angel messengers at 
the birth of Christ, through whom the invitation and privilege 
of admittance was to be extended to all mankind. 
"Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be unto all people." 

But the feast of this parable is one to which only a 
select number are invited. It is a feast which was announced 
as ready at the beginning of the Gospel age. John the 
Baptist first announced it to the Jewish nation, saying, 
"Repent ye; for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 
(Matt. 3:2.) And after him came Jesus of Nazareth, saying, 
"The time is fulfilled [—"all things are now ready"] 
and the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye and believe 
the gospel [the good news of the great feast now ready]." 
(Mark 1:15.) It is noticeable also that while this feast was 
announced as ready in the beginning of the Gospel age, 
and that while the bountiful board has been spread for a 
select company all through this age, the feast for "all 
people" is foretold as a thing future— after the great time 
of trouble (Isa. 25:1-4), when great Babylon will have 
been destroyed. 

Both of these feasts consist of the good things pertaining 
to the Kingdom of God; but the difference is that the 
feast of this Gospel age pertains to the spiritual phase of 
the Kingdom, while that of the age to come will pertain to 
the earthly Kingdom. The feast now spread is for the elect 
Gospel Church, while that of the Millennium is for "all 
people"— all the willing and obedient. 

If it be asked, Of what good things does this feast 
consist? the reply is suggested by the Psalmist (Psa. 34:8), 
"O taste and see that the Lord is good." And Peter adds, 
"As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word 
so that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted that 
the Lord is gracious." (1 Pet. 2:3.) Those who have a 
mere curiosity interest to know what good things are found 
upon the table of the Lord can never know. Only those 
who come with sincere hearts to taste and see for themselves 
can ever know. Theirs is the "hidden manna." They 
have "meat to eat" that others "know not of;" for "the 
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him." Unto them 
"it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of 
heaven"— the mystery which was kept secret since the 
world began. -Rev. 2:17; John 4:32; Psa. 25:14; 
Matt. 13:11,35. 

It is their blessed privilege to know and realize their 
relationship to Christ as his prospective bride and joint-heir, 
and, as his betrothed, to hold sweet communion with him 
here. And they may feast continually upon the glorious 
hope of living and reigning with him, of seeing him as he 
is, and being made like him, and of inheriting with him 
the spiritual phase of the Kingdom of God, being partakers 
with him also of the divine, immortal nature. Words can 
never make manifest to uncircumcised hearts the blessedness 
of the privileges of the saints at "the table of the Lord," 
even amidst the trials and difficulties of the present life and 
its warfare with the powers of darkness. "Thou preparest 



a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; thou 
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over;" for 
the glorious fellowship with Christ hereafter has its joyful 
beginning even here, in the fellowship of his sufferings and 
his cross. 

R1957 : page 71 

Only those are invited to this table of the Lord— this 
feast of spiritual blessings, of communion and fellowship 
with God, of a knowledge of the deep things of God, the 
exceeding great and precious promises, and of joy in cooperating 
with him in his plan of salvation— who desire to 

R1958 : page 71 

forsake all other tables; for "Ye cannot be partakers of 
the Lord's table and of the table of devils." (1 Cor. 10:21). 
Only deeply appreciative ones are desired at this feast— 
those who will gladly forsake all to enjoy the favor. Our 
Lord Jesus expressed this fact forcibly when he said: "If 
any man come to me and hate not [love not less] his father, 
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and 
sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. 
And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, 
cannot be my disciple.. ..Whosoever he be of you that 
forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." 
-Luke 14:26,27,33. 

Those who do cheerfully and of their own free will 
comply with these conditions are privileged to come to the 
table of the Lord and to partake of his bounties. But the 
realization of these conditions is the explanation of the indifference 
and even opposition of many who hear the call. 
They are not willing to sacrifice the business prospects of 
the present life, the social ties, etc. They consider the 
cost, and prefer to be excused. Such will never taste of the 
supper. 

The parable shows three classes called: (1) Those originally 
invited; i.e., those of Israel who, having respect 
to their covenant, were striving to keep the Law, and thus to 
attain to all that God had promised (the "elder brother" class 
of the parable of the prodigal son). To this class belonged the 
Kingdom favors by divine covenant, if they had appreciated 
and accepted them; but the strait gate and narrow way repelled 
them and they excused themselves, and were excused. 
(2) The class of the streets and lanes of the city represents the 
publican and sinner class of Israel— the prodigal-son class, 
of which some came, and, accepting the terms, left all to 
follow the Lord. But that remnant was not sufficient— not 
the full number which God had foreknown and predestinated 
should be the elect number to constitute the 
Kingdom class of joint-heirs with Christ. Hence (3) the 
Lord sent forth the message to the Gentiles— outside the city, 
outside of Israel— in the highways and hedges urging* a 
sufficient number of them to come to complete the elect 
number. 



Truly so precious an invitation is worthy of our strivings 
and self-denials to attain it; and the truly appreciative will 
lay aside every weight and the sin that doth so easily beset, 
and run with patience the race for this great prize. But, 
thank God, we are no longer deluded into the belief that 
those who, blinded by Satan, reject this great invitation will 
be everlastingly tormented therefor.— Compare 2 Cor. 4:4 
withlsa. 29:18; 35:5; and Rev. 20:1-3. 

We are plainly told that the great majority who hear the 
call will reject, and that only a "little flock," a mere remnant, 
of both Jews and Gentiles will be the privileged sharers of 
this "supper." And "blessed" indeed will he be "who 
shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God"— who shall be 
counted worthy to share with Christ in the honors and 
glory of the spiritual Kingdom established. "To him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne." 
"Fear not, little flock [of overcoming ones], it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom." 



*"Compel" in verse 23 is better rendered constrain or urge as in 
the Diaglott. The Lord never compels the acceptance of his favors, 
but he does constrain by his love and grace and promises those who 
love righteousness and truth.— 2 Cor. 5:11,14,15. 



R1958 : page 71 

THE PRODIGAL RECEIVED. 
-APRIL 19.-Luke 15:11-32.- 



Golden Text— "Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence 
of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth."— Luke 15:10. 

THIS parable, as also the two preceding ones concerning 
the joy in finding the lost sheep and the 
precious bit of silver, was spoken by way of reproof to the 
murmuring of the Pharisees and scribes against our Lord's 
gracious attitude toward the publicans and sinners who in 
great multitudes assembled to hear him. Their complaint was, 
"This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them."— Vs. 2. 
The parable recognizes two classes in the Jewish nation, 
—one represented by the "elder son," who had carefully 
and wisely preserved their portion of the inheritance granted 
them, and the other a prodigal class who had wasted their 
portion in riotous living. The former class were the Pharisees, 
and all who had respect unto their inheritance in the 
Law Covenant, which was the portion granted to all Israel 
by the Heavenly Father; while the latter class were such as 
recklessly plunged into open sin, regardless of all their interests 
in the inheritance granted to them. But, as a matter 
of fact, while the one had preserved and the other had 
wasted his inheritance, neither class had rightly valued or 



comprehended all that was implied in their share of the inheritance 
of Israel, and while the one had grievously sinned, 
neither was the other without sin; and the sin of both 
hindered the operation of the Law Covenant for their blessing. 
And so that which was ordained to life was found to 
be unto death.— Rom. 7:10. 

Seeing the helpless condition of all, which neither of 
these classes realized, God, in his abounding mercy, sent to 
them the Messenger of a New Covenant, which would indeed 
be unto life to all who should comply with its righteous 
conditions. (Gal. 3:21,22; Acts 3:26.) Now while the 
"elder son" class was really in the most favorable position 
to receive the blessings of the new covenant in Christ, being 
schooled in the law and the prophets, all of which testified 
of Christ in type and prophecy, as a matter of fact, as 
Jesus said (Matt. 21:31,32), the publications and harlots 
were going into the Kingdom blessings and privileges before 
them. And why? Simply because this "elder son" class had 
cultivated a spirit of pride and boastfulness, feeling that 
they had done a very meritorious thing in simply retaining 
their respect for the law and refraining from riotous living, 
whereas in this they had done nothing more than their duty, 
and that they had done very imperfectly. They had actually 
become so vain and puffed up in their self-righteous conceit 
that they were thereby blinded to their need of any new 
covenant of life, and they became foolishly confident of receiving 
eternal life as a recompense for their imperfect, 
outward keeping of the law. 

The publicans and sinners, on the other hand, seeing 
nothing whatever in themselves to boast of, saw no hope for 
themselves in the provisions of God's perfect law, which 

R1958 : page 72 

they had openly and grossly violated; and being despised by 
and cast out from the more law-abiding "elder brother" 
class, they were ready to appreciate the condescending love 
and kindness of the Lord, the great Teacher and Prophet 
in Israel, and to profit by his instructions. The hearts of 
many of this "prodigal" class were won by the meek and 
loving zeal of the Lord for their recovery from the bondage 
of sin and their reestablishment in the favor of God. 

Had the hearts of the scribes and Pharisees been right, 
had they really been actuated by the spirit of the divine 
law, even though they could not fulfil its letter, they would 
have rejoiced in the return of the prodigal publicans and 
sinners from the paths of sin to the paths of righteousness. 
But, actuated by a spirit of proud self -righteousness, they 
scorned the returning prodigal and arrayed themselves in 
opposition to the Lord, the Heavenly Father's representative, 
who graciously welcomed them and taught them and 
companied with them and blessed them. This loving, helpful 
spirit is the spirit which the Lord would have all his 
people exercise toward even the most degraded of men who 
manifest any disposition to forsake sin and return to the 
right ways of the Lord. In our Father's name, he would 



have us meet them, even while they are yet a long way off, 
and encourage their return with assurances of a hearty welcome 
and a blessed feast. He would have us bring hither 
the best robe,— the robe of Christ's imputed righteousness, 
that, thus clothed, they may receive the unending divine 
favor of which the ring was a symbol, and the seal of the 
Father's love of which the kiss was a token. 

This is the spirit manifested also among all the holy 
angels:— "There is joy in the presence of the angels of 
God over one sinner that repenteth." 



R1958 : page 72 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



We are sure that many aching hearts will respond to 
the sentiments of the following letter. To such must come 
with the sweeter encouragement those words spoken to one 
of old— "She hath done what she could;" and that other 
assurance— "Ye are complete in him." 

Dear friends, we "labor fervently for you in prayers, 
that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of 
God," even unto death. 

Texas. 

MY DEAR BROTHER:-As I have written you before, 
my father and wife have been very sick this winter; hence 
I have been close at home. I have only two appointments 
each month. 

I think of Moses in Kadesh. When the people were 
complaining on account of no water, the Lord commanded 
Moses to take the rod and gather the assembly together. 
Moses surely gathered from this that he was to use the rod. 
When I was commanded to "go preach," I started, supposing 

R1959 : page 72 

that to preach was all, or the main business, that 
God (who was able) would remove all hindrances and that 
I would go into what I did (and do) delight. This was 
fifteen years ago. 

Alas! I have found that there are many oppositions, 
and that God did not promise to remove them but to assist 
me in overcoming them. 

Now I think of David's prayer (Psalm 19: 13) — 
"Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins." We 
may presume; but I now see it is best to "wait upon the 
Lord," and "be instant in and out of season." Oh, yes! 
"Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; for when he 
is tried [not before] he shall receive the crown of life which 
the Lord hath promised to them [who succeed in their undertaking 
and are never overcome by temptation? Ah, no! 
if that were the case, and such only were to be blessed, 



many, and I for one, would be left, but it is to them] that 
love him." Yes! Praise his holy name! I know I love 
him, and am filled with prayer and praise, and my desire is 
well expressed by the Psalmist— "Let the words of my 
mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer." 

Here is my great desire, and may I, yes, I will! approximate 
as nearly as possible to a life of harmony with, 
and perfect obedience to, him who said, "I do always the 
things that please him." 

So now, whether I may stand before the people to declare 
the glad tidings (in which I so much delight) or stand 
around the bed to witness the sufferings of those I love so 
dearly (which is so heart rending), I want to be submissive 
and "endure as seeing him who is invisible." 



The following letter from an aged Brother is refreshing 
and encouraging. He is spending his declining days in 
going about binding up the broken hearted and applying so 
far as permitted the eye salve of present truth to the blind 
eyes. May God bless him, and all like him who are giving 
their all in sacrifice. "How beautiful upon the mountains 
are the feet of Him," etc. 

Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER:— With me life's work still progresses; 
though feebly and slowly, as in age I approach an open 
grave— the spirit is willing but I find the flesh is weak. I 
have been laboring here at home with the intent of creating 
an interest in the truths of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
with some success; but nothing to what I had fondly desired. 

Religious teachers are making every effort, and using 
all conceivable means, to keep the minds and hearts of their 
membership and hearers intensely occupied with church 
work and measures, thereby preventing their consideration 
of any thing new (to them) in religious thought. 

I am content that the harvest should come in God's 
own good time. No doubt we shall be surprised some day 
to learn the untold value of the truths we are now spreading 
to the world at large during the great day of trouble 
upon which we are entering. I purpose now, the Lord 
willing, to spend some time from home this coming winter 
with the chart. Enclosed please find order for tracts. 

Yours in the bonds of truth and love divine, 
S. S. CONE. 



page 72 

Wisconsin. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed find my "Good 
Hopes" contribution for this year. I send it all now, hoping 
it will be a help in the Harvest work. 

Thank God for the help received from the TOWER! 
Several years ago it showed me how selfish I was; and by 



the grace of God I have been trying to overcome it. And 
now the last TOWER (Feb. 15) shows me that I have not 
been guarding my thoughts and words as I should. The 
Lord is my helper. Yours in love and service, 



page 73 

VOL. XVII. APRIL 15, 1896. (16 PAGES.) No. 8. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 74 

Views from the Tower 75 

The Easy Yoke 78 

Judas' Case a Hopeless One 79 

Our Children in the Time of Trouble 81 

The Contrast of Human Perfection 

and Human Depravity 82 

The Truth Defended in Scotland 84 

Bible Study: The Rich Man and 

Lazarus 85 

Bible Study: "Lord, Increase Our Faith" 86 

Encouraging Letters 87 

page 74 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1961 : page 74 

A MONTH LATER. 



SEVERAL friends write us that they missed the TOWER which announced 



the proper date for the Memorial Supper. Such are advised 

to celebrate a month later; viz., at the full of the following moon, 

April 26, after 6 P.M. --See Numbers 9:6-11. 

R1962:page74 

OUR PRAYERS ANSWERED. 



THE Post Office authorities have reinstated MILLENNIAL DAWN as 
"Second class mail" at pound rates of postage until May 19th, 
pending the action of Congress on Second Class Matter. 

The sisters as well as the brethren did well to address Congressmen 
and Senators as per the suggestion of our last issue. The government 
officials are representatives of all the people for whom they make laws: 
and this includes women as well as men. Indeed, in the terms of the 
law women are denominated "citizens." 



R1959 : page 75 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RECENTLY, during the session of the one hundred 

and ninth conference of the M.E. church of 

Philadelphia, the delegates to the Laymen's Electoral Conference 

gathered and discussed denominational interests. 

It is described as a "breezy" session in which equal representation 

with the preachers in the general conferences was 

warmly advocated. Of this session the Philadelphia Press 

says: 

"To-day's meeting of the laymen of Philadelphia was 
no exception to the rule. It not only adopted strong resolutions 
memorializing the general conference to grant equal 
representations, but also gave positive instructions to the 
lay delegates that were elected to attend the coming session 
of the conference to endeavor to secure constitutional 
changes to largely restrict the governing powers of the 
preachers and leave them shorn of much of the official authority 
they now possess. In fact, the preachers were 
'handled without gloves,' and the declarations for enlargement 
of the authority of laymen in the government of the 
church were voiced with unusual vigor and unanimity. As 
was expected, the conference declared in favor of equal lay 
representation for women." 
We clip the following from the Pittsburg Post:— 
"Baltimore, April 6.— Rev. Dr. John Lanahan sprung 
a sensation in the Methodist preacher's meeting this morning 
when he announced that in a few days he will publish 
in a permanent form the 'Era of Frauds' in the Methodist 
Book concern at New York, of which he was at one time 
an agent. He stated that the publication is made necessary 



by the repeated denials of the frauds by persons in 
official positions. 

"After the astonishment created by Dr. Lanahan's 
reiterated charges against the New York concern had somewhat 
subsided, there was almost a unanimous sentiment expressed 
among the members of the preacher's meeting that 
the general conference, to meet in Cleveland, O., next 
month, be compelled to give serious attention to the 
case. Dr. Lanahan will be a member of that body, and 
his standing in the church is such that his statements can 
no longer be ignored. 

"Dr. Lanahan will, he says, furnish proof that for 
more than 12 years every financial report made to the 
church by the New York management was false, from 
$20,000 to $100,000; that said reports were false as to the 
amount of cash in the Shoe and Leather bank, where the 
official account was kept, because the senior agent kept large 
sums of the concern's moneys in his personal account and 
used it to speculate in stocks in Wall street; that large 
sums of money sent to the concern for church benevolence 
were used in the same way." 

We understand that the above charges are acknowledged 
but that for over twenty years the business has been in competent 
and reliable hands. 

"At a recent meeting of Methodist Episcopal preachers 
of Pittsburg it was argued that $1,000 a year should be the 
minimum salary for them, and that it should be a lien on 
the church property. It was not the first time that such a 
suggestion had been made."— Pittsburg News. 

The editor of the News, probably a worldling, comments 
upon this item, and gives an account of the labors 
and salary of a Methodist minister in these parts from 
August, 1833 to August, 1834, taken from his diary. Total 
receipts, $79.44; total sermons, 90, the first being from the 
text, "I must work the works of him that sent me, while it 
is day; for the night cometh when no man can work." 

The difficulty seems to be that preaching is sought by 
too many for its honor, its leisure and its emoluments. 
Few to-day are preaching under the impulse which moved 
the Apostle Paul: that caused him to rejoice in the preaching 
of the gospel even when its only wages were slander 
and persecution, and he earned his living by tent-making. 
But the Apostle had a gospel to preach of which he was 
"not ashamed;" he had "good tidings of great joy which 
shall [yet] be unto all people," to proclaim. Thank God 

R1959 : page 76 

for the opening of our eyes and ears and mouths to this 
blessed message— the light of the goodness of God shining 
in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 



"The unanimity of the pulpit in New York in the desirability 
of peace has brought the clergy of all denominations 



together, and greatly accelerated the movement in 
favor of church union. To employ the picturesque phrases 
of Bishop Potter, the very church steeples appear to embrace 
each other. Although the movement for church union 
has all along appeared very chimerical to the conservative 
clergy, recent events seem to indicate a very near approach 
to it. Bishop Potter is the most sanguine in his expectations, 
and is working very hard to bring it about."— Exchange. 

The announcement is also made that there will be a 
meeting of prominent ministers in Pittsburg shortly, to consider 
what obstacles are in the way of a reunion of Protestants 
and Roman Catholics. 

We are inclined to think that Jesuits are behind these 
movements, all of which are of direct advantage to Romanism. 
Every one of good judgment, who is informed on 
the subject, knows that Rome will make no concessions; 
that all the surrender must be by Protestants. That Romanists 
are profiting by the situation is evident: missions for 
Protestants are being held in all large cities, at which questions 
relating to the differences between Romanism and 
Protestantism are entertained, and answered by priests of 
keen sagacity, who of course endeavor to represent Papacy 
as the mother of every good and desirable thing, and not 
the mother of harlots [systems] and all the abominations 
of Christendom. 

But after all it makes little difference to the predominating 
"tares" whether they are Protestant tares or Romanist 
tares. Perhaps indeed the radical blindness of their 
leaders may help some of the "wheat" class yet in Babylon 

R1960 : page 76 

to realize the situation, and thus hasten their separation, as 
those loyal to God. "Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues!"— Rev. 18:4. 



The "Church of England Almanack" reports eight 
associations amongst Church of England clergymen, favoring 
Ritualism and "restoration of visible communion" 
between the Church of England and the Church of Rome. 
One of these societies, the "English Church Union," has 
a membership of seven bishops and 4,255 ministers. 



L'Independence Beige says that in time of peace Russia 
has a standing army of 858,000 men; next comes Germany 
with 580,000 and then France with 512,000 men. In case 
of war Russia and France could put in the field 9,700,000 
men, against the 7,700,000 soldiers of the three countries 
forming the triple alliance— Germany, Austria and Italy. 
In time of peace the maintenance of the standing armies 
of the above powers costs $1,000,000,000 annually. 



What a record! What a satire on the terms "Christian 
nations" and "Christendom!" How evidently Satan is 
still the "prince" of "this present evil world!" No 
wonder that the whole creation groans and travails in pain, 
waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God. No 
wonder that the sons also groan and pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come! Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

It will not be long until these millions are enlightened 
to the extent that they will refuse to serve the ambitions of 
lords, priestcraft and superstition, who rule them by the 
grace of Satan. But they will not get free until they realize 
that the great taskmaster is Sin who rules them through 
their depraved dispositions, their selfish and degrading 
appetites. Next they must learn of and accept the great 
Savior who has already redeemed them, and who waits to 
make them free indeed. 



It appears that in modern rapid-firing guns the size of 
the bullets has been reduced to facilitate transportation, etc.; 
but a difficulty has been encountered: the smaller bullet 
does not sufficiently mangle the poor soldiers who are struck 
by them. Fewer lives are lost, and the wounded recover 
more rapidly, and are soon ready to be shot at again. 
This it seems is to be rectified, according to the following, 
from the New York Sun:— 

"A perforated bullet for which great destructive power 
is claimed has just been finished by an inventor at Anderson, 
Ind. The bullet has a hole, one-eight of an inch in 
diameter bored from the front end almost through its entire 
length. This air chamber, the inventor says, gathers air 
under strong pressure, caused by the rapid flight of the bullet, 
and the air expanding, when the bullet finds its mark, causes 
an explosion of great destructive force. Inch boards, which 
would be pierced by an ordinary solid bullet of the same 
calibre, are splintered and torn with great violence by the 
perforated bullet. Cans filled with water and sealed were 
simply pierced by an ordinary bullet, but were blown into 
fragments when struck by the new projectile. The usual 
effect, witnesses say, is for the bullet to tear in the object 
hit a hole from seven to ten times the size of the bullet." 

Alas! "man's inhumanity to man" seems to know no 
limit. When the great Prince of Peace shall have inaugurated 
his Kingdom and shall have opened the now blinded 
eyes of the world, with what feelings of revulsion and horror 
will men look back upon the present "reign" of Sin and 
Death! What feelings of sympathy and shame for the terrible 
degradation of the race should be awakened in every 
heart in which the love of Christ is shed abroad. True 
views, God's view, the view of the angels and the view of 
the saints on such matters should be impressed upon those 
with whom we come in contact, and especially upon our 
children. Let them know the truth— that cruelty is a 
shame, a disgrace, as well as a sin, even when practised on 
the lower creatures, but especially toward fellow beings 



made in God's image. 



There are two great levers, Love and Selfishness. The 
former is the right, the divine power. It, with justice, 
moves the sceptre of heaven, and is shortly to be the power 
that will rule the world. It should therefore be recognized 

R1960 : page 77 

and cultivated in the hearts and lives, the thoughts and 
words and deeds of all who have been translated out of the 
kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

Selfishness, greed, is the Sin-power now in control of 
the world through depravity. It has led and is still leading 
to every evil thing. The Apostle James' comment (James 4:2) 
is endorsed by a New York Tribune editorial as 
follows:— 

"Nations and individuals, the world over, as almost 
never before, are hastening to become rich. They are doing 
this in many ways, but most notably by the simple process 
of digging precious metals from the earth. Manufactures, 
trade, commerce, all are too slow. 

"Almost every war or threat of war to-day may be 
directly traced to this greed for gold and silver, just as 
could the savage freebooting of three hundred years ago. 
The troubles in the Transvaal are due to the gold fever on 
the Rand. That it is that makes Great Britain so resolute 
to maintain her suzerainty over the Republic, and that 
makes Germany so desirous of extending her own influence 
over it. The same cause led to the occupation of Mashonaland 
and to the Matabele war. It was not because Lobengula 
was a monster of savagery that he was deposed: no, 
but because his kingdom was a part of ancient Ophir. 
Prempeh of Coomassie made human sacrifices, it is true; 
but his kingdom was known to contain much gold, and 
hence the Ashantee war. 

"It was in expectation of finding gold in Madagascar 
that the French decreed the conquest of that island. For 
the same cause Japan wrested Formosa from China, and 
Brazil and France are now involved in a boundary dispute. 
Reports of mines of gold and gems led England to the 
partitioning of Siam, and are now making Russia and Japan 
confront each other over Corea. It is the mineral wealth 
of the Essequibo and Orinoco basins that makes the 
Venezuela boundary question most acute and most difficult 
to settle. It is the gold mines of the Yukon and of the 
Coast Range that have brought the Alaska boundary question 
to its present state, and prompted the vast extension 
of Canadian claims. And the gold finds, or expected finds, 
of British Columbia, of Australia and of Colorado and 
Washington are stirring three great English-speaking nations 
to the heart. " 



In India there are no fewer than 65 Protestant missionary 
societies; viz., 16 Presbyterian, with 149 laborers; 
13 Baptist, with 129; 9 Church of England, with 
203; 7 Lutherans, with 125; 4 Methodist, with 110; 2 
Congregationalist, with 76; 1 Unitas Fratrum and 1 
Quaker, with 16; 7 Independent, 5 Women's associations. 
In addition to 857 ordained missionaries there are 711 ordained 
European lay helpers, 114 European and semi-European 
lady assistants, teachers, etc., and 3,491 native 
lay preachers. The number of communicants is 182,722, 
an increase of 70,000 in the last decade. 

Is it strange that when viewing all the inconsistencies 
of these varying sects, a Hindoo Brahmin should say: 
"You Christians are not as good as your Book! If you 
were as good as your Book, you would convert India to 
Christ in five years?"— The Armory. 



"Probably one of the strangest facts in the history 
of language," says a recent writer, "is the resurrection 
of the Hebrew to life and activity as the 
language of a people and country, after its death, which 
occurred 2,250 years ago. The Jews who returned from 
the exile were a small people, and they were compelled to 
learn and employ the Aramaic, the language of the country, 
so that the Hebrew was disused, excepting by the priests, 
as the Latin now is by the Catholics. But the language 
was preserved in the Old Testament Scriptures, and it was 
taught that the Scriptures might be understood, and this 
has been continued to the present day. Now the Jews are 
returning to Palestine from Russia, Poland, Germany, Italy, 
Spain and other countries, and cannot understand each 
other in these divers languages, but they all understand 
the Hebrew of the Old Testament, and employ it, so that 
Hebrew is again the language of the common people, and is 
heard in the marts of trade and in common use. The Hebrews 
of Palestine employ it exclusively in their families, 
so that it has become again the mother-tongue. In Jerusalem 
it died, and in the same city after so many centuries 
it has come to life again. As was to be expected, the pronunciation 
varies, but this is corrected in accordance with 
the Arabic and other Semitic dialects. There is something 
marvelous in this restoration of, not only the people, but 
the language, which they had practically lost five hundred 
years before their dispersion."— The Armory. 



Rev. A. T. Pierson, one of the speakers at the Prophetic 
Conference held in Allegheny in December last, 
was immersed on Feb. 1, by Rev. J. A. Spurgeon, a Baptist 
minister in England. According to Baptist usage (there is 
no Baptist law on any subject; for Baptists deny being a 
denominational organization) his action made Mr. Pierson 



a member of the Baptist church. But he was already a 
member of the Presbyterian denomination, and a member 
of the Philadelphia Presbytery to which he addressed a 

R1961 : page 77 

letter, in which, after stating the fact of his immersion, 
he said:— 

"This act was not meant by me as in any sense a change 
of denomination, but a simple act of obedience to what 
seems to me a clear teaching of the New Testament. For 
some years the basis of infant baptism has seemed to me 
too slender, scripturally, and its perversion too common 
and too dangerous, practically, to justify my longer adherence 
to the practice. And the obvious example of believers' 
baptism seems to be too conspicuous in the New Testament 
to leave in my mind a reasonable question that it was my 
privilege thus to confess Christ, and typically submit myself 
to burial with him." 

Well done! Obedience to conscience is always a safe 
course. True, we regret the clinging to denominationalism, 
shown in the preference manifested for the tighter bondage 
of Presbyterianism, rather than the looser bondage of Baptist 
Associations; but Dr. P. is progressing, not retrograding. 
By and by, let us hope, he will be free indeed, 
from all human control. Let us hope, too, that he may 
yet come to see the true import of immersion, which few 
even of our Baptist friends see, of which the water immersion 
is only the outward symbol. "Then shall we know, 
if we follow on to know the Lord." 

The Philadelphia Presbytery was greatly agitated upon 
receipt of this letter. The fact that Dr. Pierson believed 
in the second coming of Christ, and took part in the Prophetic 

R1961 : page 78 

Conference, had already marked him as a semi-heretic, 

even though he avoided the despised Nazarenes of 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN, and avoided 

teaching that our Lord's coming is for "the restitution of 

all things" (Acts 3:20,21)— the only "good tidings of 

great joy, which shall be unto ALL PEOPLE." 

The Presbytery had hoped that Dr. P. would take himself 
away into some other denomination, and at his request 
had granted him a Letter of Recommendation to the Congregationalists; 
for they did not like to "cast him out" 
simply because he believed the Lord's words, "I will come 
again and receive you unto myself," a truth so fully corroborated 
by all the Apostolic writings. To have done so 
would have advertised the second coming, and some of the 
common people might have been awakened to the Scriptural 
prominence of this teaching. 

But now, in being immersed, and in claiming that 
neither he nor others baptized in infancy were "believers," 
Dr. Pierson was casting discredit upon them all, implying 
that none of them had been baptized according to the 



Scriptures. If belief in the Second Coming was bad, this 

was worse; now he was a heretic, sure enough. The Presbytery 

promptly withdrew its Letter of Commendation to 

the Congregationalists, and after some dispute as to whether 

to "drop" him from membership, etc., or what to do, it 

was decided to request his withdrawal. 

In the discussion of the subject one of the ministers, 
Dr. Hoyt, said,— "We [Presbyterians, respecting infant 
baptism] rest on the Abrahamic covenant confirmed in 
Christ. To deny that fundamental principle in the Presbyterian 
Church, and then to hold a position in its ministry 
is utterly inconsistent. We are in a dilemma, and don't 
know how to get out of this labyrinth in which Dr. Pierson 
has entangled us." 

As with the doctrine of election, our Presbyterian 
friends have a mixture of truth with error, so on this subject 
of the justified state of the children of believers. True, 
the children of believers are subjects of divine grace until 
they come to years of personal responsibility (1 Cor. 7:14); 
but infant sprinkling has nothing whatever to do with 
this favor. Our Presbyterian friends have assumed, but without 
the slightest warrant, that baptism now takes the place 
of circumcision appointed for the seed of Abraham; and 
that, as infants were circumcised, so infants therefore should 
be baptized, even though not believers. But baptism and 
circumcision do not represent the same thing at all: 
if they do represent the same grace, only males should be 
baptized; for only males were circumcised. 

We would like to see the truth on the subject of baptism 
very thoroughly and widely proclaimed. It would be 
a great blessing to all true Christians, not excepting 
"Baptists" and "Disciples." 



R1961 : page 78 

THE EASY YOKE. 



"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will 

give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek 

and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."— Matt. 1 1:28-30. 

THE yoke is a symbol of servitude and subjection, and 
all in the world are under yokes of some kind— political 
yokes, social yokes, financial or business yokes, yokes of 
sin, of selfishness, of pride, etc., etc. The man who is under 
the political yoke finds it a very hard one. He is busy 
days and nights planning and scheming and working for 
office, studying all the arts of worldly policy to gain the 
friendship of voters, spending time, money and thought 
and concentrating every energy upon the risky business of 
seeking office, which, if he gain it, brings only a multitude 



of cares, and exposes him to a host of enemies of the opposing 
party who are often ready to blacken his character 
at the slightest provocation. 

Those under the financial or business yokes are similarly 
oppressed. They labor long and hard; they scheme and 
plan and contrive and fret and worry to be rich, and in so 
doing they fall into a snare which robs them of the true 
happiness which riches cannot bring. 

Those under the social yokes labor hard and sacrifice 
much in meeting the demands of society upon them. Few 
in the humbler walks of life know how galling is this yoke 
upon the rich, and particularly to those who are vieing 
with others in better circumstances. Women often 
wear themselves out in this unsatisfying service, while husbands 
and fathers are driven to despair and ruin trying to 
keep up with the financial drain. The yokes of pride, selfishness 
and sin of every kind are indeed hard yokes, and their 
burdens are heavy. To shake off all yokes and free ourselves 
from all burdens is impossible in this evil day. The 
prince of this world, Satan, has already imposed upon all 
the yoke of sin. And there is none able to deliver us from 
this yoke and its binding fetters but Christ, who, in his 
own good time and way, will do it for all who come unto 
him by faith and repentance. 

While it is the purpose of Christ ultimately to set all 
such free from every yoke and to release them from every 
burden, he sees that they are not able yet to exercise and 
enjoy the glorious liberty of sons of God; and so by way 
of discipline and training, he purposes to bring them to that 
condition. It is therefore necessary that those who would be 
delivered from the galling yokes of sin and of the present general 
order of things should submit themselves fully to Christ 
—that they take his yoke upon them. And he invites all who 
have come to feel and realize the discomfort of other yokes 
and the weight of other burdens, to come unto him for 
rest and release. 

R1961 : page 79 

In tender sympathy for all the oppressed and sorrowing 
he says, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you," 
etc. Thousands have responded to the kind invitation, 
and they testify in no uncertain terms to the ease of Christ's 
yoke and the blessedness of his promised rest. And yet 
the rest is not of general temporal prosperity and freedom 
from care and toil and from all restraint. 

Few would say in viewing the Apostle Paul's experience 
that the yoke of Christ on his shoulders was an easy 
yoke, or that the burden of Christ's work which he bore 
was a light one. But evidently he thought so, for he 
counted it an inestimable privilege to endure hardness as 
a good soldier for Christ's sake. He joyfully suffered the 
loss of all things and counted them but dross, that he 
might win Christ and be found in him. He rejoiced to be 
made a partaker of his sufferings that he might also be 



made a partaker with him of his glory, and share with him 
in the blessed work of his Kingdom. 

Blessed work! Paul gloried in the prospect of such 
a future mission, and was in haste to manifest his readiness 
of mind for it, by zealously and most energetically devoting 
his life here to the Lord's service along the lines indicated 
in the divine plan. He took Christ's yoke upon 
him: he did not attempt to guide himself, but humbly 
placed himself under subjection to Christ, and obediently 
followed his guidance whithersoever it led him— whether 
to prison and the stocks, to an ignominious public beating 
or stoning that left him almost dead, to shipwreck, to perils 
on land and sea, among heathen enemies or false brethren, 
to wearing labor, and painful toil, or what not? And yet 
Paul counted this burden of Christ a light one, and his 
yoke an easy yoke. He spoke of his trials as light afflictions, 
and said he rejoiced in tribulations; and with lacerated 
backs and feet fast in the stocks in the depths of a 
miserable dungeon Paul and Silas rejoiced and sang praises 
to God. 

Stephen had the same rest and joy even while his 
enemies were stoning him to death; and thousands more 
of God's saints can testify to the same thing— in the midst 
of poverty, sickness, affliction, temptation, and enemies 
on every hand, and even in the flames of violent persecution. 
Whence comes it? or how are rest and even joy 
compatible with such conditions? The answer is: it is a 
rest of mind— "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee." None can know the blessedness 
of this rest until they have experienced it. And 
none can realize its great value until they have been put to 
the tests of affliction. 

R1962:page79 

The Lord gives the key to this rest in the words— 
"and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart." 
Truly, in a meek and quiet spirit is the secret of rest. To 
be meek is to cultivate the graces of patience; of loving 
submission to the will of God; of abiding confidence in 
his love and care and in the wisdom of his guiding counsel 
and overruling providences; and to perseveringly pursue 
this course through evil and through good report, or 
through favorable or unfavorable circumstances. 

Let the beloved children of God seek more and more 
to copy Christ's meek and quiet spirit, accepting the providences 
of God and obeying his precepts and leading as he 
did, armed with the strength which he alone can supply, 
and will, to all those who take his yoke upon them, and 
learn of him. 



R1962:page79 

JUDAS' CASE A HOPELESS ONE. 



WE have heretofore pointed out that during this 
present age (the Gospel age, the spirit dispensation) 
the world of mankind is not liable to the Second 
death. (1) Because this age is for the Church's trial and 
is not the period of the world's judgment or trial. (2) Because 
now the world has not that degree of enlightenment 
which would involve the full, extreme penalty of God's 
law,— the Second death. (3) Because the inspired Apostle 
declares that now Satan is exerting a blinding and deceiving 
influence upon all except true believers (2 Cor. 4:4; 
Rev. 20:3), so that "the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto 
him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

These conclusions from the Scriptures in general are 
abundantly confirmed by the statements of Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31, in which the Apostle warns the Church 
that wilful sin or apostasy, on the part of those who have 
enjoyed the privileges of consecrated believers (viz., those 
who "have tasted of the good word of God, and the powers 
of the age to come, and who have been made partakers of the 
holy spirit"), leaves the case of such hopeless. It will be 
found impossible to renew such, because there remaineth no 
longer any part for them in the sacrifice for sin— they have 
had and have misused their share in the great "ransom 
for all." 

We have called attention to the fact that the world in 
general, even in civilized lands, has had no opportunity to 
sin after the example of wilful apostasy, described by the 
Apostle. And it is well to note that this sin unto death 
on the part of believers is not at all the same as the missteps 
and stumblings which may occur in the path of any 
through weakness of the flesh (Gal. 2:11-14), and which 
are among the sins which may be repented of, reformed 
from, and forgiven.— 1 John 2:1; 1 John 5:16. 

In view of the above, and in view of our further claim 
that the spirit dispensation began at Pentecost when our 
Lord was glorified (John 7:39), some have wondered that 

R1962 : page 80 

we teach that Judas' case is a hopeless one, since his sin 
and death were both before Pentecost. We are asked to 
explain this seeming inconsistency. 

We answer:— The period of the Lord's presence at 
the first advent,— from his baptism to his ascension— differed 
from the period after Pentecost, throughout this age 
in which believers walk wholly by faith and not by sight, 
even as the Millennial age will differ from the Gospel age. 

In the Millennium, knowledge and responsibility will 
no longer be confined to the spirit-begotten; for it is written, 
"The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord 
as the waters cover the sea [knowledge ocean-deep]." "All 



shall know me [the Lord] from the least unto the greatest." 

(Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34.) It will no longer be the rule 

that the consecrated must "walk by faith and not by sight;" 

for the consecrated of that time, while no doubt still having 

room for faith, will, to a very considerable degree, 

walk by sight. It will no longer be true that Satan, the 

god of this world, will blind and deceive all except believers, 

for Satan will be bound and can deceive the world 

no longer; and "this world" [age] shall then have given 

place to "the world [age] to come wherein dwelleth righteousness;" 

and all the blind eyes shall be opened.— 

Isa. 35:5. 

When knowledge is thus general, the possibility of sinning 
wilfully against great light will become general. Whosoever 
will may accept the divine favor and use the divine 
aids, and attain to perfection and life everlasting; and 
whosoever will may intelligently reject God's favor in 
Christ, and die the second death, the everlasting death, 
the hopeless death. 

Now let us return to the case of Judas, and consider 
the conditions which obtained in his time of trial and 
failure, in the period of the Lord's presence, in the Jewish 
harvest. The circumstances of that time differed from those 
of the present age and also from those of the Millennial 
age in the conditions and hence the responsibilities differed 
also. Our Lord was present, and marvellous works 
were performed, illustrative of "the powers of the world 
[age] to come." The truth was presented to the people in 
such a manner that the Lord declared that its rejection would 
bring "stripes" and "woes" upon those who, after hearing, 
loved darkness rather than light. He declared that some of 
those, because of the rejection of the truth, would be counted 
worthy of "many stripes;" and that it would therefore be 
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of 
Judgment than for those. Our Lord's declaration was, If 
I had not done among them the works which none other 
man did, they had not had sin.— John 15:22,24. 

And if the people had such a responsibility because of 
what they heard and saw, how much greater was the responsibility 
of the twelve chosen apostles? They had professed 
much, saying, "We have left all to follow thee." 
They were always with him; and not only beheld many of 
his mighty works, of which the multitudes in various places 
saw but few; but more: he communicated to them, severally, 
a measure of his spirit and power, and sent them out to 
proclaim him and his Kingdom, and to work miracles— to 
heal the sick and cast out devils in his name. 

The apostles received also a special insight into the 
divine plan, an enlightenment not granted to the people; 
the equivalent to much that is now granted to the spirit-begotten 
ones of this age. The Lord addressed the multitudes 
in parables and dark sayings, but these he interpreted 
to the Apostles, saying, "Unto you it is given to know the 
mystery of the Kingdom of God; but to them that are 
without [outside the twelve and other special disciples], 
all these things are done in parables." Again he said to 



them: "Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, 
for they hear; for verily I say unto you that many prophets 
and righteous men have desired to see those things which 
ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things 
which ye hear have not heard them."— Matt. 13:11; 
Mark 4:11. 

If, then, the people who saw a few of our Lord's mighty 
works, and heard a few of his words of life under parabolic 
cover, were declared "worthy of stripes" for not receiving 
the light, what shall we say of the responsibility of the 
twelve, who not only saw much more, but by his power in 
them performed his miracles; who not only heard the parabolic 
words of life, but who had them expounded to them 
by the great Teacher? (Matt. 13:36-43; Mark 4:10-13.) 
And what punishment less than death— hopeless extinction 
—shall we suppose was merited by the one of these, who, 
after all this, according to his own confession, "betrayed 
innocent blood?" We judge that if Pilate and Herod and 
the Roman soldiers had some responsibility for Christ's 
death, the multitude which clamored, Crucify him! His 
blood be upon us and on our children! had much more 
responsibility; and that the better educated, envious Pharisees 
and Priests who incited the illiterate common people 
had yet a greater responsibility (Matt. 23:15-33); and that 
Judas, his betrayer, was the chief, the real crucifier, because 
of his knowledge and wilfulness. Upon him alone, of all who 
had to do with his death, our Lord placed the responsibility, 
the full guilt, when he said: "The Son of Man goeth 
[to death] as it is written of him [prophetically]; but woe 
unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed. It 
had been good for that man if he had not been born." 
(Matt. 26:24.) Should Judas be granted eternal life under 
any circumstances or after any experience, his birth 
could not be considered a disadvantage to himself.— See 
also Psa. 109:6-8; John 17:12; 6:70,71. 

So, likewise, it is those, and those only, who (with good 
knowledge of God's grace in Christ) sin wilfully and count 
the precious blood of the covenant, wherewith they were 
sanctified [set apart], a common thing, who "crucify 
Christ afresh and put him to an open shame." And, like 
Judas, they often accompany this denial of his ransom-sacrifice 
with the words, "Hail, Master!" and a deceitful 

R1962:page81 

kiss. All such should be an abhorrence to all who possess 
to any degree the true, noble, Christ-like spirit. 

The question asked by some is,— Did not God predestinate 
that Judas should betray our Lord? Was he not 
thus forced to do his evil deed "that the Scriptures might 
be fulfilled?" 

We answer, No; "God tempteth no man;" He forces 
no man to do evil. To so suppose would be to charge the 
Almighty with being the real sinner and using men as his 
tools. On the contrary, "All his work is perfect." "God 
is not the author of confusion."— See TOWER March 1, '95. 



We cannot doubt that there are other men who would 
have performed Judas' part, as well as others who would, 
under similar conditions, have done as others of the Apostles 
did. God's foreknowledge of Judas' course and his 
Scriptural forestatement of it no more caused it to be so 
than the forestatement of the changes of the moon's phases 
by Almanac makers causes those changes. 



R1963 : page 81 

OUR CHILDREN IN THE TIME OF TROUBLE. 



THE following letter doubtless voices the sentiments 
of many. 

DEAR SIR:— I have a baby daughter now two years 
old. In the year 1910 she will be only sixteen years old. 
The query is, What is to become of her during the period 
of anarchy? She probably represents a class. Numbers 
of God's people must have small children growing up, and 
the same query must present itself to a great many. Certainly 
it would show anything but a commendable spirit if 
any parent could rejoice in the hope of becoming a member 
of the Bride of Christ and himself being taken away 
from the trouble "coming upon the whole world," and not 
think of the fate of his children who would be left behind. 
Now I find such promises as Psa. 37:25,26; 102:28 and 
Prov. 11:21; but these do not exclude the use of means. 
If the children of the righteous are delivered in the "time 
of trouble," it seems to me it will be by the use of means 
provided for their deliverance; and who should be considering 
the means to be used, if not their parents and 
guardians? 

Now my idea is that a state of anarchy will produce a 
complete destruction (1) of commerce— no railroads will 
be in operation, no post office service, no telegraph lines 
open; (2) of business— no manufactories will be running, 
no trade carried on, except in a primitive way and confined 
to narrow limits; (3) of government— there will be no 
protection to individuals except what their own strength 
affords. The country will be filled with bands of marauders, 
and the peaceful and moral among the people will be obliged 
to unite in little bands for defence and protection. For 
food and clothing they will be obliged to depend on what 
they can themselves produce and defend from marauders. 

Cities and towns will be burned or fall into ruin from 
neglect, bridges, etc., be destroyed, the machinery, etc., 
of our manufacturing establishments be destroyed or rendered 
useless by neglect and decay, so that after the period 
of anarchy is over the world will be obliged to begin over 
again. 

I would like you to consider this question of the state 
of the country; for perhaps it will not be so bad as I have 



described, at least in the United States and England. These 
two countries have been especially favored during the Gospel 
age, and perhaps they may still be favored during the 
time of trouble. Their higher degree of intelligence, their 
greater love of order and their greater knowledge of the 
truth, may enable them to conform sooner to the new order 
of things and not bring so severe punishment upon them 
as upon the rest of the world. Furthermore, may it not 
be that the prophecies more particularly refer to the Roman 
Empire; and the United States certainly, and England 
probably, were not parts of the Roman Empire. 

When we come to consider who will be the most favorably 
situated for escaping the perils of that time, it is evident 
that the towns and cities will suffer most. The ones who 
will be disturbed the least will be those who live in places 
remote from towns and cities and the main routes of travel, 
who live in a primitive manner, supplying their wants principally 
by their own labor from the land around them, 
who are not dependent upon commerce for their supplies, 
and whose remoteness from towns and routes of travel will 
keep them secluded from bands of marauders. Such places 
are mostly found in mountainous regions, and mountainous 
places are most easily guarded and defended from attack. 
This reminds us that Christ warned the Christians of Judea 
to "flee to the mountains" when they saw the near approach 
of the Jewish "time of trouble"— which was typical 
of the coming trouble. May it not be that he intended us 
to profit by that warning and provide places of refuge for 
those of our families and friends who will be here when the 
anarchy begins? 

[IN REPLY:— The above conception of the coming 
trouble is, we believe, a very moderate one. The account 
of the trouble upon Jerusalem at its fall is much more 
thrillingly awful; so also is the record of the reign of terror 
in France a century ago. Both of these great events are 
mentioned in Scripture as illustrations of the coming general 
trouble; which, however, it is distinctly declared, will be 
worse than either of these;— "a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation." 

While the Roman empire occupies an important place 
in the prophetic history of the past eighteen centuries, yet 
we are to remember that the great troubles marking "the 
day of the Lord" are shifted to symbolic Babylon— confused 
nominal Christendom— which certainly includes 
Great Britain and the United States. Indeed, as the 
severest troubles came at the first advent upon those who 
had seen the great Light and rejected Him, so we may well 
fear that the great privileges and blessings enjoyed by the 
English speaking peoples have brought great responsibilities 
and will bring severe tribulations. 

The tendency of all as the storm approaches will be 
to seek cover, protection, under the great mountains (kingdoms) 
and in the rocks of society (beneficial orders) 
(Rev. 6:15-17); and many will flee from the country to 
the cities. The "overcomers" who will "escape all these 
things coming upon the world" (Luke 21:36) will indeed 



flee to the mountain, the Kingdom of the Lord, and be 

R1963 : page 82 

safe, but none others can attain to it. "Who shall ascend 
into the mountain of the Lord? who shall stand in his 
holy place? He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart," 
etc.-Psa. 24:3-6. 

But, seeing that all the efforts of men to hide themselves 
"from the wrath of the Lamb" when the great day of his wrath 
shall have come will be in vain, the saints would best make 
no such effort to hide their children, knowing that it would 
be folly. The trouble comes to overthrow sin and every 
false system and thing; and the lessons it brings will prove 
beneficial to mankind in general, breaking their idols and 
purging their hearts. If our children and friends need the 
purging, we should not wish to have them escape it. If 
they do not need it, we may rest assured that the Lord will 
permit the glorified members of his body, his Church, to 
care for their children and friends during that trouble and 
to succor them from all that would not be to their benefit. 
What more could we ask than that we should be their 
ministering guardians, far more able to help them than if 
with them in the flesh? 

The best provision which parents can make for their 
children is to give them, by precept and example, faithful 
instruction in righteousness. Remember that "the fear 
[reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Begin 
therefore to instruct them in the plan of salvation, the 
plan of the ages. As they come to a true appreciation of 
God's wisdom, justice and love, it will give them broader 
and truer views of justice and love, in respect to their own 
conduct and toward their fellow creatures. Teach them 
meekness and humility, and the folly of pride and arrogance. 
Teach them generosity of thought, and how to be 
happy with little, reminding them frequently that godliness 
with contentment is true riches. Remind them of the 
Lord's words, "seek meekness, seek righteousness. It 
may be that ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger." 
(Zeph. 2:3.) The rich in this world's uncertain riches, 
and the proud, whether poor or rich, and all that do 
wickedly, will be special sufferers.— Compare Mai. 4:1; 
James 5:1-6. 

During the time of trouble, for the first time in the 
world's history, there will be a premium on meekness, patience, 
love, gentleness, goodness. (However, before that 
stage of the trouble comes, before Babylon falls, there will 
be a different trouble upon a "great company" of those 
not overcomers, who will be severely buffeted by Babylon 
which for a time will have an increase of power. The foregoing 
remarks do not apply to this class which will come 
through great tribulation. Since the service of the poor 
and afflicted in mind and body is a great privilege, we 
should endeavor so to train our children that, when the 
trouble comes, they will be both able and willing to counsel 
others to righteousness and the avoidance of carnal warfare, 



rather than selfishly think merely of their own safety. 
Children should be encouraged to such stability of character, 
in combination with faith in God, that they will, under 
any stress, act up to a high conception of nobility.) 



R1963 : page 82 

THE CONTRAST OF HUMAN PERFECTION AND HUMAN DEPRAVITY. 



"And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots, that it 
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, 'They parted my 
garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.' 
And sitting down they watched him there."— Matt. 27:35,36. 

HERE, in marked contrast, are seen the glory of 

moral perfection and the depth of human depravity. 

Here was the most sublime heroism, the most 

perfect self-abnegation, the most exalted benevolence, and 

the most devoted loyalty, in contrast with the vilest hypocrisy, 

the most cold-blooded hate, and the most abject 

cowardice. The meanest, vilest selfishness, pride and conceit 

delivered to ignominy and death the fairest flower of 

virtue that ever bloomed on earth, and wicked hands and 

fiendish hearts executed the dark designs of envy and hate, 

taking a morbid pleasure in the dying agonies of the Son 

of God, while he, as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, 

opened not his mouth in self-defence, but meekly submitted 

to the terrible ordeal of suffering and death for the 

world of sinners, none of whom could then appreciate and 

understand his motives or his work. Truly, the contrast 

R1964 : page 82 

of such virtue, in comparison with such depravity, encircles 
the Cross of Christ with a halo of ineffable glory, 
the broken rays of which, falling upon us, express to us all 
there is of moral excellence and worth. 

In the apprehension, arraignment and crucifixion of 
Christ three classes of criminals come to view. First, there 
were those who, for envy, delivered him to death. They 
were the proud, boastful, self-righteous hypocrites, who, 
realizing their own inferiority, and aware of their own unfitness 
to be the leaders and saviors of the people, yet so 
anxiously craved the honors and praises of men and the 
emoluments of office that they could not brook the appearance 
of a rival of superior talents and ability. These 
hated the Lord without a cause, save that which originated 
in their own depravity. These, the mighty men of the 
Jewish nation, the rulers and religious teachers, the educated 
men of the nation, the expounders of the law of God, 
and the interpreters of the prophets,— these wickedly took 
counsel together against the Lord and against his Anointed; 



and in their counsels among themselves they acknowledged 
the superiority of the victim of their hate and expressed 
the real animus of it— their envy of his rising fame and 
influence among the people, which tended to their own 
speedy displacement. 

Second, there were those cringing, hireling menials, 
too basely selfish to spurn a bribe, or to appreciate a principle, 

R1964 : page 83 

and who are ever willing to sacrifice principle for a 
trifle of present advantage or gratification. Of this class 
was Judas, who sold the Lord for thirty pieces of silver, 
and also all of that infuriated mob which, incited by the 
priests, cried "Away with him ! Crucify him ! We have 
no king but Caesar! His blood be upon us and upon our 
children!" Judas loved the money, and these loved the 
approval of the priests and rulers, and wanted to be on the 
popular side. How mean the bribe, how base the crime! 

Third, there were those cold-blooded, cruel servants 
of the Roman state who, presuming to have no responsibility 
in the matter, cared nothing for the honor of justice 
or the vindication of right. It was their business to execute 
the mandates of their superiors, and they must do so 
at their own peril. Looking to their own interests, therefore, 
it was their business to drive the nails through the 
quivering flesh and to plant the thorny crown upon the 
victim's head. It was an awful business, but they were 
schooled to it, so that the groans of anguish failed to reach 
their hearts. So, regarding the horrid transaction in the 
light of business, they thought only of their booty, and, 
with frigid indifference, sat down and watched the agony 
of the Lord, while they cast lots upon his vesture. And 
some even endeavored to add to the sufferings by cruel 
taunts and fiendish exultation. 

How strange it seems that humanity, originally in the 
likeness of God, can sink so low! and yet it is all too true. 
The depth of depravity to which an intelligent being can 
sink can be measured only by the height of the original 
perfection and glory. Satan fell from a great height to a 
corresponding depth, and so likewise man falls to the very 
depths of iniquity, unless he repent and be converted from 
the error of his way, and voluntarily submit to the healing 
influences of divine grace. Sin, with accelerating speed, 
ever tends downward to more and more vile conditions, 
until it ends in the shipwreck of everything that is noble 
and pure; and "sin when it is finished bringeth forth 
death." 

As we look at the various manifestations of wickedness 
on the part of those who crucified the Lord, it is a 
sad comment upon human depravity to notice that the very 
same elements have been in the world ever since; and alas ! 
are present still. And the special victims of their hate 
have been, and still are, the meek of the earth, who have 
taken up their cross to follow in the footprints of the crucified 
One— the body of Christ which fills up the measure 



of his sufferings. (Col. 1:24.) All through the age there 

have been those anxious to deliver them to death, who, for 

envy, hypocritically assumed to be the representatives of 

God to condemn them, and to seek them out, and hunt 

them down, and kill their influence, and deliver them over 

to be crucified. This is the Pharisaical class— the class 

represented by the chief priests, the scribes and Pharisees. 

There has also always been the hireling class, ready to 

sell their services to such leaders for the paltry bribes they 

have to offer— for the favor of their leaders, for the convenience 

of being on the popular side, or for a trifle of 

financial or social advantage. This is the Judas class— a 

class which, like Judas and like the priests and scribes and 

Pharisees, know, and secretly recognize, the truth and righteousness 

exemplified in the body of Christ, yet who nevertheless 

dislike them, hate them, and are ever willing to 

make merchandise of them,— to deliver them over to scorn 

and contempt, if not, as in former times, to prison and to 

death, for the mean advantage of popular favor. 

Then there are still the cruel cold-blooded menials 
who, with complacency and indifference, and yet with 
curiosity, sit down and watch the sufferings of the body, 
and wonder what will happen next. They are surprised 
and puzzled by the fortitude which daily takes up the cross 
and follows after Christ; they cannot understand the 
motives that inspire it; they have no faith in the rewards 
to which the consecrated look, and they curiously watch 
them to see if, perchance, their God will interpose and deliver 
them. And when they see no miraculous interposition 
in their behalf, but that instead they bear the cross to 
the bitter end of sacrifice, they regard them, like their 
Head, as "smitten of God and afflicted," and to the sufferings 
are added their reproaches. And so every member of 
the anointed body can say with the Head, "The reproaches 
of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me." 

The important concern to all who are thus suffering 
with Christ in any measure is that they bear it with the 
same humility, benevolence and fortitude that characterized 
him under the most crucial tests of endurance. He was 
not surprised by the exhibitions of human depravity: he 
knew that he was in an unfriendly world bound by sin and 
largely under the dominion of the prince of darkness, and 
therefore he expected reproaches, taunts and persecutions, 
all of which he endured patiently while his great loving 
heart, almost unmindful of its own sufferings, was full of 
pity and of loving concern for others. Have we indeed 
so much of the Master's spirit that we can thus suffer with 
Christ, meekly bearing reproach and trusting to heaven's 
vindication of us in due time? "If when ye do well and 
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; 
for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered 
for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow 
his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his 
mouth: who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; 
when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself 
to him that judgeth righteously." Therefore let us "consider 



him that endured such contradiction of sinners against 

himself, lest we be wearied and faint in our minds." (1 Pet. 2:20-23; 

Heb. 12:3.) And let us also see to it that we 

bear the reproaches of Christ as he bore them,— with pity 

and prayer for the erring and depraved, if perchance God 

may grant unto them repentance; and with humble fortitude 

esteeming it a privilege to prove our devotion to the 

Lord by enduring hardness in his service as good soldiers. 

R1964 : page 84 

But what shall we say of those who hate the Lord's 
body without a cause, who for envy deliver them to persecution 
and death, or of those who for bribes betray the innocent, 
or of those who, with frigid indifference, but 
curious interest, calmly watch the sufferings of the body, as 
the Roman soldiers did of the Head, saying, "Let be, let 
us see whether Elias will come to save him?" "O my soul, 
come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine 
honor, be not thou united." Their way is the way of 
death. When the noble spectacle of loyalty to God, to 
truth and righteousness, and of Christian fortitude in enduring 
hardness and persecution meekly and patiently, fails 
to move and win the hearts of men, what more remains to 
be done for them? The goodness of God exemplified in 
his children as well as in other ways should lead to repentance; 
but if it only hardens the heart and steels it against 
the further influences of divine grace, sad indeed is the condition 
of such a soul. It is not ours, however, to judge 
such to condemnation: but it is our part to shun the company 
and counsels of all such. "Blessed is the man that 
walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in 
the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful: 
but his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law 
doth he meditate day and night... For the Lord 
knoweth the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly 
shall perish."— Psa. 1:1,2,6. 



R1964 : page 84 

THE TRUTH DEFENDED IN SCOTLAND. 



SOME months ago we gave a little account of 
Brother Houston's success in the colporteur work. 
He is a merchant, but is able to give a considerable portion 
of his time to special service for the Truth, of which he is 
not ashamed. His business talent and training are thus, as 
part of his stewardship, being used for the Master. And 
we might remark that he is not alone in this. In the United 
States there are a number of business and professional men 
and many artisans and farmers who are similarly using what 
time they can disengage from labor for the meat that 



perisheth. Indeed, everywhere, those who are filled with 

R1965 : page 84 

the spirit of the Truth are finding and using opportunities 
for serving it. 

Brother Houston's activity soon aroused opposition. 
MILLENNIAL DAWN was attacked through the public 
press, especially by a minister named Davidson, who endeavored 
to prejudice the people so that they would not 
read the DAWN. After several newspaper battles Mr. 
Davidson evidently thought his tongue would be mightier 
than his pen, and challenged Bro. H. to a public debate 
of the questions at issue. His challenge was accepted, 
and below we give a report of the discussion, by an unknown, 
clipped from one of the local papers. Bro. H. 
wrote us that it was his first experience in a debate, but 
that he felt it to be his duty to defend the Lord's cause, 
and that he was relying on help from on high. From the 
report below, he was evidently sustained by the Lord. 

"A CRITICISM ON THE DISCUSSION." 



"I was present at the theological discussion in Canisbay 
Free Church on Wednesday evening, and followed both 
speakers with great interest. Will you kindly allow me to 
say how very much disappointed I was with Mr. Davidson's 
method of dealing with his opponent, and why? Mr. 
Houston affirmed the universal applicability of the ransom 
sacrifice by Christ, taking as his key text 1 Tim. 2:5,6— 
For there is one God and one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time.' I think that in the course 
of the discussion he made, among others, the following 
points:— 

"That in view of our fall in the first Adam, the basis 
of hope for the human race is in the ransom— 'corresponding 
price'— given by the second Adam, the Lord from 
heaven. 

"That this is confirmed by numerous other statements 
of Scripture, among which he quoted the following; 'Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man;' 
'as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to 
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free 
gift came upon all men unto justification of life;' that 
the gospel is thus 'glad tidings of great joy which shall be 
to all people;' that in 'the seed of Abraham'— the Church 
(Gal. 3:29)— 'all the families of the earth shall be blessed;' 
that Christ died 'for our [the Church's] sins, and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world;' that 
'God so loved the world that he gave,' etc.— John 3:16. 

"That salvation is thus a free gift to all men, the conditions 
being, accept, believe, obey. 

"That when Christ died millions had gone into their 



graves who had not known of the coming Savior even in 
type and shadow. 

"That his, however, is the only name given under 
heaven among men whereby we can be saved. 

"That millions have died since without ever having 
heard of the 'only name.' 

"That justification by faith is the central doctrine of 
the Christian system. 

"That St. Paul argues that they cannot believe in 
Him of whom they have not heard. 

"That therefore all must hear— have a full and fair 
opportunity before being finally condemned, and that it is 
only if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the 
knowledge of the truth, that there remaineth no more 
sacrifice for sin. 

"That the hope of the Church— the company to which 
many are called but of which only a little flock make their 
calling and election sure, the very elect, His Bride, specially 
called out in the Gospel age— is that she shall share 
the glory of her Lord as his joint-heir. That the present 
work of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the 
future work of service— preparing by following Christ's 
footsteps of self-sacrifice for being the kings and priests of 
the next age. That the hope of the world lies in the blessings 

R1964 : page 85 

of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by 

Christ's Millennial kingdom— the restitution of all that was 

lost in Adam to the willing and the obedient at the hands 

of the glorified Church. That the ransom does not essentially 

or by the mere fact of it give or guarantee salvation 

to any man, but that the knowledge of it, with the corresponding 

opportunity, will be testified to all men in God's 

due time. 

"That there is no obstacle to belief in all this except 
the idea that death ends all probation— an idea for which 
there are no grounds in the Scriptures except the words, 
'Where the tree falleth there shall it be' (Eccl. 11:3), which 
may be interpreted to mean that no change takes place in 
the period of the grave, in harmony with Eccl. 9:10. 
That as the hope of the restoration of the Jews is the resurrection 
from the dead, so in that day (a thousand years), 
which God hath appointed to judge the world by that man 
whom he hath ordained, all that are in their graves shall 
come forth, when all who have not had full knowledge 
shall receive it. ('I am the resurrection and the life. He 
that liveth and believeth in me though he die shall live 
again; and no one who lives again and puts faith in me 
shall in any wise die until the remotest age. Believest thou 
this?' John 1 1:24,26.) That the preaching of the gospel 
to all who hear it now is a savor of life unto life or of death 
unto death, knowledge proving our condemnation if we do 
not accept the free gift. 

"That, per contra, the teaching of the Confession of 
Faith is that all mankind (save and except the elect) God 



was pleased to pass by and to ordain them to dishonor and 
wrath for their sin; and to assert and maintain that men 
can be saved by any other religion, or the light of nature, 
'is very pernicious and to be detested'— thus absolutely shutting 
the door of hope for the ignorant masses of mankind. 

"That this is out of all harmony with the God revealed 
to us in the Bible— the God who is infinite injustice, 
love, mercy, and who gave his only begotten Son as a ransom 
for all. 

"Here, surely, was plenty of work cut out for Mr. Davidson. 
Why did he not take up all, or some, or even one 
or two of these points, and show wherein they were unscriptural? 
I venture to say your readers will search your report 
in vain for an answer to any of these points. Here was 
constructive matter. What was wanted was destructive 
criticism. To merely relate the commonly accepted beliefs 
avails nothing. Why were these passages of Scripture 
not taken up and their true meaning explained— that is, if 
the wrong construction was placed upon them by Mr. 
Houston? Instead, amid much that was wholly irrelevant, 
and in execrably bad taste, Mr. Davidson read lengthy extracts 
from the book, MILLENNIAL DAWN, with the view 
of trying to prove that it teaches 'a second chance.' 
It was noticeable that the extracts as read met with 
no marked objections on the part of the audience. 
The book teaches that to every man is guaranteed one 
full opportunity in the Second Adam— not that if, in 
God's providence, one gets an opportunity in this life 
and refuses he gets another in the next life, but that 
all who had not heard will hear; it will be testified to 
them in due time. The quotation given by Mr. Houston 
from the book was a complete answer to the charge that it 
teaches a second opportunity to those who already had one. 
'We do not wish,' says the author of MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
'to be understood as ignoring the present responsibility of 
the world, which every man has, according to the measure 
of the light enjoyed, whether it be much or little, whether 
it be the light of nature or of revelation.' p. 145. From 
this it is manifest that by answering either 'yes' or 'no' to 
the categorical questions put to him— a most unusual thing, 
by the way, in a debate— he would be giving a misleading 
impression of the teachings of the volume in question. 

"A 'second chance' to those who have heard and understood 
the gospel, and have wilfully rejected it, might 
be 'unphilosophical, repugnant to Christian thought and 
feeling, and highly dangerous to morality;' but a plan of 
ages and dispensations, in the course of which all will come 
to a full knowledge of the ransom, is highly philosophical, 
by no means repugnant to Christian sentiment, and, if 
generally understood, would be a much more powerful lever 
to morality than the fear of everlasting torment. The world, 
sir, has outgrown a theology of gloom and despair. Reprobation 
is scouted all along the line of the best Christian 
thought of the day; and if Mr. Houston lacked in anything 
it was in failing to invade his opponent's territory 
and show up the logical absurdities into which much that 



is preached as the gospel to-day leads us. 

"As a Bible student I protest against points like those 
indicated above being scoffed at as 'a mixture of sense 
and nonsense,' and our would-be spiritual leaders going 
away fondly imagining that by the re-stating of thousand-times-told 
platitudes and playing upon our emotions by 
throwing a sanctimonious tremor in the voice, they had 
successfully answered important points of Bible teaching 
affecting the most vital doctrines of our faith." 



R1965 : page 85 

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS 

-APRIL 26.-Luke 16:16-31.— 

THIS parable has long been used as the special support 
of the horrible doctrine of "eternal torment." If 
those who thus misuse it would but examine it afresh in the 
light of the below suggestions they would find it more in 
harmony with other Scriptures, more beautiful and more 

R1966 : page 85 

reasonable. 

(1) It is a parable, without doubt; because to take it 
literally would make of it an absurdity. It simply puts 
the rich man into flames and torment because of his fine 
linen and purple and sumptuous living, and not because of 
any specified evil doings. It likewise puts the beggar into 
"Abraham's bosom" simply because he was poor and sick, 
and not for any specified merit or righteousness. And if 
Abraham's arms are only for the poor and sick he surely 
has them more than filled long ago; so that the poor and 
sick of the present time would have no more chance than 
the well clothed and well fed of getting into his bosom— 

if this were a statement of fact and not a parable. 

(2) Since it is a parable, it must be understood and 
expounded as a parable, and not as a fact. In the parable 
of the wheat and the tares, wheat does not mean wheat but 
the children of God, and tares do not mean tares, but 

the children of the devil. The same is true of all other 
parables— sheep, goats, fish (good and bad), the pearl 
of great price, ten pieces of silver, etc., etc.: the thing 
said was never the thing meant. It would therefore be as 

R1966 : page 86 

incorrect to say that the rich man and the beggar of this 
parable were two men as to say that literal sheep and goats, 
and wheat and tares, were referred to in the other parables. 

(3) Interpreting this parable on the lines of interpretation 
applicable to all parables, we should expect the rich 

man to represent some class of people, and the beggar to 



represent another class, and the fire and Abraham's bosom 
to have equally symbolical meanings. 

(4) We suggest the following as fitting all the 
conditions:— 

The rich man represents the scribes and Pharisees 
(the elder son in the parable of the Prodigal Son) who enjoyed 
the good things of God's favor and had much advantage 
every way over the Gentiles as well as over the 
publicans and sinners (the prodigal) of their own nation. 
The purple raiment represented the royalty promised to 
Israel, the fine linen represented their justification through 
the typical sacrifices. 

The beggar who desired the crumbs from the table of 
the favored represents the sin-sick of Israel, and especially 
of the Gentiles, who were desirous of God's favor. Some 
of these Gentile outcasts asked for and received from our 
Lord "crumbs from the children's table." 

The death of both, beggar and rich man, at the same 
time, represented the change of dispensation which dated 
from the time that our Lord, just before his death, pronounced 
over Jerusalem the words, "Your house is left 
unto you desolate." 

The rich man in torment represents the trouble which 
has been upon the Jews throughout this Gospel age. The 
beggar in Abraham's bosom represents how the former poor 
outcasts have been received into divine favor during this 
Gospel age, and are no longer strangers, but children of 
Abraham through faith in Christ.— Gal. 3:29. 

For further particulars see OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 
Nos. 1 and 32. 

The Golden Text chosen shows that those who selected 
the lesson had the common misunderstanding of this parable. 



R1967 : page 86 

"LORD, INCREASE OUR FAITH." 

-MAY 3. -Luke 17:5-19.- 

OUR Lord's teachings were so contrary to the spirit 
of this world and so adverse to its policy that his 
disciples felt that to adopt his methods and principles and 
discard their own really involved a revolution of their 
former ideas. And in yielding themselves, as true disciples, 
they felt the need of a stronger, firmer faith than they had 
yet been called upon to exercise. They were quite persuaded 
from the purity and nobility of his character, and 
from his miracles and his teachings, that he was indeed a 
teacher sent from God; yet remembering the requirement 
of discipleship,— "Whoso forsaketh not all that he hath 
[all his own ideas and will and possessions and earthly 
prospects], he cannot be my disciple,"— they felt that to 
continue in this attitude of acceptable discipleship would 
require a growing faith which would rise to every emergency 



of his requirements. Hence their request, "Lord, increase 
our faith." 

And they were quite right in their reasoning; for the 
Lord also clearly shows that the true disciples make progress 
in the school of Christ toward the full overcoming of 
the spirit of the world. And this progress can be achieved by 
faith only— by such full, implicit confidence in his teaching 
and training as will keep them continually as earnest, diligent 
pupils under his guidance and instruction. "This is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith." 
(1 John 5:4.) This, by the way, is very suggestive of what 
it signifies to be an "overcomer," to whom pertain all 
the exceeding great and precious promises of the gospel of 
Christ. It is simply this— that day by day we attentively 
heed and patiently carry out the instructions of our infallible 
Teacher and Guide in full, unquestioning faith in his 
wisdom and love; no matter how heavy will be the daily 
cross or how severe the discipline. It is indeed a tedious, 
life-long process, but the end will be glorious; and 
even the daily discipline, patiently and meekly borne, will 
bring the present rewards of conscious progress in the great 
work of overcoming and of a nearer approach to the goal 
of a ripened Christian character. All of this is implied 
in the beautiful words, so expressive of the faith and fervent 
devotion of true discipleship,— 

"Nearer, my God, to thee, nearer to thee, 
E'en though it be a cross that raiseth me." 

We observe that the Lord made no direct answer to 
this request of his disciples, but that he dwelt upon the 
power and desirability of faith. He showed that even a 
weak, but genuine, faith could so lay hold upon the power 
of God as to instantly root up and replant a tree, and on 
another occasion he said it could remove mountains into 
the midst of the sea. Is the suggestion preposterous? No, 
not to faith; for, bear in mind, faith is not imagination, 
nor self-will, nor ignorance, but it is a reasonable thing 
founded upon good and substantial evidence: so that our 
Lord's teaching here implied what on another occasion 
he clearly stated; viz., that the request be made according 
to the will of God. (John 15:7.) Thus, for instance, 
if the least disciple were assured, on good evidence, that 
the removal of such a tree or mountain would be a part of 
the divine will, and that it was his duty to do the commanding, 
he should have equally strong faith in the results. 
Thus it was when the Lord caused the barren fig tree to 
wither. This, observe, was not to satisfy mere idle curiosity, 
but like all of his miracles, which God wrought by 
him (Acts 2:22), it was for a definite and wise purpose, 
to teach an important lesson, and also to convince his disciples 
of his divine recognition and authority. 

But since there is no basis of evidence for faith that 
the will of God is to remove literal trees or mountains in 
answer to any idle or self-willed or ignorant commands of 
men to do so, a genuine faith in his willingness to do it now 
is an impossibility. But regarding the tree and mountains as 
symbols of difficulties and obstructions in our individual 



Christian course, or in the general course of God's work, 
we know that "miracles" are wrought for those who exercise 
faith; and they going forward in the strength of the 
Lord, are thus permitted to overcome difficulties and to work 
righteousness otherwise impossible. 

While the Lord made no direct answer to this request 
for an increase of faith, his whole subsequent course with the 
disciples was a fulfilment of it. And so it will be with us if 
in a similarly true spirit of discipleship we pray, "Lord, 
increase our faith." The increase of faith will come, not 
by a miraculous infusion, but in the natural process of the 
Lord's leading and training. In the school of experience, 
in following his leading and in the blessed results of each 

R1967 : page 87 

step of the way, faith develops and grows. 

Verses 7-10 show that it is in the Lord's service we 
are to look for the rewards of faith, the special manifestations 
of divine favor, in the removal of obstacles and difficulties 
found to be in the way of our progress in his service 
by cultivating Christian character in ourselves and others, 
and in ministering generally to the furtherance of the 
divine plans. We may not expect these rewards of divine 
favor except as we prosecute the service. And when they 
are received we are not to regard them as evidences that 
we have done any more than it was our duty to do. As servants 
of God we owe him the full measure of our ability; 
hence we may not feel that we have merited or earned the 
great blessings of heavenly inheritance and joint-heirship 
with Christ. We have merely done our duty; but God, 
with exceeding riches of grace has prepared, for those who 
lovingly serve him, rewards far beyond what they could 
have asked or hoped for. We can do no works of supererogation; 
even at our best our service is marred by many 
imperfections, and could never find acceptance with God 
except as supplemented by the perfect and finished work 
of Christ. 

Verses 11-16 show how the rewards of faith, which are 
of God's free grace and by no means earned by our faith, 
should be gratefully received. The samples given illustrate 
the fact that the rewards of faith are not always gratefully 
received. Here were ten lepers cleansed, and only one returned 
to give thanks and worship. So also of the many 
who receive justification by faith, the forgiveness of sins 
and reconciliation with God through Christ, how few return 
to present themselves living sacrifices, thank-offerings, 
to God, their reasonable service! 



R1966 : page 87 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a word to tell you that 
our little Church (thirteen in number) met last evening and 
joined with the rest of the body in commemorating our 
Master's death on our behalf. We had a solemn but blessed 
time, and we realized perhaps more than ever how much his 
death means to us. We thank God and take courage. 

Your brother in the faith, JESSE HEMERY. 



Maryland. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-A little company met at 
our house and celebrated our Lord's last Memorial Supper. 
We all felt how graciously the Lord hath dealt with us in 
leading us out of darkness into his glorious light. We 
realized our shortcomings and unworthiness of the high 
privilege of participating in the communion of his death, 
after being made acceptable to our Heavenly Father through 
the merits of our Redeemer. After a brief explanation 
of the symbols, seven partook of the same. We closed 
with Hymn 276. 

All were greatly strengthened, especially as we realized 
that all the Lord's people everywhere were praying for one 
another. We also felt, from previous experiences, that we 
have especial need at this time to encourage one another. 
May the Lord be gracious unto all, and keep us very humble; 
"for many are called, but few chosen." 

Love from your brother, joined by all the company at 
Oakland, H. WEBER. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I pray for you 
daily that our Father in heaven will give you a clear conception 
each day of his will and grace and strength to stand 
for God and the truth. Oh, how thankful we are (I am 
speaking for our little assembly here) that God has been 
pleased to reveal his Son to us, and that we know him as 
the way, the truth and the life! 

Our little assembly is using me for its leader, and I am 
so weak, dear Brother, that I need your prayers daily; but 
Oh, I am so thankful that I feel very humble, and pray the 
dear Lord always to keep me in that way. How much I 
need to study and meditate on the love of God to usward, 
in order to get the mind of our dear Lord. Only by continuance 
in well doing and prayer can we have the spirit's 
guidance in this wilderness journey. Our daily song should 
be, 

"I love thy Church, O God! 
Her walls before me stand." 

We met for the Memorial Supper at Brother Fry's. 
When I saw a good-sized room full, the thought came to me, 
"Can I serve in a way that will be satisfactory to our 



blessed Lord and the truth-loving ones?" The answer came 
like a flash. "I will be with thee and uphold thee; my 
grace is sufficient for thee; only trust, and lean on me." 
How strong I was, dear Brother, after the answer came to 
my whispered prayer! I read a short article on the subject 
from one of the dear old TOWERS, and Brother Chase gave 
thanks. All appeared to be deeply impressed and to realize 
the solemnity and import of the occasion. 

Yours in the love of the truth, R. S. MOORE. 

[The three letters above are fair samples of about one 
hundred reports received of the commemoration of the 
Memorial supper: and probably as many more celebrated 
from whom we have had no reports. These seasons are becoming 
more precious yearly. Indeed, we are glad to be 
able to report that the spiritual health of the Church was 
probably never better than now, the servants of the truth 
never more active nor more wise, and the triumph of truth 
over error never more pronounced. God be praised for the 
privileges and pleasures of his service! This we believe is 
the sentiment of an increasingly large number. 

May the strength and blessing derived from this Memorial 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice and of our fellowship in 
it abide with us all as a blessing, fitting and preparing us 
for further faithful service, and to endure whatever trials and 
tests our Lord may see best to permit to come upon his 
flock; we cannot expect that such a season will altogether 
pass without " sittings " for the wheat, to separate the chaff 
and the tares. --EDITOR] 



England. 
DEAR BROTHER:-The TOWER is as fully appreciated 
now as at any time during the past fourteen years in which 
I have been privileged to receive it. Its form and size are 

R1966 : page 88 

convenient; its title page is a sermon in itself; but as "in 

de wah time" the Richmond newspapers were eagerly welcomed, 

though printed on the commonest of wrapping 

paper, so the TOWER would be gratefully welcome for the 

blessed truth and spiritual food it contains, apart altogether 

from its outward appearance, necessary though it be that it 

should be becoming, pure, chaste, sober, unsensational in 

garb, as a fit covering to the purity within. 

I have said it is as much appreciated as at any time; in 
some respects it is even more so. Articles are anonymous, 
less controversial matter appears with regard to those who 
"went out from us" and those not of us; only so much as 
is necessary, that the true flock may be kept true, and guarded 
from false shepherds and false and poisonous food; and 
less prominence is given to "Encouraging words from faithful 
workers" in the omission (if I remember rightly without 
referring back) of names of writers. Altogether there 
is a welcome appearance as of a chastened purity, which 



without doubt has a corresponding effect upon its readers. 

Whilst in heart and mind I give thanks to our Father 
through Jesus our Lord, that I have been privileged to hear 
and to accept of the blessed truth of the most holy Word, 
and to partake of the spiritual food now spread before us, 
in His due time; I yet, whether rightly or wrongly I know 
not, have a great distaste for the relation of "personal experiences. 
Perhaps the liking or disliking of it in different 
persons may be owing largely to early training and sectarian 
association;... though the admonition "confess your 
faults one to another," in a proper spirit, is fully recognized. 

It appears to be a duty, whenever occasion offers, to 
boldly declare the truth, as far as lieth in one, and certainly 
it is a great pleasure so to do, and especially to an ear that 
can hear; but how few these are. 

With kindest seasonable greetings and affectionate respects 
and regards, Yours in the one faith, 

[Experience meetings in which the speakers vie with 
each other in the relation of their past wickedness, or in 
boastfulness of present grace or attainments, are sure to be 
injurious in their tendency. But testimony meetings at 
which each child of God present in simplicity and godly 
sincerity recalls the Father's care and love and discipline 
for the week or month preceding are surely very profitable. 
If each is careful to relate such features of his experience, 
his trials or triumphs, as will be helpful to others, all will 
be edified. This letter column is designed to supply such 
a lack for many of our readers who are isolated and enjoy 
no such privileges of communion of saints.— EDITOR.] 



Illinois. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is now a few years since 
my eyes were opened to the present truth; and I feel that 
I ought to write you a few words telling you of the great 
joy and happiness it has given me. Oh, how thankful I am 
to God that the "present truth" has illuminated my path! 
I can not find words to express myself. How I rejoice that 
I can now see that all the world will be blessed in "due 
time," and that the time is fast approaching when the 
Gospel Church will be glorified with Christ, our Lord and 
Head. 

Brother Franklin was the first to present the truth to 
me. I remember very well the first time we conversed 
about the matter. When he said that death (extinction of 
being) was the penalty for sin, and when he denied eternal 
torment, he startled me! I thought it was horrible that a 
man, claiming to be a Christian, could be so bold as to deny 
eternal torment for the ungodly. I purchased the first 
volume of DAWN of the brother, but at that time I could 
not read English, and not until after two years did I commence 
to read it. It was hard for me to get rid of all my 
inherited prejudices; but, thank God! I can now see what 
the Word of God teaches and also the value of Christ's 
sacrifice; and I have tried to present the truth the best I 



could to my countrymen. 

I am glad to inform you that in my judgment the 
Swedish translation of DAWN is very good, and I will circulate 
as many as possible. Please remember me in your 
prayers, and be sure that when at the throne of grace I always 
remember you. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, A. T. ERICSON. 



page 88 

Georgia. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Received your very kind 
letter, and appreciate very much your kindly interest in my 
spiritual welfare. I realize the necessity of walking close 
to God, and striving day by day to cultivate the mind that 
was in our Savior. 

I also feel the need of approaching the throne often in 
order to renew my strength to continue the conflict. I feel 
as if I had more temptation to endure now than when I 
first embraced the truth; yet, while they are at first grievous, 
I ought to rejoice in them as giving opportunities to build up 
a Christian character— if rightly resisted. The glorious 
end of our high calling grows more precious to me as the 
time grows nearer. Sometimes Satan injects the thought 
that I am very presumptuous to aspire to be part of the 
Bride class; but I am fully satisfied that if I draw back 
now, the Lord will have no pleasure in me. I fully realize 
the importance of walking humbly before the Lord, of following 
him who was meek and lowly of heart; and yet, 
while I am striving to this end, my poor, fallen nature gives 
me a great deal of trouble, so that I am very often grieved 
at my slow progress in Christian development. Nevertheless, 
the sincere desire of my heart is that I may walk more 
worthy of the vocation wherewith I am called, so that by 
attending faithfully to the Lord's will, mine may be the joy 
of sharing his name, his honor, his glory, as partaker with 
him in the divine nature. Your brother in Christ, 
S. J. RICHARDSON [Colporteur]. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed please find order for 200 
or more DAWNS. Am doing better here than I expected. 
It looks now as though it would take me two or three months 
to finish up. 

My health is very good, and I have sufficient encouragement 
to keep my spirits cheerful. Had one very snowy day 
in which I worked some among the stores. Found one 
man who recognized me as one who left a tract there once. 
He said he usually tore such things up, but this he put into 
his pocket. Did not know why, but read it, sent to the 
office for VOL. I., read it, liked it and bought the other two 
volumes of me. 



So the work goes on. Those who hunger and thirst 
for the truth will find it. The Lord as a good Overseer is 
watching the work and will guide it all right. As I see the 
work going on, and the Kingdom class building up, I feel 
like shouting, Glory! 

Yours in full sympathy with the work, GEO. KELLOGG. 



page 89 

VOL. XVII. MAY 1, 1896. No. 9. 

CONTENTS. 



Special Items 90 

Views from the Tower 91 

"Have They not Heard?" 94 

Bible Study: "God be Merciful to 

Me, a Sinner 98 

Bible Study: Stewardship of the 

Pounds and Talents 98 

Encouraging Letters 100 

page 90 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1968 : page 91 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



CHRISTIAN (?) Italy, like other Christian (?) 
nations of Europe, has been trying to do its duty 
to the heathen of Africa to teach them something of modern 
civilization, as represented in the liquor traffic and in 
land-grabbing. Italy felt that duty called her to conquer 
and "protect" the Abyssinians;— that is, she would "protect" 
such as she did not destroy with her modern implements 
of warfare, that they, as her slaves, might be heavily 
taxed and help her to live in luxury and pay the interest 
on her present enormous debt. But the Abyssinians 
surprised the world by nearly exterminating the army invading 
their home. In view of this they may be regarded 



as less "barbarous" than Italy had supposed, and as not 
needing Italy's civilizing taxation. 

Christianity was introduced into Abyssinia as early as 
330 A.D., but it was of the corrupt type so early prevalent, 
and represents many of the errors of the Romish, Greek and 
Armenian systems. But Protestant missionaries and Bibles 
published for them by the British and Foreign Bible Society 
have done much to elevate their moral and religious standing. 
What will the Abyssinians now think of the British assisting 
the Italians by advancing upon them the Egyptian army? 

The following from La Figaro purports to be a letter 
from Negus Menelek, king of Abyssinia, to Mr. F. S. R. 
Clark, an English missionary, Feb. 3, some little time before 
the Italian army attacked him and was defeated. We quote 
as follows:— 

"You are mistaken in believing that I do not care for 
your prayers. All prayers of believers are dear to me, even 
when they come from the children of Europe. Not all are 
aggressors in my kingdom; not all commit the iniquity of 
attacking those whom they hope to find weaker than themselves: 
not all have bent the knee before Baal, the god of 
destruction and the slaughterer of brothers. Many, I am 
sure, still truly adore the God of the cross, the God of justice 
and of peace. With them I feel in perfect communion 
of faith, and I am happy that they pray for me, for my 
household and for my people. 

"I only wish they would make truth dwell in the sanctuary, 
and that instead of a mutilated gospel, which explains 
the confusion and the infidelity of the peoples of Europe, 
they would return and lead others back to the true gospel 
which began with the creation of the world. 

"By what right do they efface the whole portion of it 
which precedes the coming of Jesus Christ, and have they 
done away with what God established for all time? 

"What you call the Old Testament is as true as the 
New, and what is contained in it must be respected and observed 
by those who follow Jesus and the apostles, announced 
by the prophets. 

"Never did Jesus abolish the distinctive mark of his 
race, since he was subject to it by his mother on the eight 
day. [Circumcision, still practiced by Abyssinians.] To 
suppress that which God established "from age to age and 
from forever to forever" is to weaken the faith, is to furnish 
the same spectacle shown by the Christians of Europe. It 
is not only without that they use violence, but also within, 
against the Jews who are, nevertheless, Christian souls, and 
to whom we owe our Savior. There are more than 300,000 
of them in my kingdom, and, though they enjoy almost 
complete independence, they are obedient and industrious 
subjects. They never conspire, pay all tributes, and respect 
our abuna as much as do the Christians. If they are 
worse in Europe, it is because the Christians, too, are worse. 
Our Lord Jesus forgave them on the cross: why should 
we persecute them? You [English], at least, do not persecute 
them. May the other Christians of Europe imitate you. 

"What you need is to return to our God, to observe 



all his ordinances, to no longer separate Moses and the prophets 
from the apostles or St. Peter from St. Paul. Whoever 
wishes to serve God must humble himself and obey. 
You know that, envoy of God. Teach it in Europe and 
Asia. I am having it taught in Africa. 
"May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 
Menelek." 

R1968 : page 92 

Little as we have in common with any of the so-called 
"Catholic" systems of Christian religion— the Greek, Roman, 
Armenian and Abyssinian— we nevertheless consider 
it a shame that, if the Armenians cannot be protected from 
the Mohammedan Turk, the Abyssinians must be scourged 
by Roman Catholic Italy, backed by Protestant and enlightened 
Britain, while civilized France has just finished 
a conquest of Madagascar, which for some time has been 
known as "the first heathen nation converted to Christ" 
in modern times. The heathen pay dearly for their acquaintance 
with civilization and so-called "Christian nations." 
Evidently selfishness is the basis of all this injustice. 
All this, however, may be a necessary experience to prepare 
men for the true Kingdom of Christ. 



In Chicago a number of Presbyterians broke away from 
the Fullerton Ave. Church, and, with "Rev. Dr. John 
Rusk," organized an independent congregation known as 
the "Church Militant." This Church, in order to emphasize 
their Christian (?) liberty, recently invited Col. Robert 
Ingersoll to preach (?) to them. Mr. Ingersoll did so 
on Sunday, April 12. The public press account is as follows: 

"With a prelude that included an invocation, the repeating 
of the Lord's Prayer in unison, the reading of the 
tenth chapter of Luke, beginning with the twenty-fifth verse, 
the singing of a Hosanna, of "Nearer my God to Thee" 
and "America," Col. R. G. Ingersoll stepped to the rostrum 
of the Church Militant and for nearly two hours expounded 
to the congregation his views upon 'How to Reform 
Mankind.' 

"Although admission was strictly confined to ticket 
holders, the street in front of the theatre was blocked with 
people long before the opening of the doors, and even 
after the interior had been packed more than a thousand 
men and women besieged the entrance. On the stage were 
400 or more representative citizens, including nearly every 
member of the Appellate and Superior judiciary and several 
county officials, delegations from every medical and law 
college and institution of learning in the city and suburbs, 
and a number of retired preachers. Every sect and denomination 
of importance, without exception, had its 
representative. 

"When Col. Ingersoll made his appearance, arm in 
arm with Rev. Dr. Rusk, there was loud applause. In the 



prayer that followed the musical exercises Rev. Dr. Rusk 
asked for a special blessing on Col. Ingersoll as one who 
was endeavoring to show the world how this life might be 
made one of usefulness and joy. Rev. Dr. Rusk invoked 
a dispensation for Col. Ingersoll's wife and children, and 
in his introductory remarks spoke of the agnostic as "the 
man who is endeavoring to do this world good and to make 
it better." Rev. Dr. Rusk added that this was no time to 
reason, no time to disagree with the faiths of men or beliefs 
of men, when they were trying to make the world better 
than they found it. No matter, he said, whether a man 
believed in God or not, if he expounded the truth. 

"As Col. Ingersoll stepped to the rostrum he was welcomed 
with applause that lasted for over a minute. His 
text was from Shakespeare, "There is no darkness but ignorance.' 
He discoursed fluently on the evolution of intellect 
and the necessity for education; on the evils of war, 
showing that it costs $6,000,000 per day; on how to lessen 
crime by teaching criminals "the naturalness and harmony 
of virtue." [A difficult lesson for intelligent men to learn. 
All of their experiences attest the contrary, and agree with 
the Scriptures that to the natural man virtue is quite unnatural. 
ED.] He advocated homes for all the people, 
proper, useful education, etc., and then gave his views of 
what a church should be, as follows: 

"Now it seems to me that it would be far better for the 
people of a town having a population of 4,000 or 5,000 to 
have one church, and the edifice should be of use not only 
on Sunday, but on every day of the week. In this building 
should be the library of the town. It should be the 
club house of the people, where they could find the principal 
newspapers and periodicals of the world. Its auditorium 
should be like a theatre. Plays should be presented 
by home talent, an orchestra formed, music cultivated. The 
people should meet there at any time they desire. The women 
could carry their knitting and sewing, and connected 
with it should be rooms for the playing of games, billiards, 
cards, and chess. Everything should be made as agreeable 
as possible. The citizens should take pride in this building. 
They should adorn its niches with statues and its 
walls with pictures. It should be the intellectual centre. 
They could employ a gentleman of ability, possibly of genius, 
to address them on Sundays on subjects that would be 
of real interest, of real importance. 

This is a "natural" man's mistaken conception of 
what Christ's church should be. He rejects Christ, and 
cannot be expected to have his spirit or mind on the subject 
of what, why and how his church is "called" "out 
of the world." And alas! the Church, two thirds full of 
unconverted, "natural" men, see no better than this Infidel 
teacher. Indeed, to "natural" men the advice of 
"natural" men must appear more reasonable and more 
consistent than the teachings of the Word and spirit of 
God. It does not surprise us, therefore, to see many 

R1969 : page 92 



turned from the truth unto fables (2 Tim. 4:4), and congregations 
and denominations moving from the hopes and 
methods set before us in the gospel to hopes and methods 
of their own misconceptions and unbelief. 

But the close of the address pictured the real Church 
of God glorified, in a manner and degree little realized by 
the orator, who meant rather to describe Nature— his god. 
He said:— 

"The firmament inlaid with suns is the dome of the 
real cathedral. The interpreters of nature are the true and 
only priests. In the great creed are all the truths that lips 
have uttered and in the real litany will be found all the ecstasies 
and aspirations of the soul, all dreams of joy, all hopes 
for nobler, fuller life. The real church, the real edifice, 
is adorned and glorified with all that art has done. In the 
real choir is all the thrilling music of the world; and in the 
starlit aisles have been, and are, the grandest souls of every 
land and clime."— Compare Eph. 2:21; 2 Cor. 6:16; 
1 Pet. 2:4,5; Rev. 3:12; 21:22; Matt. 13:43. 

The "Church Militant" convinces us that it is free- 
not only free from Sectarian supervision and creed bondage 
(a good thing), but free also from Christ, a very dangerous 
freedom. Yet it is still true that truth only can make "free 
indeed." Whatever the state of their hearts, if Christians 
at all, they sat for two hours in the seats of the scornful 

R1969 : page 93 

and took counsel of the ungodly. The blessed of the Lord 
do not so, as is particularly stated in the first Psalm. 

How this circumstance shows the blindness of Christ's 
professed followers, that they who should be the light of 
the world should be so dark that they feel their need of, 
and request the instruction of one whom the god of this 
world hath blinded; who is so blind that the light of the 
glory of God as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our 
Lord has not yet penetrated his mind;— almost as blind as 
the "fool" mentioned in Psalm 14:1. Verily, Mr. Ingersoll 
chose a good text, There is no darkness like ignorance; 
and if, as the Scriptures declare, "The reverence of the 
Lord is the beginning of wisdom," then Mr. Ingersoll is 
still in gross darkness, the "True Light" not having shone 
into his heart. What could he know or teach of the true 
hope for the groaning creation? 

We have not yet heard whether or not some of the 
brethren in Chicago improved the opportunity to offer to 
the congregation, as they came out, some of the truth in 
printed form, but if they did not they missed a grand opportunity. 
There probably were some of the really truth-hungry 
children of God there, who, starving for lack of 
true food for their souls, are looking and feeling after it in 
a wrong direction. All men are awaking, and all as they 
awake are hungry: Satan will supply them poisoned food 
in abundance and under favorable conditions; let us who 
have the truth redouble our activities if we hope to hear 



our Master say, Well done! good, faithful servant,, 
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. 



The Christian Denomination, otherwise known as 
"Disciples," have very rigid ideas respecting baptism (immersion 
in water). They teach that immersion is the door 
to justification, or forgiveness of sins and acceptance as 
God's people. They lay stress upon the Apostle's statement 
in Acts 2:38, and fail to notice that he spoke to the 
Israelites, already God's people (verse 36), and not to the 
Gentiles. They overlook the fact that it is faith, not water, 
thatjustifies.-Rom. 5:1; 4:2-4,13,22-24. See TOWER 
for June 15, '93. 

The Cedar ave. Disciple Church, Cleveland, having 
recently broken over the unwritten law of the denomination, 
and having received into membership a Christian 
man who had not been immersed, a great stir has ensued, 
and, as a sign of disfellowship, the donation of this church 
to the Foreign "Christian" Missionary Society was refused. 
But nevertheless the influence is spreading, and the South 
Side Christian Church of Indianapolis is also receiving 
members who have not been immersed. 

The result will no doubt be a disruption of the denomination, 
for its membership will be started to thinking; 
just as other circumstances are arousing thought in other 
denominations. It is all a part of the shaking and waking 
up, proper to this time of "shaking" (Heb. 12:28), that 
the true Christians of all denominations may get free from 
denominational thraldom; henceforth to be bound, not as 
members of human institutions, but each as a branch in the 
true vine— Christ. Instead of unions in cliques, societies 
and denominations, bound tighter and tighter to prevent 
disintegration, each individual Christian must stand free 
from all human alliances, that he may be most completely 
united to Christ, and, in fellowship and bonds of love only, 
with all who have Christ's spirit. The fall of Babylon 
means the setting at liberty of those whom God calls "My 
people."— Rev. 18:4. 



Abbe Courbe, parish priest of Dion, Vichy, France, 
has just published a book, which he distinctly states is done 
with the consent of his superiors, in which he presents the 
view of a future Millennium. (This is the very opposite 
of the Roman Catholic theory, which all along has claimed 
that it was fulfilled during the period of Papal triumph, 
from the eighth to the eighteenth century, closing with 
Napoleon's triumph, which it claims began the "little 
season" of Rev. 20:3,7. This book may be an attempt 
to "hedge" a little, and indicates at least a doubt as to the 
previous interpretation.) 

The title page of the book, translated from the French, 
reads as follows:— 



"The great occurrence ("coup") with its probable 
date. That is to say the great chastisement of the world 
and universal triumph of the Church, which will probably 
occur between Sept. 19 and 20, 1896. The secrets of La 
Salette compared with the prophets of the Bible and other 
authorities." 

As here indicated the author expects a one-day (24 
hour's) battle, whereas we see from the Scriptures that it is 
a forty-year battle day, begun twenty-one years ago, whose 
latter part is to be a time ["day"] of trouble such as never 
was before. (Dan. 12:1.) Like the bloody predictions of 
others for this year, this of course will fail. The year will 
doubtless bring its share of troubles, but much remains to 
be done before the great revolution shall occur which will 
wreck society. 



Electrician Thos. A. Edison has developed the "Roentgen 
ray" or "X ray" to such a degree that in a recent experiment 
he was able with his naked eye to look through 
an eight-inch block of yellow pine and see the outlines of 
his fingers. He has still greater hopes of future 
experiments. 

Professors Pratt and Wightman have conceived that 
these penetrating rays might be utilized not only in locating 
diseases but also in curing disease by killing the disease 
germs. They have been experimenting with the germs of 
Dyphtheria, Cholera, Influenza, Typhoid fever and Consumption; 
and report excellent results. They believe that the 
X-rays will kill these germs or bacilli and thus stop 
the dreadful ravages of these diseases. These things are 
telegraphed throughout the world, yet how few realize their 
meaning— that the long-promised "times of restitution" 

R1969 : page 94 

are approaching and that our present Lord is thus making 
ready for blessing the world physically, by natural means, 
which are none the less of his providence. 

If any one wonders how restitution could possibly rejuvenate 
the aged, let him read of a sample case, possibly 
granted for the purpose of illustration, as follows:— 

"Middlesboro, Ky.— Mary Crabtree, who will be 91 
years old the 15th day of August, is now in possession of 
all her faculties, has cut a new set of teeth, and can read 
without glasses. The most remarkable fact of all, however, 
is that her hair, which was snowy white, began to turn 
dark again eighteen months ago, and now is of a dark, 
glossy brown, just the color it was when she was a girl of 
eighteen."— The Philadelphia Press. 



R1969 : page 94 



"HAVE THEY NOT HEARD?" 



"But I say, Have they not heard? Yes, verily their sound went into 
all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world."— Rom. 10: IS 

BY many this scripture is understood to mean that 
in Paul's day the gospel had been universally 
proclaimed and heard; but it requires only a little reflection 
and observation to see that this view is not correct. 
For instance, it would be contrary to the reasoning of 
verses 12-15.— "How then shall they call on him in whom 
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him 
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear 
without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they 
be sent?" Besides, it could not have reached the portions 
of the earth then almost or entirely unknown,— e.g., 
America, Lower Africa, Eastern Asia or Australia. Nor 
had it gone in a full, clear sense to all even of the then 
known world. 

The Apostle's meaning is clear, however, when his 
discourse is considered as a whole, and when it is remembered 
that he is addressing Israelites— those who had been 
under the bondage of the Law Covenant. The ninth, tenth 
and eleventh chapters should be taken together and studied as 
one subject. Then it will be seen that the Apostle, reasoning 
from the Old Testament Scriptures, is showing that the 

R1970 : page 94 

gospel is to be preached to all the world, and not to Israel 
only, as some had imagined. To support this argument he 
repeatedly quotes from the prophets. 

It should also be borne in mind that the prophets seldom 
spoke of things as future, but instead, they took a 
future standpoint and spoke of things future as though they 
were present, or accomplished in the past. Thus Isaiah, 
in referring to the birth of Jesus, a thing then future, spoke 
of it as though already accomplished, saying, "Unto us a 
child is born, unto us a son is given." (Isa. 9:6.) Thus 
also "went," in the above text, should be understood; 
and the real meaning of the passage is seen to be, Verily, 
their sound goeth, or shall go into all the earth. The statement 
of Colossians 1:23, properly understood, is in harmony 
with this: the gospel which the Colossians heard 
was not to them exclusively, nor to be confined as heretofore 
to Israel, but was to be preached, declared or made 
known, irrespective of birth or nationality, to every creature 
who has ears to hear it. 

To make clear Paul's argument, we will briefly paraphrase 
Romans 9:30 to 11:36, as follows, calling special 
attention to Paul's quotations from the prophets:— 

Rom. 9:30-33.— What must we conclude, then, concerning 
God's dealings with Israel and the Gentiles? We 
conclude that though Israel has been seeking to be right 



and justified before God, for over 1600 years, and the 
heathen nations were indifferent to and ignorant of needed 
justification, yet now that it is offered, Israel will reject, 
and the heathen will accept, the gospel of justification and 
reconciliation. Why? Because Israel, as a nation, vainly 
expect it by works, while the heathen will accept it by faith 
in Christ's finished work. Israel, feeling so confident that 
she can approve herself to God by works of obedience, 
stumbles at the simplicity of the gospel and will not believe 
that Jesus was the propitiation (satisfaction) for 
the sins of the whole world. Therefore, instead of 
accepting of redemption through Christ, they have 
stumbled over and rejected the only way to God. This 
was foreshown by the prophet Isaiah (8:14). "Behold, I 
lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and rock of offence; and 
whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed." 

Chap. 10:1-4.— Though I speak thus plainly about 
Israel and their stumbling, do not understand me to rejoice 
in their fall, for I desire and pray that they might be saved. 
I do not accuse them of indifference and wilful unbelief; 
nay, they have a zeal for God, but they have a plan and 
way of their own, and are thus blinded to God's way and 
plan of justifying through a ransom. They hope for salvation 
through the keeping of the Law in every particular, 
which in their degenerate condition is an impossibility; 
and they reject Christ, who before the tribunal of justice 
became the ransom, the substitute for all who will accept 
his service; and for all such he met and fulfilled the 
penalty of the Law, which is death. 

Vss. 5-10.— Moses explains (Lev. 18:5) that the man 
who does right according to the Law shall continue to live, 
and not die; but in all the time since Moses thus wrote, 
none have succeeded in meriting life; death claimed all. 
It is therefore useless longer to look to works. We are 
proclaiming that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness 
to every one that believeth. Jesus' death settled the 
claims of the Law upon all under it who accept of his ransom; 
and this is the good tidings which we now proclaim— that 
a right to life may be had by accepting of the redemption 
provided through Christ's sacrifice for our sins. 

R1970 : page 95 

But, my brethren, as Moses also said (Deut. 30:11-14), 
this thing is not hidden from them, neither is it far off, 
difficult to understand. And those who banish prejudice 
and exercise faith will not say, Who ascended into heaven 
to bring Christ down from above, or who descended into 
the grave to bring Christ back from the dead? But what 
will faith say? Faith will say just what Moses said (Deut. 30:14). 
The word (that is, the truth we preach) is nigh 
thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart— it is reasonable 
and plain, that you may understand. Faith, finding abundant 
foundation in the teaching and mighty works of Jesus 
and his apostles and in the testimony of the prophets 
(unimpeachable witnesses), accepts the facts of the coming 



of Christ from above, of his death, his resurrection and 
ascension. Unless you believe this, you of course cannot 
accept of his sacrifice as being the end of the law and the 
cancelling of its death-penalty against you as violators of it. 

But if you would lay hold of this great salvation, you 
must publicly and openly confess that Jesus is Lord— your 
Master; that by his death he purchased you, and thus became 
your owner; for "To this end Christ both died and 
rose and revived, that he might be LORD [owner, master] both 
of the dead and living." (Rom. 14:9.) And you must not 
only own and believe that he is your purchaser, your Redeemer 
and Lord, but also that he is a living Lord, that 
God raised him from death and highly exalted him to a 
higher nature than that which he gave as our Ransom. To 
believe and thus confess is acceptable with God, and to such 
believers it will be plain that Christ settled all the condemnation 
of the Law against them, and such may have joy 
and peace in thus believing. After all, it is with the heart 
that men believe. No matter how much their minds may 
be convinced of the truth, if their hearts be stubborn they 
will not believe. Brethren, get your hearts right, and then 
you will be able both to believe on and to confess Jesus as 
your Lord. 

Vss. 1 1-13.— This general principle, that faith is the 
condition of release from condemnation before God, is 
proved by the Prophet's words to apply, not only to Israel, 
but to all mankind, for the Prophet declared, Whosoever believeth 
on him shall not be ashamed. (Isa. 28:16.) This shows 
that, no matter how much preference was shown the Jew 
under the Law, there is to be no preference shown under 
the gospel, for the same Lord over all is rich enough to 
settle the claims of all that come unto him and ask for a 
share in the benefits of his ransom sacrifice. We have 
proof of this also in the prophecy which says, "Whosoever 
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved." 
-Joel 2:32. 

Vss. 14-17.— This brings us to another question, namely: 
Is it not very proper to preach the good tidings of 
ransom and salvation through Christ to the Gentiles, as 
well as to Israel? Certainly; the quotation last made implies 
this; for how could they call on Christ as Lord without 
believing? and how could they believe on him except 
they should hear? and how could they hear without a 
preacher? and how can preachers go forth with this message 
unless authorized of God? Hence it is evident that 
God meant this good news to be preached to all the Gentiles 
as well as to Israel— to every creature. Not only can 
we reason it out logically thus, but we find a positive statement 
that the good tidings will be preached, which implies 
that the Law Covenant will be at an end to every one who 
hears and believes. The prophets Isaiah and Nahum testify of 
this preaching, saying: "How beautiful the feet of him 
that bringeth good tidings of peace [reconciliation through 
his blood— the remission of sins], and bringeth good tidings 
of good [things which come as a result]."— Isa. 52:7; 
Nahum 1:15. 



But we must not hastily suppose that when preached 
all will receive the good tidings; for the Prophet, speaking 
of things future as though they were past, again testifies 
of the result of the preaching, saying, "Who hath believed 
our report [our preaching], and to whom is the arm 
of the Lord revealed?" (Isa. 53:1.) This implies that 
the real believers and confessors would be few, at least for 
a while. But this proves that faith is to be the result of 
hearing— of hearing God's truth— and not a result of keeping 
perfectly the Law. 

Vss. 18-21.— Now we inquire, Will the fact that few 
will believe prove that the testimony will reach only a few? 
No, it is bound to reach all, in proof of which I again 
quote from the Prophet. He says, speaking from a future 
standpoint: Their sound went into all the earth, 
and their words to the ends of the world. This 
proves that all the Gentiles shall yet have this gospel 
preached to them. But what about Israel? Shall not they 
as a people come to know— understand and appreciate— 
the good tidings? Yes, but not for a long time; they are 
yet a stiffnecked, stubborn people. As Moses said (Deut. 32:21), 
God will [have to] provoke you to jealousy by 
them that are no people, and by a foolish nation will he 
anger you. Isaiah speaks yet more pointedly of Israel's rejection 
of the message, and of the acceptance of it by the 
heathen, saying: I was found of them that sought me not, 
I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me. 
And, speaking of Israel, he says, "All day long I have 
stretched out my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying 
[self-willed] people."— Isa. 65:1,2. 

Chap. 11:1-5.— In view of these declarations of the 
prophets, showing that Israel will have to be thus dealt with 
and disciplined, I ask: Hath God utterly cast away his 
people Israel? God forbid; for I also am an Israelite, of 
the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God 
hath not utterly cast away his people whom he formerly 
recognized and favored. Call to mind Elijah's prayer 
against Israel, saying: Lord, they have killed thy prophets 
and digged down thine altars, and I am left alone, and they 
seek my life. But mark God's answer: I have reserved 
to myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the 

R1970 : page 96 

knee to Baal. (1 Kings 19:10,18.) Even so at this 
present time there is a remnant who through God's favor 
will accept the good tidings and will not stumble. I, Paul, 
rejoice, that I am of that favored remnant. 

Vss. 6-8.— But now another point: This remnant is not 
saved by works of the Law, nor because they almost kept 
it, but by accepting of salvation as God's free favor through 
Christ. While Israel as a nation fails to receive the blessing 
sought by works of the Law, the chosen ones, the remnant 
of Israel, and those of the heathen who receive the 
gospel, will obtain a special blessing far higher than Israel 
ever dreamed of. These being justified, not by works, but by 



faith in Christ as their Redeemer (substitute), thereby gain 

R1971 : page 96 

the privilege of becoming sons of God on the divine plane 
and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, in the coming 
kingdom. The rest, both of Israel and the nations, 
will be blinded to this privilege. The God of this world 
will blind all except those who, by faithfulness, make their 
calling and election sure— a "little flock." 

Vss. 9,10.— David also foretold Israel's stumbling, 
saying, "Let their table be made a snare and a trap and a 
stumbling-block and a recompense unto them [i.e., their 
downfall shall be over the very blessings which God gave 
them; over their blessings they shall stumble. God had 
given them food such as he gave to no other people. To 
them God had committed the oracles of truth, the prophecies 
and the types which foreshadowed the sacrifice for 
sin and the blessings following that atoning sacrifice; yet, 
becoming proud and vain of the honors conferred, they 
thereby stumbled over the very graciousness of God's 
plan shown to them in types]." (Psa. 69:22,23.) Thus 
their eyes were darkened, and they were bowed down to 
see only the earthly promises. 

Vss. 11-14.— But now we come to another question: 
Admitting that Israel will stumble, and is stumbling, as 
foretold, I ask, Have they stumbled to fall irrecoverably? 
will they never again come into fellowship with God? God 
forbid that they should forever remain cast off. The significance 
of their fall is rather to be a blessing to the Gentiles 
than a permanent injury to Israel. And we may 
reason that if their fall from favor results in riches to the 
world (the Gentiles), then their restoration to favor, which 
God's promises guarantee, will imply an abundance of 
divine favor both to Jews and Gentiles. I speak to you 
Gentiles thus, because, being the apostle to the Gentiles, I 
desire to show the importance of the Gentiles in God's 
plan, and to stimulate my countrymen to emulation, and 
thus recover some of them from blindness. 

Vss. 15-21.— Thus is seen the breadth of God's plans. 
We know that there are certain promises made to Israel 
which must yet be fulfilled; and if they would be temporarily 
postponed and a blessing unexpectedly given to the 
Gentiles, it argues that God's plans, as we now see them, 
are broader than we had at first supposed, and include 
Gentiles as well as Jews; for if the casting away of them 
opens a door of favor to the Gentiles, what shall the receiving 
of them be, but life from the dead? that is to say, 
God's promises to Israel are such as imply their resurrection 
from death, their restitution; and now that we learn that the 
world in general may be reconciled to God because their sin 
was atoned for by the ransom, we may reasonably conclude 
that "life from the dead," restitution, will be offered to all the 
heathen, as well as to Israel. We see Israel to be merely a first-fruit 
of the world, the first favored; and if God has a blessing 
for them, as promised, it follows that he has the same blessing 



for other nations; for if the first- fruit, or sample, be holy 
—acceptable and blessed of God— so also the mass which 
it represents (the world in general) will be holy. 

The covenant promise of God out of which the kingdom 
classes are being developed is the root, and fleshly 
Israel as branches were first developed. But, because of unbelief 
and pride, most of these were broken off, and wild, 
heathen branches were grafted in instead, with them to 
partake of the life of the root, yea, the very fatness of the 
promise; yet they should not be puffed up against the 
broken-off branches, but humbly and thankfully remember 
that they are occupying the place originally belonging to 
the natural descendants. Walk humbly, for if because of 
pride and unbelief they failed and were cast off, God would 
be as likely to cut off the wild branches under similar circumstances. 
[How we see this fulfilling in the breaking off 
of many of the Gentile branches— now blinded and being 
cast off. They are no more respected than were the natural 
branches, and are broken off for the same cause. (Rev. 3:15-17.) 
Only the elect few branches, the "little flock," 
will remain.] 

Vss. 22-24.— Here we find two prominent characteristics 
of our Heavenly Father illustrated— his love and his 
justice— his goodness and severity. He is abundant in 
mercy and goodness, but will by no means clear the guilty. 
His goodness is manifested by the promise and the blessings 
it contains, and his just severity in the cutting off 
from those favors of all the unfaithful. But even in cutting 
Israel off, God is merciful and kind; for even though 
cut off as a people from the chief favor, they still have 
every advantage as individuals, and as such, any may be 
reengrafted, if they exercise the needful faith, though, as 
we have already seen, their hearts are hardened by the past 
favors of God, so that most of them are less ready than 
the Gentiles to accept of the gospel. 

"THIS MYSTERY." 



Vss. 25-27.— Here is a fact not generally known; it 
is a secret as yet— a mystery— and will show you that God's 
plan is more comprehensive than you have yet appreciated; 
and by showing you that you have not all wisdom, it will 
enable you to keep humble and to search for the further 
unfoldings of God's plans. The mystery is this: The 
blindness and breaking off of Israel will not continue forever, 

R1971 : page 97 

it will last only until the choicest, fittest branches 

from the Gentiles have been properly engrafted on the root 

—the Abrahamic promise. Then the broken-off branches 

shall be reunited to the root. The fact is, the root of promise 

contains a double set of branches; first, the select 

branches, natural and engrafted, the spiritual seed of Abraham, 



the Christ which is to bless all nations; and, secondly, 
a lower order of engrafted branches— Israel restored— the 
natural seed of Abraham through which the spiritual seed 
will principally operate in blessing all nations. 

Thus seen, Israel as a whole will be saved from their 
blindness in due time, and will yet share in the very blessings 
they expected when they were broken off; viz., the natural 
or earthly part of the blessings— the better or spiritual part 
of the Abrahamic blessing being conferred upon the elect, 
then chosen, who through much tribulation and crucifixion 
of the flesh and following of the Master are counted worthy 
of the chief honor, the spiritual blessings. What I state 
as to the recovery of Israel from her cast-off condition 
is already stated, but obscurely, by Isaiah the prophet (59:20,21), 
and I will throw light upon it by stating it clearly, 
as follows: "There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer, 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: For this is 
my covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins." 

Vss. 27-30.— This prophetic statement shows us that 
though the natural branches are treated as enemies for the 
present, for your exaltation, yet really they are still beloved 
of God, and he has blessings yet in store for them, 
as promised to their fathers; for any free gift and promise 
which God makes is sure of fulfillment. He fully foreknew 
this temporary lopping off before he made his promises 
concerning them, and, knowing the end from the beginning, 
it is unnecessary for him ever to repent of a promise. 

Let us now analyze this prophecy and see that it implies 
what we have before suggested to be God's plan; viz., 
to bring the natural branches again into God's favor. 
"Jacob" clearly means fleshly Israel, and from these ungodliness 
is to be turned away— but not until God himself 
shall "take away," or "put away," or "blot out" their 
sins. As elsewhere shown, the sins of the world will not be 
put away, until the close of the Gospel age, until the sufferings 
of the body of Christ are ended. During this age, 
only the sins of those who now believe are cancelled or put 
out of sight by God. But he who now justifies believers, 
will then justify them also, when they become believers in 
the ransom. He will thus take away their sin through the 
same ransom which he gave for our sin— even his Son. 

In turning away ungodliness a Deliverer is required. 
This is none other than Christ, the great Deliverer 
whom Moses promised. He shall deliver from all evil, from 
death, from pain and sickness, from ignorance and blindness, 
from every oppression of the devil. He shall bind 
Satan and set free his captives. This Deliverer is the complete 
Christ, the members of the body with the head united, 
complete, no more twain, but one. This Deliverer 
comes out of Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem, which is the mother 
of us all. (Gal. 4:26.) He is the first-born of Zion, the overcomer 
and heir of all things. Hence, before the promised 
blessings come to Jacob (fleshly Israel), the heir of the spiritual 
blessings must first be developed. 

Nor should we suppose that the blessings and deliverances 
will stop with Jacob; for, as already shown, they are 



but a first-fruits of restored mankind; and when they are 
turned to God, they shall become a channel through which 
the Deliverer will bless and release "all the families of the 
earth." 

Vs. 3 1 . Lift up your eyes and take now a comprehensive 
view of God's dealings with Israel— both spiritual 
Israel and Israel after the flesh— and see how grand and 
large is the plan of God, which as yet is only budding. 
As for a long while you (Gentiles) were strangers and aliens 
from God, and seemingly unloved and uncared for, yet now 
you have obtained mercy and favor, while fleshly Israel is 
cut off, even so these of the fleshly house are now unbelievers 
and cut off that by and by they may obtain mercy 
and find favor through you. That is to say, God is blessing 
them at the very time he is cutting them off; for in 
blessing you and preparing the spiritual seed and Deliverer, 
he is making ready to bless them through you, when you 
as the body of Christ are complete. (Gal. 3:29.) Thus 
through the mercy which God now shows you, he is also 
providing mercy for them, to be manifested in his 
due time. 

Vss. 32-36.— God treated Israel as a nation of unbelievers, 
and cast them aside nationally, in order that he 
might have mercy upon them nationally, and bring them as 
a people to inherit the earthly promises made to them. 

Looking at the deep workings of God's plan thus, in 
the light of what he tells us is future, as well as of what is 
past, how wonderful it is! Oh, the rich depths of God's 
wisdom and knowledge! How useless for us to try to discover 
his dealings except as he is pleased to reveal his plans 
to us. His doings are all mysteries to us except as we are 

R1972:page97 

enlightened by his Spirit. Who knew this gracious plan, 

so much beyond human conception? Who helped the 

Lord to arrange such a plan, think you? This is not human 

wisdom. God only could be its author. A Jew never 

would have planned to graft in Gentiles to share the chief 

blessings of the promise! A Gentile never would have arranged 

the original stock and branches Jewish and himself 

a favored graft. No, the plan is clearly of God, and well 

illustrates both his goodness and his just severity. Of him 

is all the plan; through his power it is all brought to pass; 

and to him be the glory forever. 

When the spirit of Paul's argument is caught, it can 
be clearly seen that he quotes the words, "Their sound went 
into all the earth and their words to the end of the world," 
AS PROPHECY yet to be fulfilled, and not to prove that the 
gospel had been universally published, but that it would 
be in due time. 



R1972:page98 



"GOD BE MERCIFUL TO ME, A SINNER." 

--MAY lO.-Luke 18:9-17.- 

Golden Text— "The publican, standing afar off, would not lift up 
so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, 
God be merciful to me, a sinner."— Luke 18:13. 

WHILE the Pharisee presents to our minds the 
extremes of conceit, selfishness and hypocrisy it 
is always well to remember that there are many approaches 
to that disposition which give sure signs that those who have 
and who are cultivating them will by and by mature the 
same kind of fruit unless they change their course. The 
spirit of meekness, which is the spirit of all true children 
of God, is the very opposite of the spirit of proud, boastful 
self-righteousness. It is only this spirit that can gain 
the ear of the Lord and bear away the answers of peace, 
as illustrated in the case of the publican so strikingly in 
contrast with that of the Pharisee. 

How this calls to mind the words of wisdom and of 
warning to guard against every approach to a spirit of pride 
and vain glory:— "Be sober, and watch unto prayer"; "Be 
sober, be vigilant" against "your adversary, the devil; I 
say. ..to every man. ..not to think of himself more 
highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly"; "In 
simplicity and godly sincerity" have your "conversation in 
the world." (1 Pet. 4:7; 5:8; Rom. 12:3; 2 Cor. 1:12.) 
It is the intoxication that comes from imbibing the 
spirit of the world that leads to that foolish boasting of 
which a man in his sober senses would be ashamed, and such 
intoxication is an abomination in God's sight and is unworthy 
of the least of his children; for every sober man 
must realize that he is far, very far, short of perfection. 
Boasting, therefore, is only an evidence of ignorance and 
of intoxication with the worldly spirit. 

To further enforce this teaching, our Lord calls attention 
to the beautiful, artless simplicity of childhood as a 
pattern in this respect of what all must be who would enter 
the Kingdom of God. To be a child in guilelessness and 
simplicity, however, is one thing, while to be a child in understanding 
and development of character is another; and 
it is in the former, and not in the latter respect, that we are 
to be children. And it is in this respect that the people of 
God are spoken of as his "little ones" (Luke 17:2), and 
by the beloved John as "my little children." They may 
be old in years and gray-headed, but their hearts are young 
and preserve the sweet simplicity of childhood. On the 
other hand, they may be ripe in character and learned in 
the wisdom of God, as was the Apostle Paul, who said, 
"When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a 
child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man I 
put away childish things." And the same apostle also says, 
"Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in 
malice be ye children, but in understanding be men." 
"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be 



strong. "-1 Cor. 13:11; 14:20; 16:13. 

The simplicity of childhood, realizing its need, confesses 
it and asks mercy, instead of attempting to deceive itself 
by philosophizing. In this respect we must continue "children," 
we must continue to admit our own imperfection, 
continue to admit our need of mercy, continue to trust in 
the precious blood provided to cleanse us from all sin, if we 
would continue to have the Heavenly Father's ear and 
favor, and if we would continue to be "justified" in his 
sight. 

We urge upon all the importance of sincere prayer; 
—private or "closet" prayers, "family" or "household" 
prayer and "social" prayer with fellow-Christians. 
Each has its special importance to everyone who is running 
the heavenly race; and each has Scripture sanction. They 
need not be lengthy: indeed few of the Scriptural examples 
of prayer were so; but they must be sincere, from the heart 
and not a lip service. Heart prayers are always accompanied 
by efforts of life in harmony with the prayers; while 
lip prayers are usually in contradiction of the living epistle. 
Prayer without corresponding endeavor is like faith without 
works; it is a dead, worse than useless, thing. 

Prayer is required, not to change God's plans, but to 
bring our hearts into such a condition as will prepare us to 
receive and appreciate the blessings which God has freely 
promised and which he delights to grant to his children. 
Hence our requests should be such only as God has authorized 
us to ask and expect. Our requests should be unselfish: 
The Apostle remarks that some ask and receive not because 
they ask amiss (not in harmony with the Lord's arrangements), 
to consume the things asked for upon selfish desires. 
—James 4:3. 



R1972:page98 

STEWARDSHIP OF THE POUNDS AND TALENTS. 

MAY 17.-Luke 19:11-27. Compare 
also Matt. 25:14-30; 1 Cor. 4:1-7. 

"He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much; and 
he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much."— Luke 16:10. 

THE Parable of the Pounds and the Parable of the 

Talents, as companion parables, illustrate from different 

standpoints the responsibilities of the stewardship of 

God's people. St. Paul says, "Let a man so account of us 

as of the ministers [servants] of Christ, and stewards of the 

mysteries of God." This stewardship and ministry, while 

it belonged in a special sense to the apostles, belongs also 

to the whole Gospel Church, all of whom have the anointing 

and the commission (Isa. 61:1,2) and the consequent responsibilities 

of the sacred trusts committed to them. And 

as stewards of God we have nothing of our own, nothing 



with which we may do as we please; for, says the Apostle, 
"What hast thou that thou didst not receive?" Nothing. 
And what have we to call our own that has not been included 
in our covenant of consecration to God? Nothing. 
Consequently all that we have belongs to God, and we are 
merely stewards of his goods. 

"Moreover," says the Apostle, "it is required in 
stewards that a man be found faithful"; and the parables 
under consideration show what is considered as faithfulness 
to our stewardship. To merely receive the gifts of God is 
not faithfulness, tho many seem to think so. Many indeed 
seem to think they have done God a great favor in merely 
accepting his grace through Christ, and are satisfied to make 
no further efforts. But such make a great mistake; for 
faithfulness, as here shown, consists in a proper and diligent 

R1972:page99 

use of our gifts in harmony with the divine purpose and 
methods; and both the Lord and the Apostle point to a 
day of reckoning, when even the secret things will be brought 
to light, and all the counsels of the hearts shall be made 
manifest. -Luke 19:15; 12:2,3; 8:17; Mark 4:21,22; 
Matt. 25:19; 1 Cor. 4:5. 

We observe that in the former parable each of the servants 
received exactly the same thing— a "pound," while 
in the latter the gifts varied: one received five talents, 
another two, and another one, "every man according to his 
several ability." The "pound," being the same to all, fitly 
represents those blessings of divine grace which are common 
to all God's people. Among these are the Word of God 
and the various helps to its understanding, the influences of 
the holy spirit, the privileges of faith and prayer and communion 
with God and fellowship with Christ and with his 
people. But the "talents" being distributed according to 
every man's several ability, represent opportunities for the 
service of God along the lines of such abilities as we possess. 
They may be talents of education, or money, or influence, 
or good health, or time, or tact, or genius, with 
opportunities for their use in God's service. 

In both parables our Lord is represented as about to 
take his departure to receive for himself a kingdom and to 
return. And a part of their object was to disabuse the disciples' 
minds of the idea that his Kingdom would immediately appear. 
He thus intimated that while he was about to return 
to his Father in heaven there would be an interim between 
then and the time of his return, during which time their 
faithfulness to him would be fully tested, and that all that 
would prove faithful to their stewardship in his absence would 

R1973 : page 99 

be owned and blessed of him in his Kingdom upon his return. 

The commission to each and all of the Lord's stewards 
is expressed in the words, "Occupy [which, in old English, 
signified, "Do business with," "Use," "Traffic with"] till 



I come." And the first business with the King on his return 

is not to deal and reckon with and judge the world, 

but to reckon with these servants to whom his goods— the 

"pounds" and the "talents"— had been committed; to see 

how much each had profited thereby, as a test of their fidelity, 

to determine what place if any should be granted them 

in his Kingdom. Notice also that the reckoning with them 

is as individuals, and not by groups or classes. 

In plain language, these parables teach that it is the duty 
of every Christian to make good use of all that the Lord 
has given him. The right use of the "pound" is to diligently 
profit by all the means of grace for the spiritual upbuilding 
of ourselves and others. We cannot afford to neglect 
any of these; for we cannot do so without loss. If we 
neglect to consider and ponder the principles and precepts 
of God's Word, or to heed their wholesome instructions; 
if we fail to consider or to follow the leadings of the holy 
spirit; if we neglect the privilege of prayer and communion 
with God; or if we fail to cultivate the fellowship and 
communion of saints, we are folding our "pound" in a 
napkin. It cannot yield its legitimate increase while thus 
unused. Christian character cannot grow and develop in 
the neglect of the very means which God has provided for 
its perfecting. In such neglect a spiritual decline is sure to 
set in; and the more persistent and long-continued is the 
neglect, the less realized is the decline, and the less inclination 
is there to energy, diligence and zeal in correcting it. 
But in the diligent and proper use of these means of grace 
there is a "feast of fat things" which is sure to build up 
and invigorate the spiritual life and cause it to bring forth 
much fruit unto holiness, which is the increase for which 
the King is looking. 

Yet the parable shows different degrees of increase in 
different cases following the right use of the "pound." 
The "pound" in the care of one servant gains ten, while 
with another it gains five. This reminds us of what we 
commonly observe, that even the same means of grace do 
not profit all to exactly the same extent. Some, for instance, 
are by nature more studious and thoughtful, or more 
generous, or grateful. And therefore the appeals of the various 
means of grace to the heart differ in different individuals, 
and the consequent fruitfulness also differs in quantity. 
Another illustration of the same thing is also found in the 
parable of the sower (Matt. 13:8), where the seed in good 
ground produces fruit in varying quantities— some thirty, 
some sixty, and some an hundred fold. 

But all such fruitful characters are appreciated and rewarded 
as "overcomers," and of the "little flock" to whom 
"it is the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom." 
The different measures of fruitage— the thirty, sixty, and 
hundred-fold, or the ten pounds and the five, mark differences 
in obstacles to be overcome, etc., rather than unfaithfulness 
in the use of the means of grace. Some may work 
long and diligently for small results, while the same effort 
in others of more resolute will and of greater continuity 
may accomplish great things. Some by slips and occasional 



backslidings, from which they subsequently recover, lose 
time and opportunities which can never be regained, although 
they are forgiven and generously reinstated in the 
divine favor and thenceforth run with diligence and patience 
to the end. 

All of these, therefore, because of their faithfulness, 
because they have overcome the obstacles in their way and 
have diligently cultivated the fruits of the spirit in the use 
of all the means of grace provided, are accorded a 
generous welcome into the everlasting kingdom, although 
the best efforts were short of perfection, and each must 
still have the robe of Christ's righteousness imputed 
to him by faith. But the degrees of exaltation in the kingdom 
differ according to the measure of their fruitage here. 
The steady diligence that secured the gain of "ten pounds" 
here is rewarded with corresponding exaltation there, which 
figuratively is likened to authority over ten cities; while 
the faithfulness which was sometimes interrupted and imperilled 
by dangerous backslidings afterward healed, but 
which apart from these perseveringly gained "five pounds," 
is rewarded with an exaltation in the Kingdom represented 
as "authority over five cities." 

The Parable of the Talents illustrates fruits of labor. 
In it the ratio of increase is the same with both of the faithful 
servants— each doubled his "talents"; and the same 
approval is expressed to each, according to the principle 
mentioned by Paul (2 Cor. 8:12),— "If there be first a 
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, 
and not according to that he hath not." A truly "willing 
mind" to serve the Lord will always find a way to serve 
him in the use of whatever talents are possessed; and the 
increase is sure to follow; and if not under our immediate, 
present observation, it will appear by and by. "God 
is not unmindful of our work and labor of love," however 
unfruitful it may appear to us. The fruit will be manifest 
by and by when all the secret things shall be revealed. 

The differences of reward, accompanied by the same 
words of approval and welcome to the Kingdom glory and 
joy of the Lord, call to mind those scriptures which bid us 
rejoice in all present opportunities for that suffering and 
service which attest our faithfulness, because they work out 
for us "a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory," 
and also remind us that there will be some least and some 

R1973 : page 100 

greater in the Kingdom of heaven. This is an incentive to 
"lay up treasures in heaven," where moth doth not corrupt 
and where thieves do not break through and steal.— 
See Matt. 5:11,12; 2 Cor. 4:17,18; Matt. 11:11; 6:20. 

But what of the faithless servant who wraps his "pound" 
in a napkin (who failed to make use of the means of grace 
for his own spiritual upbuilding and character development) 
and who buries his "talent" (of time or means or education, 
or ability of any kind, great or small) in the earth- 
in the service of self and Mammon? Is there any reward 



for his faithless misuse of the Master's goods? No! even 
that which he hath shall be taken away, and he shall be 
cast into outer darkness. (Luke 19:24-26; Matt. 25:28-30.) 
The principle announced in the golden text is that 
upon which the rewards are to be given. Great trusts are 
to be committed to the "overcomers" of this age, and their 
worthiness must be tested: they must endure the tests, and 
thus be proved. 

The citizens that hated him (verse 14), and sent a message 
after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign 
over us, represent not only the Jews who cried, Away with 
him! Crucify him! We have no king but Caesar! but includes 
also all who having come to a knowledge of Christ and his 
coming kingdom are so out of accord with righteousness 
that they do not desire the promised Millennial Kingdom. 
Wrath will come upon these, a great "time of trouble, such 
as was not since there was a nation," soon after the 
"servants" have been reckoned with and rewarded. "Bring 
them hither and slay them before me," speaks of the Lord's 
righteous indignation against evil doers, but in no way cuts 
off hope of forgiveness for those who shall then repent and 
become loyal subjects of the King. 



R1973 : page 100 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



California. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I wrote you 
some time ago that I had commenced to hold meetings in 
the house of a poor widow who was in great trouble. She 
seems to be much comforted, and is eager for the truth. 

I was much encouraged recently to learn that two to 
whom I had spoken two years ago followed up the subject 
and have become deeply interested. Glory to His name! It 
seems wonderful to find undeniable evidence that the Lord 
has blessed one's feeble efforts. Another lady to whom I 
talked tells me that she has read the three volumes and 
uses the TOWER explanations of the S.S. Lessons in the 
Sunday School. I am kept very busy. I held four meetings 
last Sunday, three of them with an audience of one, 
the other with an audience of three. It would save much 
trouble if I could get the people to meet all together, but 
so far I have not been able to do so. Therefore, in order 
that they may hear the truth of God's plan I go to them. 
Three of them are old ladies from 50 to 60 years, one of 
whom has been bedridden. I sometimes think that if we 
could perform miracles, as the disciples did, we could then 
get many followers, if we could make the lame to walk, etc. 
But it seems that such is not the plan of God for these days. 

I know that my poor efforts have slow results some 
times, but I recall the words of St. Paul, not to look back, 



but to press forward to the prize which is in Christ Jesus. 
The Lord is so good to allow the light to shine even here 
on me; and if it is his divine will, I would like that its rays 
should reach those to whom he leads me to speak of the 
precious truth. 

Bidding you Godspeed, Respectfully, Mrs. A. A. 

[This dear co-laborer has caught the right idea. An 
audience of one is not to be spurned by us, who follow in 
the footsteps of him who was pleased to serve the lone Samaritan 
woman; and, if we despise not the day of small 
things, he will not only bless us for our humility and warmth 

R1974 : page 100 

of zeal, but also those whom we serve, and finally grant us 
still larger opportunities for service. The spirit that will 
search out the poor and aged and afflicted, in order to comfort 
them with the glad tidings, is the spirit of Christ. He 
"went about doing good;. ..for God was with him."— Ed.] 



S. Dakota. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I do not wish to intrude 
upon your time, but judging your heart to be something 
like mine, I trust good news will be no intrusion. 

The Master has very graciously and lovingly been leading 
me for the past two years. I used to like Christ, felt 
very grateful to him for forgiving my sins and for the peace 
I even then felt, and was willing to do a great many things 
for him. Now I think I can truly say I love him with all 
my being; and what a wonderful change has come over my 
whole life! Truly, he is the one altogether lovely. 

I have been a member of the Methodist denomination 
for a long time, but probably by the time this reaches you 
I will be no longer. I also have a Bible class in the Sunday 
school; but last week I received a letter from the pastor 
stating that my class was becoming annoyed at my persistence 
in teaching doctrines of Adventism (?), and giving interpretations 
to passages which according to Methodist doctrine 
were unscriptural, and requesting that I desist. 

I had determined upon the withdrawal some time ago 
and asked for guidance as to the best way to do it. And 
the Master seems to have opened the way much more effectively 
than I could have done. The letter referred to was 
in reply to one of mine to the pastor setting forth God's 
dealing with men as I understood it. 

A number in the city are much interested in the DAWN. 
What the next step will be I do not yet know; but he who 
has opened one door can certainly open another. So I have 
no fear, my only anxiety being that I may be willing to 
take the next step when it is made plain.— Phil. 3:14-15. 

[A later letter says:—] I have your very kind favor, 
also the DAWN and tracts. The five volumes are already 
gone. Enclosed find order for more. 

The Father, Christ and Heaven all look so much more 



glorious and lovely as I get some of the cobwebs of tradition 
and creeds cleared from the picture, that I want to help 
clear them from before the eyes of others. 

The many ways the Lord has taken to open my eyes, 
seemingly so adapted to just my peculiar needs, would take 
too long to mention, but to me they are so manifestly from 
him that I cannot doubt. Suffice it to say, so far as I know 
my own heart and mind, everything has been laid upon the 
altar, and as fast as new light comes to show me more, I receive 
it very thankfully, and lay that also upon the altar. 

I appreciate very much your personal prayers for me 
and mine, and I am glad to be able to ask the Father daily 
that his favor and spirit may be granted you and yours, 
that you may be able and willing to do his will completely. 

Yours in Christian fellowship, W. E. V. 



page 101 
VOL. XVII. MAY 15, 1896. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 102 

Erroneous Chronology and False 

Conclusions 103 

Mr. Dimbleby's Chronology, Etc 110 

True Bible Chronology Stated A.M 112 

The Temple of God 113 

Bible Study: Parable of the Vineyard 115 

Bible Study: The Destruction of 

Jerusalem Foretold 116 

page 102 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



INSPIRED COUNSEL FOR ALL SAINTS. 



"FRET not thyself because of evil-doers, neither be thou envious 
against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down 
like the grass, and wither as the green herb. 

"Trust in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land 
and verily thou shalt be fed [naturally and spiritually]. Delight thyself 
also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. 

"Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall 
bring it to pass. And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, 
and thy judgment as the noon-day [sun]."— Psalm 37:1-7. 



R1974 : page 103 
ERRONEOUS CHRONOLOGY AND FALSE CONCLUSIONS. 



MANY are the false chronologies and erroneous 
and very misleading applications of prophecy 
in our day, but the majority of them being little known 
it is not necessary that their errors should be specially 
pointed out. But during the past five years numerous tracts 
and pamphlets have been published and widely circulated by 
a Mr. Dimbleby of England, and by a Mr. Totten of the United 
States, which present a so-called "Bible chronology," and 
various prophetic interpretations based thereon, which are 
quite misleading to many,— inclining them to false expectations 
and thus diverting their attention away from correct 
expectations, and consequently away from the real duties 
of the present "harvest" work and time. 

Their chronology, and methods of applying such prophecies 
as they attempt to expound, are practically the same, 
with a few exceptions which we will show later on. Mr. 
Dimbleby is conceded to be the originator of the Chronology, 
which is far from clear, and very disconnectedly stated. 
It is built only in part upon the testimony of the Bible; 
and, while claiming exactness to the fraction of a day, it 
is one hundred and twenty-nine years astray, according 
to the Bible record. This is shown in the article 
following, on "The True Bible Chronology";— to 
which, for straightforward, unvarnished simplicity, no 
other chronology we have ever seen will compare. We do 
not claim it as "our" chronology: on the contrary, we 
claim it is God's chronology, supplied in the Bible to all 
that are his, and for our common use and behoof. We fear 
human speculations and manufactures along these lines, by 
ourselves or others. 

But it may be asked, Why should any be confused by 
this Dimbleby-Totten chronology, which they do not 
understand, and which is not simple? We reply, it is 



chiefly because of five things:— 

(1) Because these gentlemen claim to back up their 
chronology by astronomical calculations, eclipses, etc. 

(2) Because Mr. Dimbleby is or has been connected 

with the British Chronological and Astronomical Association; 

and Mr. Totten is a man of some erudition, who 

for some time held the position of Instructor of Military 

Tactics in Yale College, and therefore is known as Professor 

Totten. 

(3) Because the majority of people know little about 
mathematics, chronology and astronomy— especially the 
latter— and are apt to overestimate possibilities along 
those lines. 

(4) Because both of these gentlemen, following a very 
common failure, employ their talents rather to impress their 
readers with reverence for their learning, and thus for their 
views, than to elucidate and prove their subject. They use 
technical terms, and assert astronomical proofs of their 
chronology which the average readers do not comprehend, 

the latter are convinced of their own ignorance, and proportionally 

convinced of the wisdom of these gentlemen; 

and forthwith they accept what they do not at all comprehend. 

And as for those who have some knowledge of 

astronomy, they usually have little knowledge of the Bible, 

and no knowledge of Bible chronology. They are therefore 

as unprepared to see, as they would be indifferent to 

expose, the errors of statement on this subject made by Mr. 

Totten and Mr. Dimbleby. 

(5) Because these gentlemen state themselves boldly, 
as though they believe all that they are teaching. 

Respecting the last proposition: We must remind our 
readers that it is nothing uncommon for people to deceive 
themselves, as well as others. Saul of Tarsus, one of the 
most zealous, God-fearing men in Israel, was deceived to 
the extent that he persecuted the Church while verily 

R1974 : page 104 

thinking that he did God service. Hence, while charging 
these gentlemen with serious errors, we do not believe that 
they were originally actuated by any desire to deceive themselves 
or others. They desired to find a chronology, and 
concluded they ought to be able to find and prove one. 
They set about it; and have bent and warped their own 
judgments so that they no doubt at first believed what they 
were teaching, which, as we proceed to show, is very far 
astray chronologically, and without a particle of astronomical 
support. But we do find fault with them in that 
afterward, when they became involved in difficulties from 
which they could not extricate their theories, either logically 
or Scripturally, they taught and still teach them instead 
of refuting them. 

Their "Bible Chronology" is defective; because in 
certain places where the historic account of the Bible is 
broken, they have neglected to take the divinely given 
"bridging" for those "chasms," specially provided by the 



Lord in the New Testament; hence the difference between it 
and the simple, easily comprehended, Bible chronology 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chapter II. (See 
p. 42), and stated in Anno Mundi order on another page 
of this issue. The largest portion of this error (100 years) 
is made in reckoning the period of the Judges. The error 
next in magnitude is made in connecting Bible chronology 
with secular chronology,— the "seventy years desolation of 
the land" being taken to mean seventy years of captivity, 
whereas the captivity began eighteen years before. Thus 
one hundred and eighteen (100+18) years are lost from 
their reckoning. In these two errors these gentlemen have 
followed Bishop Usher, whose chronology appears in the 
margin of our common version English Bibles. Indeed, 
it may be said that they use Usher's chronology with but 
slight deviation, until, finding it too short, they adopt a peculiar, 
"original" and erroneous method of lengthening 
it, the fallacy of which we will expose. 

But, says some one, if their chronology is wrong to 
the extent of one hundred and eighteen years, or even one 
year, or even one day, how could they prove it by 
astronomy? 

They do not prove it, we answer; they merely assert 
that they prove it: and we will show you why it is impossible, 
absolutely impossible, for them or for any one else to 
prove their chronology, or any other Bible chronology, by 
astronomy. 

R1975 : page 104 

Now do not allow yourself to conclude that because 
you know nothing about astronomy you can therefore only 
choose between their claim to prove their chronology by 
astronomy and our claim that such a procedure is as impossible 
as the most impossible thing you ever heard of; 
for the matter is not nearly so abstruse as some learned 
people pretend and some unlearned people suppose. When 
we have explained, in simple language, the principle of applying 
astronomy to chronology, you can understand it, 
and will understand it; and you will see and fully endorse 
our declaration that astronomy cannot in any sense or degree 
be applied to Bible chronology. 

First— Astronomy has taken note of the fact that the 
heavenly bodies move with such regularity that it is possible 
to calculate their movements into the future and say, 
Unless some remarkable and now unforeseen change occur, 
the sun will rise and set at such hours on a certain day five 
hundred years hence, and that during that year there will 
be such eclipses at such and such hours on such and such 
days. By similar calculations or by reference to tabulated 
reckonings (just as in reckoning interest one person would 
figure it out while another would refer to an "Interest 
Table"), it is a very simple matter to know that such and 
so many eclipses occurred one thousand years ago or ten 
thousand years ago, unless some unknown changes occurred 
in the meantime. 



But now suppose that you had reckoned the matter 
out, and found that just five thousand years ago to-day the 
sun rose at 5 A.M. and set at 7 P.M. in the vicinity of 
Palestine; and that during that year the moon was eclipsed 
four times, and the sun twice; suppose that you were very 
precise and had reckoned the very day, hour and minute 
at which each of those six eclipses occurred; suppose that 
you noted, also, a transit of Venus and a transit of Mercury, 
to the very day, hour and minute, that same year. 
Of what value would all that reckoning be to you, or to 
any one, so far as giving a knowledge of human history, or 
of enabling anyone to connect your astronomic reckoning 
with mankind and the chronology of human affairs? 

None whatever! 

All can see that! Any grammar school pupil can see 
that it would be absurd to claim that because you had found 
that certain eclipses and transits occurred in a certain year, 
therefore, that must be the year in which Adam died; or 
in which Noah was born; or in which Moses and Israel 
came out of Egypt. 

But, says some one, while that seems logical enough, 
will you not explain how astronomy is sometimes used in 
ascertaining, or at least in corroborating, dates of history? 

In ancient times a connected chronology was not 
valued and preserved as now. The solidarity of the race 
was not appreciated then as now, and no common era was 
recognized. The first effort to bring time-order into the 
world's general history was in the second century of the 
Christian era (A.D.), by that celebrated astronomer, 
mathematician and geographer, Ptolemy, of Alexandria, 
in a book entitled "A Table of Reigns." In it he gives a 
chronological table of the Assyrian, Persian, Greek and 
Roman sovereigns from his own day back to Nabopolassar, 
the father of Nebuchadnezzar, of Bible note. The records 
of those kings and dynasties had been written independently; 
and Ptolemy attempted to reconcile and harmonize them 
into one. And, although generally quite accurate, no doubt 
the mistake of reckoning the "seventy years desolation" 
as seventy years of captivity, in his endeavor to unite Bible 

R1975 : page 105 

history with secular history, was originally his. It has been 
followed, very generally, since. 

Astronomy was one of the early "sciences"; but in 
early times it was so mixed with vague imaginations and astrology 
as to be of little value, and astronomers (rather astrologers) 
then not only claimed to foretell something respecting 
the future state of the weather, but after the style of 
the modern "fortune-teller" pretended to predict future 
events;— teaching that there was some connection, or relation, 
between the eclipses and transits of heavenly bodies 
and the events of earth,— such as births, battles, deaths, 
revolutions, plagues, etc.;— and they frequently made note 
of eclipses in connection with their records of events which 
they supposed answered as fulfilments of these superstitious 



notions, just as superstitious people now often connect 
things together in their imaginations which have not the 
remotest philosophical relationship— as, for instance, the 
breaking of a looking glass to be a sign of a death, etc., 
etc. Thus it happened that Ptolemy, who was a historian 
as well as an astronomer, found in those superstitious records 
of the world connections between history and 
astronomic data which he was able to use; and his knowledge 
of astronomy and of dates and times when eclipses 
had occurred helped him in bringing order and harmony 
out of the histories of the four principal heathen nations 
of his day— Assyria, Persia, Greece and Rome. 

To illustrate the incompetency of astronomy in fixing 
dates, we note the fact that scholars are still in doubt and dispute 
respecting the date of our Lord's birth. Some hold that 
it occurred one year and three months before the beginning 
of the year A.D. 1, while others contend that it occurred 
four years (and some six years) previous to A.D. 1. 
Both parties appeal to astronomy to assist them in proving 
their dates. There is nothing in the Scriptural account 
to assist (except the reference of Luke 3: 1 to the 
reign of Tiberius; see MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. p.54), 
for in the Bible nothing is recorded respecting eclipses or 
transits; but in secular history something was found that 
might bear upon the subject, at least indirectly,— the date 
of Herod's death, supposed to have been the year in which 
our Lord was born, or the year after. The only astronomical 
date was Josephus' record that the same year that 
Herod died a sedition occurred and several of the rebels 
were burnt alive by Herod's orders; and "that very night 
there was an eclipse of the moon." This is more data for 
an astronomer to work on than is furnished by any incident 
mentioned in the Scriptures: but was it sufficient to fix 
the year of Herod's death? No; because there are from 
one to four eclipses of the moon every year. 

How absurd it is, therefore, to talk about establishing 
Bible chronology by astronomy! The absurd claim of the 
Mormons that God gave them a new Bible engraved upon 
copper plates is no more incredible. The one proposition 
is as worthy of belief as the other. 

The following from the American Cyclopedia bears 
upon the point we are considering. It says:— 

"Greek and Roman dates are generally well authenticated 
[back] to the first Olympiad (about 776 B.C.).... 
The Assyrian, Babylonian and Egyptian inscriptions are in 
extinct languages and in characters long obsolete.... 
Ctesia, a Greek, about 415 B.C., wrote a history of Babylonia, 
but it is not regarded as authentic. Herodotus is 
valuable only as to his own time, about 459 B.C., and 
those of a century or two earlier.— Attempts have been made 
to bring astronomy to the aid of chronology. Eclipses being 
anciently regarded as portents, occasional mention is 
made of them in connection with historical events." 

Thus it is seen that secular history of very early dates 
is admittedly not generally reliable; and that only in a few 
instances has astronomy been able to assist in fixing dates 



to a reasonable degree of exactness. Two dates are fixed 

with considerable certainty,— the beginning of Nabonassar's 

reign on Feb. 26 of 747 B.C. and the beginning of 

the reign of Cyrus in 536 B.C. The former date is valueless 

to us in the study of Bible chronology; because Nabonassar 

is not mentioned in the Scriptures. The latter, 

however, is a very important aid; for the Bible chronology 

ends with the "70 years desolation of the land," and it 

tells us that God stirred up the heart of Cyrus to restore 

Israel from captivity at the close of that period, and that 

this was in the first year of Cyrus;— hence 536 B.C. 

The Bible, and the Bible alone, supplies such a chronology 
as the people of God can rely upon; and our conviction 
that God did intend to give us a Bible record of 
all past time is strengthened by the fact that the only broken 
periods in the Old Testament record are "bridged" by 
New Testament records. 

If, then, we rely upon the Bible as an inspired declaration 
on the subject, why should we not use it as far as 
it goes;— to the "seventy years desolation of the land," 
and thus to Cyrus. Why not believe that God intended 
thus to provide a chronology as long as it was needed- 
down to the point where secular history could be depended 
upon as accurate— so as to give us a complete chronology 
A.M.? We do so believe; and we find most satisfying 
corroborative evidence of it in the fact that the whole 
Bible record fits it with accuracy and precision, as shown 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

But did not Messrs. Totten, Dimbleby and Usher pursue 
this same safe plan, and make use of the inspired chronology 
of the Bible as far as it will go,— down to the first 
year of Cyrus? 

No, they did not. They admit that the first year of 
Cyrus was the end of the "seventy years desolation of the 
land"; and that that date is well established as A.D. 536; 
but instead of following the Bible line of chronology back 
of that, and making the uncertain dates of secular history 
conform to the positive statements of the Bible, they reverse 
the matter, and attempt to make the Bible record 
agree with the secular dates, admitted to be quite obscure 
and uncertain. For instance, they adopt the uncertain 
secular date for the beginning of Nebuchadnezzar's reign; 

R1975 : page 106 

and then referring to Dan. 1:1, they thus fix the date of 

R1976 : page 106 

Jehoiakim's reign and alter other matters to suit.* Then 

again, they apply the "seventy years" as years of captivity 

and begin them in the third year of Jehoiakim; whereas 

the Scriptures unequivocally declare, repeatedly, that those 

were years of "desolation of the land," "without an inhabitant' 

(Jer. 25:11,12; 29:10; 2 Chron. 36:21; 

Dan. 9:2.) In this manner the remainder of the reign of 



Jehoiakim and all of the reign of Zedekiah (18 years) are 
reckoned in as part of the "seventy," whereas Scrip turally 
they were previous and, therefore, additional years. + 

In this connection let us remind the intelligent reader 
that the secular history, whose dates are taken in preference 
to the Bible history and dates, is so confused, that to this 
very day the ablest secular students of the subject are not 
in full agreement as to who was the immediate predecessor 
of Cyrus,— Darius or Cyaxares; or whether those two names 
were applied to the same ruler, or whether they ruled for a 
time conjointly with Cyrus. 

It is not surprising that unbelievers put as much confidence 
in the uncertain dates of secular history as they do 
in those furnished by the Bible; but it is strange that 
Christians should do so: and that they should give them 
the preference and adopt them when professedly giving a 
"Bible Chronology" is a matter of regret. The consequence 
is that while Usher's chronology is 124 years 
too short, the chronology of Dimbleby, endorsed and 
used by Totten, is 129 years too short. This leads the 
gentlemen into other errors (one error almost always 
leads to another); for they see that there are strong evidences 
that we are living somewhere near the end of the 
Gospel age, and near the time for the Millennium to be 
ushered in by "a time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation." 

They believe, with us, that the 6,000 years of permitted 
sin are to be followed by the 1,000 years of Christ's 
reign of righteousness. But whereas the true Bible chronology 
shows that the 6,000 years from Adam ended in 
1 873 (the very year in which the world-wide depression 
began), their erroneous chronology would show the beginning 
of the seventh millennium to be over one hundred 
years in the future. 

To make their short chronology come out to fit present 
times, two fallacies are introduced; and their readers, who 
are unskilled in chronology, are confused and misled into 
false calculations and into false expectations based thereon. 
As their applications of prophecy differ a little, we shall 
consider their efforts separately,— Mr. Totten's first. 

With these three thoughts in mind: (1) that the transition 
should be expected somewhere about the end of six 
thousand years; (2) that present evidences indicate that 
the Lord's Kingdom is near at hand; (3) that his adopted 
chronology shows the end of six thousand years to be more 
than a century future, Mr. Totten seems to conclude that 
he must look up some means of shrinking his chronology, 
of shortening the 6,000 years so as to end them somewhere 
near the present time; or rather near 1899-1X4— which 
date he reckons, by his calculations, will witness the end 
of the Times of the Gentiles. 

Mr. Totten is ingenious. He reflects that while according 
to his accepted chronology the 6,000 years will end 
in A.D. 2002, yet by reckoning twelve lunations as a year, 
each year would be shortened eleven (11) days and the 
6,000 years end very shortly now. These he terms 



"short" or "lunar" years; while the regular solar year he 
styles the "true" year. To count the entire 6,000 years as 
"lunar" years, of 354 days each, would make the 6,000 years 
from creation end in A.D. 1829, rather too early for 
present use; so looking along the aisles of history, and 
figuring, he finds that the date of Joshua's great battle, at 
which he commanded the sun and moon to stand still, 
would be a convenient approximate date, as well as a 
marked event upon which to speculate. He reckons the 
date of that event to have been the year A.M. 2555-1/4, 
and declares that the remaining 3444-3/4 years necessary to 
complete 6,000 years would (if reckoned 354 days to each 
year), according to his chronology, end A.D. 1899-1/4. We 
quote his words from his own publication of Sept. 22. '90, 
as follows:— 

"Since that [Joshua's] day the millennaries have been 
shortened to lunar years, so that there will extend from 
thence 3444-3/4 lunar years to March 1899 A.D. The sum 
of the 2555-1/4 "long" or solar years up to that day and 
the 3444-3/4 "shortened" or lunar years, from thence to the 
specified equinox, is exactly 6000. Thus some particular 
day near the vernal equinox [March] of the year 1899 A. 
D. will accurately terminate the sixth millennary since 
creation." 

We can find no reason whatever for using such a year 
as 354 days would make; and know of no reckoning, ancient 
or modern, upon that basis. The solar year (i.e., 
the year reckoned by the sun, and marked every spring 
and every autumn by equinoxes— the equal length of the 
day and night) has always been used in reckoning years 
The ancient Jewish custom was to reckon intermediate 
time by "new moons," but this was rectified in a simple 
manner, and brought to solar time, by beginning each new 
year with the first new moon at the Spring equinox, 
nature adding an extra month every few years. Thus 
the years of the Bible were true or solar years, and 
may be reckoned in with our present chronology without 
difficulty. Although arrived at in a simple manner, it 
was no less accurate and scientific than our present method 
of intercalation. 

But we shortly after discovered another reason why 
Mr. Totten chose this date for the ending of 6000 mixed 
years (part solar and part lunar);— he wanted it to agree 
with his "Times of the Gentiles," reckoned by his chronology. 



*We, on the contrary, by this passage fix the date of Nebuchadnezzar's 
reign, from the Bible date of Jehoiakim's reign. 

+Thus they lost eighteen years more. -See MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
VOL. II., pp. 50,51. 

R1976 :page 107 

Accordingly, we concluded to examine his 

"Times of the Gentiles," which he brings to a close at 



the same minute, and proves by similarly careful (?) mathematical 
(?) and astronomical (?) calculations. What do 
we find? 

We find that in this, as in his chronology, Mr. Totten 
goes outside the Bible account and takes secular history 
from the first year of Cyrus back to and through the Babylonian 
period. Thus doing, he is obliged to deny the 
Bible statement that the land of Judea lay "desolate" 
"without an inhabitant" for seventy years. (Dan. 9:2; 
2 Chron. 36:21; Jer. 25:1 1,12.) To get the Bible chronology 
linked to secular chronology he shortens the 
desolation period, which followed Zedekiah's captivity, 
from seventy to fifty-two years. 

But, worse yet; in order to get the "Gentile Times" 
to end as early as 1899-1/4 he begins them, not at the time 
when the crown was removed from Zedekiah, the last representative 
of David who sat upon the typical Kingdom 
of God; nor even at the date when Nebuchadnezzar had 
his vision and was told that he was the head or beginning 
of the Gentile governments represented in the image shown 
him in his dream. Mr. Totten goes back twenty-two years 
before the dream given to Nebuchadnezzar, and forty years 
before the crown was taken from God's representative on 
the typical throne of David, and begins it with the first 
year of Nabopolassar. 

God, both by a vision and by his Prophet Daniel, had 
said to Nebuchadnezzar, "Thou art this head of gold, and 
wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the 
field and the fowls of heaven, hath he given into thy hand, 
and made thee ruler over them all." (Dan. 2:38.) And, 
in view of this clear, plain statement, no sufficient excuse 
can be found for such misapplication of Scripture as the 
above, by any candid expositor. We can only suppose, as 
above suggested, that Mr. Totten, realizing from the signs 
of the times that the great crisis of the age is close at hand, 
let his zeal run away with his judgment and his conscience, 
to a greater extent than even he has fully realized. 

(1) He errs in asserting that his chronology is that of the 
Bible, and that it is supported by astronomy— eclipses, etc., 
—when in reality everybody familiar with the Bible 
knows, who knows anything about the adaptation of 
astronomy to history and chronology, that there is not one 
solitary event so recorded in the Bible as to make this 

a possibility. 

(2) In shrinking his (erroneous) chronology 103 years, 
he supposes a year such as no people, not even savages, 
have ever used. 

(3) To get his "Times of the Gentiles" near the same 
date, by his erroneous chronology, he violates the Bible 
record and begins them twenty-two years before God gave 
any intimation of Gentile Times, and while God's typical 
throne still stood. 

By reason of the assertive style of Mr. Totten's teachings 
some astronomers even, who were not so well posted 
in the Bible as in astronomy, have been thrown off their 
guard, supposing that he had found something new in the 



Bible on which to calculate the dates astronomically; and 
vice versa, some Bible students were so unfamiliar with 
astronomy that they were ready to believe that it could 
prove anything. And so some very good and some educated 
men are misled by Mr. Totten's supposed wisdom, 
the main evidence of which to them is his strong statements 
that he has "solved the riddle of history," found 
"the hidden key" to prophecy and chronology, etc. 
Many of the unsophisticated of God's children are thus in 
danger of being misled so as to ignore and neglect the true 
light now shining upon God's Word and plan. Unless 
helped in time, they are likely by and by to be greatly 
shaken by the failure of Mr. Totten's predictions; and then 
to become easy captives to the snare of Infidelity. 

But, while Mr. Totten is very positive about all past 
time, he is cautious as he reaches out into the future. He 
states himself, but rather vaguely; intimating that the 

R1977 : page 107 

"watchers" will understand: and they do. We see exactly 
what he expects from his writings and diagrams, but 
have difficulty in finding brief, succinct, positive statements 
for quotation. 

His theory, as presented in his publication of Sept. 
22, 1890, chart, is, that from March 1892 to March 1899, 
seven years, the world will be crazy; as represented in the 
seven years of Nebuchadnezzar's madness. 

By March 1891 A.D. the "Jewish Irredentalism" 
would be accomplished; i.e., the Jews would organize as 
a people, but under the domination of other governments. 

By the autumn of 1891 A.D. he announces "Palestine" 
Redivivus"; i.e., Palestine would come into existence 
again, be revived. By this we presume he meant nationally, 
for Palestine has been in process of revival otherwise, for 
nearly twenty years. That he meant nationally is implied 
also by his expectation that "Jewish Irredentalism" would 
precede it six months. 

By March 1892 A.D. (the beginning of the seven 
years of world-madness), a man, a prince (Antichrist), representing 
himself as Messiah, would appear and deceive 
many Jews, and make "a compact with many"; and the 
following September would see the "altar finished" and 
Antichrist's "edict issued," and then would follow the 
general deception and conversion of the whole world to 
Antichrist,— the "virgins" being the only exceptions. This 
would be quickly done, and fully completed before Sept. 
1895 A.D., the "midst of the week." 

By Sept. 1895 a wonderful event was to take place;— 
the setting up of a great Image of Antichrist, which every 
human being on earth was to be compelled to worship, or 
else be killed. Onward to 1899 the "plagues" and "vials" 
of divine wrath, mentioned in Revelation, will be let loose 
upon Antichrist and all whom he had deceived— the whole 
world; and Antichrist will perish, while Christ and the 



R1977 : page 108 

saints (to be translated about March 1892) will appear in 
glory, at that time, March 1899. 

That it may be seen that we are not misstating Mr. 
Totten's views we quote his words, from his pamphlet of 
Sept. 22d, 1890, as follows (the brackets are ours):— 

"This table gives upon an enlarged scale the years 
surrounding the final seven upon the 'Times of the Gentiles.' 
[March 1892 A.D. to March 1899 A.D.] They antitypify 
those of Nebuchadnezzar's insanity, and cover Antichrist's 
REIGN OF HORROR. The latter half of the seven, which 
will probably be bi-sected [divided, Sept. 1895] by the 
setting up of his IMAGE [Rev. 13:18] in the temple, is the 
time of 'Jacob's trouble.' 

"The times are now short and their signs are all completed 
save a single one— the manifestation of 'Ho-Anomos' 
'That Lawless One' (2 Thes. 2:8), whose synonym in the 
same language gives us the familiar neologism, 'Ho Anarchos' 
-(THE ANARCHIST)-and those short days (a year 
and a half) [Sept. 22d 1890 to March 1892] are the SOLE 
DAYS OF GRACE THAT YET REMAIN TO US. For when that 
One shall have begun his reign [March, 1892] the Holy Spirit 
which hitherto has withstood it (2 Thes. 2:6,7) will have 
withdrawn! From that dread moment [March 1892] we 
must date the 'Great Tribulation,' which is the time of 
'the harvest'. ...Progressive interpretation of the Word 
now suggests the awful certainty that the Holy Spirit, 
grieved beyond endurance, will withdraw [March 1892] 
before the Second Advent! With it 'the elect' will probably 
be 'caught up' to join the returning Savior in the air. 
But 'woe to the inhabiters of the earth' (Rev. 12:12) 
when the 'wise virgins' disappear! The 'foolish' will then 
be truly surrounded by a pack of wolves, for when the 
Holy Spirit 'withdraws itself man must literally face the 
INCARNATE DEVIL." 

We take exception to every item of Mr. Totten's 
program, except that the Gospel age ends with the second 
presence of our Lord in the clouds of a great time of anarchistic 
trouble, already overshadowing the world. We are 
not now presenting our views, however, but criticizing his. 

In the beginning of Mr. Totten's presentations of his 
views, we thought that few probably would be misled by his 
errors; and that those few would quickly be undeceived 
by the utter failure of the predictions for 1891 and 1892. 
But no; we had given his followers credit for more discernment 
than they possessed; for it seems that they and 
Mr. Totten become more and more infatuated with their 
errors as the predictions one after another fail, until now 
they think of no date except 1899-1/4. There they expect 
something, nay, everything, to occur; whereas, according 
to Mr. Totten's claims, if reliable at all, everything should 
be over by that time. 

Mr. Totten himself, instead of coming out frankly 
and admitting that thus far his calculations and predictions 
are certainly erroneous, still infatuated with them, writes 



in the same positive manner as at first. In his publication 
of Dec. 21st, 1892, after the time predicted for "Jewish 
Irrendentalism" and "Palestine redivivus" had passed 
and, as every one knows, brought no such events; and 
after the year 1892 had passed, and no Antichrist such as 
he predicted had appeared, or made an "edict," or made 
a covenant or "compact with many" Jews, so far from 
admitting his errors Mr. Totten writes thus:— 

"I doubt if many hamlets in Saxon lands have failed 
to hear some echo of the message, which during the past 
year I have been constrained to send forth with no will to 
hesitate, nor have I aught of it to curtail or withdraw." 

"Whether the date, March 29th 1892, upon which I 
have fixed as merely the beginning of Judgments, be a type 
only, or the long delayed antitype itself, it is the one or the 
other, and in either sense is FINAL." 

All this is the language of desperation, the language 
of a man who has staked his all, and as it disappears will 
not believe the evidence of his senses, but continues to 
mutter to himself, It is so ! It must be so, even if it 
isn't so! Hear him again:— 

"The time has at last arrived when Biblical Chronologists 
may be absolutely sure of certain things; and have 
no fear that they will ever have to be moved again." 

But Mr. Totten thinks best to take some notice of the 
dates which had so evidently proved false, so far as his predictions 
were concerned. He concludes to mention the 
matter guardedly, lest a few should have seen the slip, and 
need just a word of assurance from him, that his only reliable 
and authentic, only Biblical, and only astronomically 
proved and double riveted chronology is as faultless 
as ever. Yet the statement must be so guardedly made 
that the masses of his readers, uncritical, would not know 
that any slip had occurred. His utterances, therefore, 
must be as much as possible like the utterances of the ancient 
Oracle of Delphi,— capable of being understood variously, 
according to the hearer and according to the facts 
of the future. Thus on page 3 19, Dec. '92 issue, he refers 
to the "Jewish Times" which he had previously shown 
most conclusively would end exactly one and a half years 
before March 1892, as proved beyond shadow of doubt by 
his wonderful astronomical calculations. Without a word 
of retraction of the error (so far as we have noticed), he 
takes a new place for beginning those times; viz., 3406 A. 
M. (his and Dimbleby's chronology) instead of, as before, 
3444-3/4 A.M., a difference of only 38 years— a mere nothing 
however, in Mr. Totten's exact (?) chronology which proves 
(?) itself to a fraction of a minute. 

But more; he not only begins at a different point, but 
also changes the kind of time: he now measures it by the 
"true" or solar year of 365-1/4 days, instead of by his short 
and untrue year of 354 days; then, because the reckoning 
reaches nowhere, he adds 75 years (for no conceivable 
reason except to force a date); and then gives the 
astonishing (?) result, 6001 A.M. Here are his own 
words:— 



"Hence, adding to 3406 A.M. these seven times 
(7x360=2520 years), we reach the 5926 A.M., and by 
the further addition of thirty and forty-five or seventy-five 
years, we reach the year 6001 A.M., which is the first of 
the Sabbath thousand, reckoned on the longest possible or 
Solar scale!... Moreover, as we are at this moment 
(Sept. 20-21 1892 A.D.) only at the end of Solar year 
5890 A.M., it would appear that the first year of the Millennium 

R1977 :page 109 

was still about 111 years off! And so it is upon 
the long or Solar scale." 

This is so stated that Mr. Totten can refer to it by and 
by and say,— I showed that the Millennium might not 
come before 2003 A.D. This would mean that the poor 
Jews would be "trodden down of the Gentiles" for a 
hundred years more;— a hundred years after the end 
of Gentile Times, after all Gentile nations and Antichrist 
have been destroyed by the establishment of 
Christ's Kingdom. Where now is Antichrist's deception 
of the Jews, getting them to build him a temple 
and altar and to worship him— if he flourishes from March 
1892 and is destroyed in March 1899; and, poor Jews! 
must they be trodden down by their dead enemies for another 
century? 

But Mr. Totten well knew that few, very few, of his 
readers would see or appreciate this little statement sandwiched 
in with other matter; and so he proceeds on the 
very next page to reiterate his older erroneous position, in 
these words:— 

"Our 1899-1/4 A.D. —Now I have elsewhere shown 
upon a dozen or so lines of independent calculation that 
the 'Times of the Gentiles' must terminate with this latter 
date; and it is for this reason that I unhesitatingly place 
the termination of a hidden scale of 6000 years at this 

R1978 :page 109 

very point." 

It will be noticed that March 1899 is no longer stated 
as the end of 6000 years, but now the end of "a hidden 
[deceptive] scale" of years;— part "true" or solar years 
and part false or short years. All this we can characterize 
as nothing short of a jugglery of language. 

Although Mr. Totten had previously acknowledged Mr. 
Dimbleby as his "preceptor" "in the critical study of Biblical 
chronology," and claimed that they "use the very same 
line of A.M. years with the same respective calendars, all as 
discovered by Professor Dimbleby"; and although he had 
vouched for the whole, and assured his readers that he 
(Totten) had verified it by astronomy, etc., etc., proving 
it to a second and beyond a shadow of doubt, as it were 
double riveting it all around by his wonderful discovery, 
or inspiration, etc., connected with Joshua's long day and 
the dial of Ahaz, etc., etc., yet after critics had taken some 



notice of its historical and astronomical inaccuracies, 
Mr. Totten shoves the blame of them upon Mr. Dimbleby, 
saying in his serial of Dec. 25, '94.— 

"He [Dimbleby] formerly held the maximum Eclipse 
Cycle to be 651 years to the very day. The true Eclipse 
Cycle seems to be nearer to exactly 649 years, as he now 
agrees. Yet for all practical purposes 651 years is an accurate 
Eclipse Cycle. We now believe that it is really the 
earth's mean anomalistic period, and that it always closes 
with an eclipse to within 4-5 days, sometimes accurately." 

Is this a sufficient retraction for men to make who have 
deceived a confiding public into the belief that they had 
found some new means of verifying their chronology to 
the fraction of a minute, and, by a system of stretching and 
shrinking periods, had led people to expect a fulfilment of 
their predictions from 1892 to 1899, which, if not witnessed 
would impliedly prove God a liar and the Bible a 
fraud;— because their eclipse-proved chronology could not 
err. Now the fraction-of-a-minute exactness means, "within 
4-5 days, sometimes accurately," on a short cycle of 
649 years! 

We have searched carefully for any retraction or acknowledgement 
of the error of the statements of what he 
had previously stated must occur in the several years 1892 
to 1899; but we find none. On the contrary, the Dec. 25 
'94 issue speaks of the leading of the Holy Spirit still, although 
it was to have been withdrawn in 1892 to make 
way for Antichrist. Referring to past teachings in the aggregate, 
he affirms their truth, saying that it must yet "be 
mastered by the scoffers." 

Finally, in Nov. 15, '95 issue, he admits just a possibility 
of some trifling error; but by his triumphant tone 
would have his readers believe these so trifling as to be unworthy 
of mention. He says:— "Now and then a stray 
shot may hit away a 'week-day' designation, and here and 
there a careless disposition may entail the sweeping of a 
whole section of our work into the dust." But not one 
syllable as to the gross misapplications of Scripture and 
history already pointed out in this paper; which misstatements 
will surely do damage to the faith of some well-meaning 
but too credulous people, unless they are helped 
by God's providence.— Psa. 91:11,12. 

In the same publication, in view of the proved gross 
inaccuracies of Mr. Dimbleby in relation to astronomy, 
etc., Mr. Totten says: "Any close astronomical student of 
Biblical Chronology will detect the specific errors of Professor 
Dimbleby." But Mr. Totten himself not only endorsed 
those astronomical inaccuracies, but has also 
used them to delude many trusting souls. Mr. Totten adds: 
"Even were every feature of Prof. Dimbleby's work amenable 
to the specific criticism of inaccuracy, and we will not 
say it is not, it has none the less SUPPLIED THE FOUNDATION 
upon which some of the grandest truths of 
Biblical chronology have been discovered." 

What an admission of the weakness and unworthiness 
of the foundation upon which Mr. Totten has labored for 



years. And how astounding that any man not bereft of 

reason should claim that he had built a substantial faith-structure 

upon an unreliable, crumbling proposition which 

"any close astronomical student" would at once reject as 

senseless, if not fraudulent. Yet Mr. Totten declares, in 

the same editorial,— "We not only believe, but are satisfied 

by PROOF and DEMONSTRATION that the time of the 

end of the times of the Gentiles is almost over, that the 

world ought to have the message sent to it at once, and as 

no message was sent ever before. If we had the means we 

should send it at any cost." But as Mr. Totten has not 

the means, those who believe his unscriptural, unscientific, 

unastronomical and mathematically incorrect presentations 

can procure them at the wholesale rate of $8.50 per 

R1978 :page 110 

set in paper covers, and scatter them as truth, and delude 
fellow pilgrims. Alas! that even those who seem to be 
struggling to open the eyes of their understanding should 
be beset by such bewildering false lights. 

In a chart issued by Mr. Totten, Oct. 1895, he reiterates 
his so-called Bible chronology which we have shown 
is very unscriptural, and repeats the same false measurements 
of Gentile Times, but he says nothing about the withdrawal 
of the holy spirit in 1892, nor about the seven years' reign 
of Antichrist from 1892 to 1899, predicted in a previous 
chart. Instead, he runs the record of years down to 1899, 
and then says, "How long, O Lord!" and following this 
he shows another century— until A.D. 2000, for Israel to 
tussle with a literal, human Antichrist and get firmly established. 
Some may consider this all the retraction of 
previous errors necessary; but we do not. Many will not 
see through it, and hence the necessity for helping the 
candid ones, as we now attempt to do. 

If we have shown that Mr. Totten's chronology is not 
Biblical nor reliable,— and that it is absurd to talk of proving 
his (Usher-Dimbleby) chronology, or any other Bible 
chronology, by astronomy,— eclipses, etc.— because the 
Bible contains no record of eclipses and absolutely no data 
of any kind upon which astronomy could take hold,— and 
that his "Times of the Gentiles" were commenced at a 
wrong period, for which there is no authority in reason or 
Scripture,— and that all of his other prophetic "discoveries" 
are based upon these false premises and hence are 
equally erroneous and misleading, we have accomplished 
our purpose. 



R1978 :page 110 

MR. DIMBLEBY'S CHRONOLOGY, ETC. 



AS ALREADY stated, Mr. Dimbleby's solar chronology 

was the one acknowledged by Mr. Totten. 

Therefore, whatever we have said respecting its errors 

of one hundred and twenty-nine years applies to the calculation 

built upon those errors in the theories of both. But 

to the credit of Mr. Dimbleby's knowledge of astronomy, 

he found nothing peculiar to note about the time of Joshua's 

long day, nor any reason to count his years 354 days each from 

then on, so as to culminate the six thousand years over a century 

sooner than they could honestly be terminated, according 

to his erroneous chronology. So he allows his 6000 years to end 

in the year 2002 A.D.; and begins in another way to show 

that the seventh or great millennium of Christ's Kingdom 

will begin one hundred years before the sixth thousand years 

end— but for what reason each reader is left to guess. It 

was evidently the observance of this inconsistency, together 

with the erroneous chronology, that led Mr. Totten to his 

grievous error of attempting to shorten one period and 

stretch another to bring the two together. 

Mr. Dimbleby errs, as Mr. Totten does, in beginning 
his "Gentile Times" with the beginning of King Nabopolassar's 
reign, fully twenty-five years before Nebuchadnezzar 
had his dream of the great image of Gentile governments, in 
the interpretation of which God informed him, through 
Daniel the prophet, that into his hands (not into the hands 
of his dead father Nabopolassar) he gave the dominion of 
the world. (Dan. 2:38.) So even if his chronology were 
corrected he would be obliged to alter the date for beginning 
his 2520 years of "Gentile Times" or rule;— which, 
by the way, he brings to an end in A.D. 1898-1/4 (March 
1898), one year earlier than Mr. Totten. Working on 
the same exact (?), eclipse-proved (?) chronology, 
Totten begins Nabopolassar's reign with the year 3377-1/2 
A.M., and Dimbleby begins it in 3376-1/2 A.M. 

Mr. Dimbleby, knowing of Mr. Totten's failure thus 
far, steers clear of any danger of failure before 1898, by 
locating the second coming of Christ, the time of trouble, 
etc., beyond or at the close of his "Times of the Gentiles" 
-March 1898. He says:- 

"We must observe that our Lord places his second 
coming as at the end of the 'Gentile Times,' 5896-1/4 
[1898-1/4 A.D.]. ...The coming of Christ, the conversion 
of the Jews, and the appearance of the saints in glory, 
are contingent events, all taking place at the end of the 
Gentile Times." 

"The evidence is abounding and overwhelming, if we 
can add up figures, that the eventful period is 1898-1/4.... 
All civil governments will thus be overturned, and God 
rises up to make the enemies of Christ his footstool." 

"Following the close of 'Gentile Times' will be the 
30 years. ...But how great are the events of this day of 
Christ, or 30 years, now close at hand." 

What about this "30 years?" What is it? Where 
does Mr. Dimbleby get it?— We reply, He claims that there 
are certain Jewish Times as well as "Gentile Times," with 
a different beginning and a different ending,— an ending 



30 years after 1898-1/4, where he ends Gentile Times. But 
this is an unreasonable and untenable position, and betrays 
a misunderstanding of the real significance of "Gentile 
Times." 

God passed by all the other nations of the earth and 
recognized only Israel. (See Amos 3:2; Rom. 3:1,2.) 
In Israel he placed his own throne, typically, and her kings 
represented Him; as it is written, "Solomon sat upon the 

R1979 :page 110 

throne of the Lord as king instead of David his father." 

(1 Chron. 29:23.) Yea, before the first of their kings, 

Saul, God considered himself Israel's King, and so declared. 

(1 Sam. 8:7) Under his covenant with that nation, 

God promised to bless and protect them while they 

remained loyal to him; but to chastise them for disloyalty. 

He did this repeatedly, delivering them on account of sin 

into captivity to the Philistines, etc., and rescuing them 

again after they repented; but still recognizing that nation, 

as represented in "Judah," under the kings of David's line, 

down to the end of Zedekiah's reign (3522 A.M., true Bible 

Chronology*)- There, in harmony with his vision to Nebuchadnezzar, 

in the fourth year of Jehoiakim (18 years 

previous), God actually removed his typical kingdom, to 

permit Nebuchadnezzar's government to become universal; 

for it would be impossible for the Gentiles to have universal 

sway so long as God's Kingdom, even in a typical form, 

existed. The Lord marks this time and event in most 

explicit language, saying of Zedekiah, the last king upon 

the typical throne,— "Thou profane and wicked prince 

of Israel, whose day is come when iniquity should have an 

end, thus saith the Lord God: Remove the diadem, and 

take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him 

that is low, and abase him that is high. I will overturn, 



*Starting from this, the evidently correct starting point, the 2520 
years of "Gentile Times" will, without stretching or shrinking, end 
with September 1914 A.D.; while, possibly, something may be expected 
18 years sooner (1896 A.D.); because the announcement of "Gentile 
Times" was made by Daniel, and the dream representing them was 
given to Nebuchadnezzar, 18 years before God's typical Kingdom 
was taken out of the way of Nebuchadnezzar's universal sway.— 
See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 4. 

R1979 :page 111 

overturn, overturn it [God's typical crown and kingdom 
on earth]; and it shall be no more until he come, whose right 
it is [the Christ, "Head" and "body"]; and I will give it 
[the crown and kingdom there overturned] unto him." 
(Ezek. 21:25-27.) It is for this period, during which the 
crown or kingdom of God is overturned in the earth, that 
God gives a lease of ruling authority to the Gentiles, whose 



"times" are seven symbolic years, or 2520 literal years. 
And it is during their "times" that God's people, Israel 
after the flesh, are trodden under foot by the Gentiles; and 
during the same period Israel after the spirit, "the Kingdom 
of Heaven, suffereth violence, and the violent take it 
by force." (Luke 21:24; Matt. 11:12.) Hence for Gentile 
Times to end means for the Gentiles to cease to tread 
down, and for God's people no longer to be trodden down; 
and the treading and the being trodden must of necessity 
end together. 

But not only does Mr. Dimbleby err in separating his 
Jewish times of being trodden, from the "Gentile Times" 
of treading, but he begins them at different and wrong 
places. He begins his Jewish times at the end of the reign 
of king Jehoiakim; seven years after Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream, and eleven years before God removed the diadem of 
his kingdom and overturned it. Furthermore, although he 
does not use Mr. Totten's false year of 354 days in his 
chronology, he falls into the error of reckoning his Jewish 
times by that false measure, authorized nowhere and by nobody. 
Though his chronology and starting times are erroneous, 
his calculations seem to be truthful, except when he 
tries to bring together various prophecies which have no 
real connection, and there he persuades himself that the 
following statement is true; viz.,— 

"I should also state that the 1260 and 1335 years 
make a total of 2595,— and 2595 lunar [354 day] years 
are 2520 solar." 

Mr. Dimbleby's pencil deceived him here, by five 
years lacking 26 days; for 2595 lunar years, 354 days each, 
would represent exactly 2515 years and 26-1/4 days, of 365-1/4 
days to the year. A rather bad slip for an astronomer and 
premier chronologist, who claims to figure out a chronology 
correct to the fraction of a day, and proved (?) by 
astronomy (?)! 

On the whole, then, Mr. Dimbleby's errors are perhaps 
less serious than Mr. Totten's; but still very serious for himself 
and many others: for he has a very dogmatic style, 
calculated to deceive many. Indeed, he almost charges 
that if there should be any miscarriage of his dates it would 
be because of God's unfaithfulness. For instance, in commending 
his findings and presentations, he says:— 

"Is God going to change? Will he abandon his 
fidelity? Better suppose that the sun will not rise 
tomorrow." 

Such language is not that of a teacher properly under 
the lead of the Lord's spirit. A teacher should present 
the Scriptural or other evidences, and there rest his case. 
Beware of any teachings "hammered in" thus. The implication 
is that Mr. Dimbleby's work is infallible, beyond 
question; sooner question God's veracity and fidelity, and 
sooner yet doubt the sunrise: the thing farthest from failure 
is Mr. D's. chronology and figures,— which we have 
just shown are inconsistent in every important part. We 
recapitulate them here:— 

(1) Errors in Chronology of one hundred and twenty-nine 



years.— One hundred years short in the period of the 
Judges of Israel. The other twenty-nine years in error are 
dropped by leaving the Bible record (as the standard, down 
to the first year of Cyrus, the end of the seventy years 
desolation) and attempting, with Ptolemy, Usher and 
others, to harmonize the statements of Scripture with the 
fragmentary statements of secular history. 

(2) The error of making a period of "Jewish Times" 

(which the Scriptures nowhere mention) separate from "Gentile 
Times"; and of beginning both at wrong dates, and 
counting them upon his erroneous chronology, and one of 
them upon false (short) years. 

(3) Above all the other errors his wholly unwarranted 
and absolutely untrue statements that prophecies begin and 
end on the same day of the week and month, etc., and 
that his chronology is proved by eclipses, exact to an hour 
or minute, etc. Mr. Dimbleby, as well as Mr. Totten, 

must know, what every person of even average acquaintance 
with chronology, astronomy and the Bible should 
know, that the Bible does not contain one solitary item 
that could be used by an astronomer in fixing any date;— 
neither with certainty nor with uncertainty. 

What he has done with his chronology any one could 
do with any chronology. First, as Mr. Dimbleby practically 
does, accept Usher's chronology— partly from the 
Bible and partly from secular history. Then, take your pencil, 
or such astronomical "tables" as are accessible to all, 
and say to yourself, If my chronology is correct, Nebuchadnezzar 
came to his throne in such a year; and, if so, I 
see by the "tables" that there must have been such and such 
eclipses, or such and such transits, that year. If my chronology 
is correct, king David ascended his throne in the 

year , so many years ago; and, if so, according to the 

"tables," there were such transits and such eclipses that year. 

But all depends on the if of the chronology. If the 
chronology were astray one year, or one thousand years, 
astronomy would not assist in detecting the error, unless 
accurate and quite elaborate records of astronomical events 
are found in connection with the history; which is not the 
case with Bible history. 

We could just as easily fix up a statement of solar cycles, 
conjunctions and transits and affix it to various items of our 
truly Bible chronology. We could claim that astronomy 
verified every date; and we could no doubt deceive many 
by such attempts, and few would see through the sophistry. 
But God would know it, and we would know it ourselves; 
and we believe that it is as dangerous for one to deceive 
himself as to deceive others. We advise all to be especially 
on guard against self deception in handling the divine 
Word.-2 Cor. 4:2. 



Much more could be said in criticism of the views set 
forth by Messrs. Totten and Dimbleby— their misapplication 
and distortion of every prophetic date they attempt 



to handle; their expectation of a coming man Antichrist, 
etc., etc.; but we forbear for two reasons. (1) Because 
those who see that their chief proofs (?) and arguments are 
absurdities would know better than to trust in other matters 
to such teacher's assertions. (2) Because our readers 
already have what we believe to be the Scriptural interpretation 
of the various prophetic periods, and a full treatment 
of the Antichrist, in MILLENNIAL DAWN. 



For the sake of some, we remark that a "prophetic 
year" of 360 days, used to symbolize 360 years, is an arbitrary 
arrangement peculiar to its intended symbolic use. It 
is neither a Lunar year of 354-1/3 days nor a Solar year of 
365-1/4 days. The fulfilment of a prophetic year would 
mean 360 actual or Solar years of the common reckoning. 



R1980 :page 112 

TRUE BIBLE CHRONOLOGY STATED A.M. 



THE arrangement of Chronology in our Common 
Version English Bibles was made by Bishop Usher. 
It begins with the era known as Anno Domini (the year of 
our Lord— although Usher believed, with many scholars, 
that our Lord was born 4 years earlier than that era,— and 
we claim 1-1/4 years earlier.)* Usher reckons backward 
from A.D., calling the years B.C., and in our chapter on 
Chronology in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., we have 
followed the same usage. But since some might grasp 
the subject better by a presentation of it in consecutive 
order, from Adam's creation to the present time, we will 
here give such a presentation, known as A.M. (Anno Mundi) 
or the year of the world. Otherwise the statement following 
will be found to coincide exactly with the presentation 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

PERIOD FROM CREATION TO THE FLOOD. 



A.M. 
Adam's age when Seth was born— Gen. 5:3— was 130 = 130 
Seth's " " Enos " " " 5:6 " 105 = 235 

Enos Cainan " " " 5:9 " 90= 325 

Cainan's " " Mahaleel " " " 5:12 " 70= 395 
Mahaleel's " " Jared " " " 5:15 " 65= 460 
Jared's " " Enoch " " " 5:18 " 162= 622 
Enoch's " " Methuselah " " " 5:21 " 65 = 687 
Methuselah's " " Lamech " " " 5:25 " 187 = 874 

Lamech's " " Noah 5:28 " 182= 1056 

Noah's " " the flood was on the earth 7:6 " 600 = 1656 



Total years from Adam to the day the flood 

was dried up— Gen. 8:13 1656 

PERIOD FROM THE FLOOD TO THE ABRAHAMIC 
COVENANT. 



A.M. 

Flood dried up (Gen. 8:13) 1656 

Arphaxad was born two years after the Flood (Gen. 11:10) 1658 

Arphaxad begat Salah when 35 (Gen. 11:12) 1693 

Salah begat Eber when 30 (Gen. 11:14) 1723 

Eber begat Peleg when 34 (Gen. 11:16) 1757 

Peleg begat Ren when 30 (Gen. 11:18) 1787 

Ren begat Serug when 32 (Gen. 11:20) 1819 

Serug begat Nahor when 30 (Gen. 11:22) 1849 

Nahor begat Terah when 29 (Gen. 11:24) 1878 

Terah died aged 205 years (Gen. 1 1:32) 2083 

Abraham at that time was 75 years old (Gen. 12:4) 2083 

PERIOD FROM THE ABRAHAMIC COVENANT TO THE LAW. 



A.M. 

Terah was Abraham's father; and at his death (Acts 7:4; 
Gen. 12:4) Abraham removed into the land of Canaan. Thus 
by his faith and obedience he sealed to himself the great 
Abrahamic Covenant, which God had previously promised 
should be his, upon this condition. (Gen. 12:1-7.) And, 
since the period from the making of this Covenant to the giving 
of the Law was 430 years (Gal. 3:17), it follows that the 
first feature of the Law, which was the Passover, was instituted 
in the year 2513 

(See Exod. 12:40-51 and MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. II., 
pp.45-47.) 

PERIOD FROM THE LAW TO THE DIVISION OF THE LAND. 



A.M. 

Israel's day of trial in the wilderness was 40 years— from 
"the self-same day" that the 430 years ended, on the fourteenth 
day of the first month, four days after they entered 
Canaan in 2553 

There the Jubilee cycles began to count.— Compare Joshua 4:19 
and 5:10; Lev. 25:2. 

Six years were consumed by Israel in conquering the land 
and dividing it amongst the tribes. These preceded the first 
Sabbath year, and ended with the year 2559 

(Josh. 14:7,10; MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.48.) 

PERIOD OF THE JUDGES. 



A.M. 



St. Paul, discussing this subject, says (Acts 13:19,20): 
"He [God] divided their land to them by lot; and after that 
he gave them Judges about [during+] the space of four hundred 
and fifty years [i.e., they had Judges off and on during that 
space of time], until Samuel the Prophet [inclusive]. And 
afterward, when they desired a king, God gave unto them 
Saul," at the close of the year 3009 

(Compare MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.49.) 

PERIOD OF THE KINGS. 



A.M. 



Saul's 40 year ' 


'space" 


of reigning (Acts 13:21) ended 3049 


David's reig 


;nof40 


years (1 Chron. 29:27) 


3089 


Solomon's " 


40 


" 2 Chron. 9:30 " 


3129 


Rehoboam's 


17 


" 12:13 " 


3146 


Abijah's " 


3 " 


" 13:2 " 


3149 


Asa's 


41 " 


" 16:13 " 


3190 


Jehoshaphat's 


25 


" 20:31 " 


3215 


Jehoram's " 


8 ' 


" 21:20 " 


3223 


Ahaziah's " 


1 " 


" 22:2 " 


3224 


Athaliah's " 


6 " 


" 22:12 " 


3230 


Jehoash's " 


40 ' 


" 24:1 " 


3270 


Amaziah's " 


29 


" 25:1 " 


3299 


Uzziah's " 


52 " 


" 26:3 " 


3351 


Jotham's " 


16 ' 


" 27:1 " 


3367 


Ahaz's 


16 " 


" 28:1 " 


3383 


Hezekiah's " 


29 


" 29:1 " 


3412 


Manasseh's ' 


55 


" 33:1 " 


3467 


Amon's 


2 " 


" 33:21 " 


3469 


Josiah's " 


31 " 


" 35:1 " 


3500 


Jehoiakim's ' 


11 


" 36:5 " 


3511 


Zedekiah's " 


11 


" 36:11 " 


3522 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.54. 

+The Greek word here rendered "about" is hos, and has the significance 
of during or while. The same writer, Luke, uses the same 
word in Acts 1:10; 10:17; Luke 24:32; and in each of these cases 
it is translated "while," in our common version. The Syriac reads 
thus,— "And for four hundred and fifty years he gave them Judges, until 
Samuel the Prophet"— the last of the Judges. 

The record of 1 Kings 6:1 is evidently a transcriber's error, 480 
being stated instead of 580. The latter agrees perfectly with the 
Apostle's statement (Acts 13:19,20), and is in accord with the lapping 
and broken periods of the Judgeships and captivities recorded in 
the Book of the Judges. 

The Emphatic Diaglott has the following footnote on Acts 13:20: 
—"A difficulty occurs here which has very much puzzled Bible chronologists. 
The date given here is at variance with the statement found 
in 1 Kings 6:1. There have been many solutions offered, but only one 
seems entirely satisfactory; i.e., that the text in 1 Kings 6:1 has been 
corrupted by substituting the Hebrew character daleth (4) for hay (5), 
which is very similar in form. This would make 580 (instead of 480) 



from the exode to the building of the temple, and exactly agree with 
Paul's chronology." 

R1980 :page 113 

PERIOD OF THE "70 YEARS DESOLATION OF THE LAND." 



A.M. 

This period began after Zedekiah's kingdom was overturned 
when the land was left desolate (Jer. 40:6-13; 40:10-18; 
43:5-7) 3523 

It ended 70 years later, in 3593 

PERIOD FROM THE RESTORATION UNTIL THE ERA A.D. 



A.M. 

The date of the restoration of Israel to their own land, 
which terminated its seventy years of desolation "without an 
inhabitant," is clearly fixed in the Bible as the first year of 
the reign of Cyrus the Mede (2 Chron. 36:21-23), which 
was therefore, as above shown, the year 3593 

Here the Bible chronology ends, giving us a good 
connection with secular history; for the first year of Cyrus 
is recognized by all competent judges as a clearly fixed 
date, 536 years before our era known as Anno Domini. (And 
it should be remembered that no earlier date than this can be 
clearly and unquestionably associated with Bible history and 
chronology.) Since the year 3593 was the same year as the 
first year of Cyrus, to add 535 years to it would show that the 
year B.C. 1 was the year 4128 

Our A.D. era followed. 

To complete 6000 years would require 1872 years (to 
Oct. 1872 A.D.) 1872 

Hence, the year ending Oct. A.D. 1872 was the year 6000 



l* 



The date marked by the Jubilee cycles as the beginning 
of the Times of Restitution (Acts 3:19-21), Sept. 20th, 1874" 

was therefore the year 6002 

The year which ended Oct. 1895 was 6023 

The year ending Oct. 1900 A.D. will be 6028 

The year ending Oct. 1914 A.D. will be 6042 

and the full forty year "day of wrath" from October, 1874, 
will end Oct. 1914 A.D., the full limit of Gentile Times 
to tread down Jerusalem and its people. 

All students of chronology may be said to be agreed, 
that the first year of Cyrus was the year 536 before the beginning 
of our Anno Domini era+. But there is, and can 
be, no agreement as to the dates of previous events, for 
several reasons: 

(1) The records of secular history are fragmentary, 
and all hopelessly tangled. The Bible record is by far the 
most clear; yet, as we have seen, its Old Testament records 
would be insufficient without the inspired assistance of 



the New Testament writers. 



*Two years in Eden, free from sin, may be reckoned as 
belonging to the Millennium, and thus the two years discrepancy 
between the end of the 6000 years and the beginning of the 
Times of Restitution be accounted for;— Man's week of evil, 6000 years, 
being measured in full. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., p. 127. 

+Much confusion will be saved by remembering that between B.C. 
and A.D. is a fixed point which marks a new era chronologically; 
(not the birth of Christ, but that point of time once assumed to have 
been the date of his birth). Hence, whether our Lord was really born 
one and a quarter years earlier, or four and a quarter years earlier, 
would not alter the number of the years. Whatever would be added to 
the A.D. would come off the number of B.C. years, and the total years 
would be in every case the same. See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p.55. 

R1981 :page 113 

(2) In endeavoring to harmonize the statements of 
the Bible with the tangled statements of secular history, 
Bishop Usher (and nearly all more recent chronologists 
have followed his lead in this matter unquestioningly) 
counted the "seventy years" upon Israel to be years of captivity 
to Babylon and have dated them from the first year 
of Nebuchadnezzar, when he carried Jehoiakim and many 
of the people and the valuable vessels of the Temple to 
Babylon. The chronology arranged upon such a false 
supposition is of course incorrect; for, as we have 
shown, the Bible explicitly declares that those were "seventy 
years desolation of the land," without an inhabitant. 

Our method, of taking the Bible figures only, and 
exactly, is the only proper course; and we are thus assured 
that we neither deceive ourselves nor others. God 
will in due time vindicate his Word abundantly;— meantime 
we trust it implicitly. Whatever may be said of others, 
the chronology as given in the Bible itself is, in our judgment, 
the only one worthy of consideration by the child 
of God who believes that 

"God is his own interpreter, 
And he will make it plain." 



R1981 :page 113 

THE TEMPLE OF GOD. 



"For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 

THE usual Hebrew term applied to the Jewish 
temple was heykal, which signifies a royal residence. 
It was also often qualified by the term kodesh, sanctuary, 



to indicate its sacredness as the visible dwelling place of 
Jehovah among his people. The same significance also 
attached to the movable tent or sanctuary of Israel, the 
tabernacle in the wilderness. The idea thus visibly expressed 
was that God was in the midst of his people, as he 
said, "And there will I meet with the children of Israel, 
and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. And I 
will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation and the 
altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to 
minister to me in the priest's office. And I will dwell 
among the children of Israel, and will be their God."— 
Exod. 29:43-45. 

In fulfilment of this promise, as soon as the tabernacle 
was finished, the glory of the Lord filled it, as we read:— 
"So Moses finished the work. Then a cloud covered the 
tent of the congregation and the glory of the Lord filled 
the tabernacle. And Moses was not able to enter into the 
tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, 
and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. ...The 
cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and 
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of 
Israel throughout all their journeys"— Exod. 40:33-38. 

So also at the dedication of Solomon's temple there 
was the same divine recognition of this more permanent 
structure:— "So was ended all the work that king Solomon 
made for the house of the Lord. And Solomon brought 
in the things which David his father had dedicated, even 
the silver and the gold and the vessels did he put among 
the treasures of the house of the Lord.. ..And it came 
to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, 
that the cloud filled the house of the Lord so that the 

R1981 :page 114 

priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud; 
for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the 
Lord."-l Kings 7:51; 8:10,11. 

The idea conveyed by the several accounts of this 
glory of the Lord, as it appeared in the Tabernacle, in the 
Temple, on Mount Sinai, and as it guided and protected 
Israel in coming out of Egypt, is that of exceeding brightness, 
enveloped, and usually concealed, by a thick cloud, 
from which, on special occasions, it shone forth. Thus we 
read, "And the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount 
Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days.. ..And the 
sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on 
the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel." 
-Exod. 24:16,17. See also 19:9,18,19; 40:34,35; 
1 Kings 8:10,11. 

But the tabernacle and temple of God, built by divine 
direction and under the divine supervision, and thus honored 
with the visible, typical manifestations of the divine presence 
and glory, were only types of that grander tabernacle, not 
made with hands, of which fleshly Israel could have no 
conception, and of that holy temple which should by and by 
eclipse the grandeur of the earthly temple with all the gold 



and precious stones that adorned it. Let us, then, look away 
from, or, rather, let us look through, the typical temple of 
God to its antitype. The Apostles tell us that the Gospel 
Church, both individually and collectively, constitute the 
antitypical temple:— "For the temple of God is holy, 
which temple ye are." 

Considering the matter first in its individual application, 
we hear Paul say to the consecrated people of God, 
"Know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy 
spirit which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are 
not your own?. ..Ye are the temple of the living God, 
as God hath said, I will dwell in them and walk in them; 
and I will be their God and they shall be my people." (1 Cor. 6:19; 
2 Cor. 6:16; Lev. 26:12.) Thus every faithful, consecrated 
child of God in whom God, by his holy spirit, 
dwells, is a temple of God, a royal residence of the King 
of kings, a holy sanctuary, this high privilege being ours 
through Christ, who first redeemed us by his precious blood, 
and thus made us eligible to the call of God to be thus sanctified 
and set apart wholly to his use— "for a habitation of 
God through the spirit." 

It was to this that our Lord also referred, saying, "If 
a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will 
love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode 
with him.... The comforter which is the holy spirit, 
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you 
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever 
I have said unto you." (John 14:23,26.) Thus 
each individual saint becomes "a habitation of God 
through the spirit," a holy temple, a royal residence. 

How precious is the thought, how great the condescension 
of our God in thus honoring his chosen ones who 
believe and trust in him and are fully consecrated to his 
will and service. "Ye are the temple of the living God"; 
and "ye are not in the flesh [in the old carnal condition], 
but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in 
you." (Rom. 8:9.) And if the spirit of God dwell in 
us, it is to sanctify and glorify these temples of his, that 
even now we should show forth the praises of him who 
hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 

It is in this view of our relationship to God that Paul 
would impress upon our minds the sanctity of these temples of 
the holy spirit, saying, "Know ye not that ye are the temple 
of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any 
man destroy the temple of God, him will God destroy." That 
is, if, after he has been made a partaker of the holy spirit, and 
consequently, through the enlightening and guiding influences 
of that spirit, has tasted the good word of God and 
the powers [privileges of divine instruction, etc.] of the 
coming age, he should stifle all these blessed influences, refusing 
to be further led of the spirit of God, and turn again, 
either suddenly or gradually, to the spirit of the world, 
such a one is destroying his spiritual life— destroying the 
temple of God, which was holy and consecrated to God. And 
if such a one should hope thereby to have his portion in the 
coming age with the restitution class, let him quickly undeceive 



himself, for the judgment against all such is, "Him 
will God destroy." The Lord has "no pleasure" in any 
who "draw back" from such high privileges. "But, beloved, 
we are persuaded better things of you, and things 
that accompany salvation.... We are not of them who 
draw back unto destruction, but of them which believe to 
the saving of the soul."-Heb. 6:4-9; 10:38,39. 

It was in allusion to this same thing that our Lord, 
addressing his disciples, said, "Whosoever shall seek to 
save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life, 
shall preserve it"; and that Paul also said, "If ye live 
after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye, through the spirit, 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." (Luke 17:33; 
Rom. 8:13) It is to those who appreciate the 
sanctity of these temples of God that all the blessings of 
divine grace belong; for God shall dwell in them and 
walk in them, and his glory shall be manifested in them 
and to them. It is their blessed privilege, in reverent humility, 
to realize the condescending favor of God in recognizing 
them as his temples, and making his abode with them, 
and to profit by all the hallowed influences of his presence 
and favor. And if indeed these bodies of ours be the 
temple of the holy spirit, what manner of persons ought 
we to be in all holy conversation and godlikeness? and 
how ought these mortal bodies to be quickened by his spirit 
that dwelleth in us?— quickened into active and diligent 
service and to the bringing forth of all the fruits of holiness. 
-2 Pet. 3:11; Rom. 8:11. 

But while the saints are thus individually the temples 
of God, they also collectively constitute the great temple 
in which Peter likens each individual to a living stone, and 
Christ to the chief or foundation corner stone, "To whom 
coming, as unto a living stone,. ..ye also, as living stones, 

R1982:page 114 

are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer 
up sacrifices* acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 2:5.) 
Paul also refers to this same thought, saying, "Ye 
are. ..of the house of God, and are built upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets [the foundation of 
hope in which they trusted, and which they pointed out to 
us], Jesus Christ, [he] being a foundation corner stone of 
it; in whom all the building fitly framed together, groweth 
unto an holy temple for the Lord: in whom ye also are 
builded together for a habitation of God through the 
spirit."— Eph. 2:20-22. 

The fact of the chief corner stone being also the foundation 
stone of this building, as well as the "head-stone," 
the crowning glory of it, as suggested by the prophets 
(Zech. 4:7; Psa. 1 18:22), calls to mind the form of the 
Great Pyramid whose top stone is the chief corner stone, 
and whose internal structure corresponds so perfectly with 
the Tabernacle and its symbolism. + And further, if Christ 



*Sinaitic MS. omits "spiritual" before sacrifices. 
+See Millennial Dawn, VOL. III., Chap. 10. 

R1982:page 115 

be the chief corner stone, the top stone and also the foundation, 
as he surely is (1 Cor. 3:11), the manifest suggestion 
is that the foundation of this building of God is laid 
in the heavens, not on earth, and that all the other living 
stones built upon this foundation are drawn and cemented 
to it by heavenly and not earthly attractions. Yes, "ye 
are God's building"— "ye," both individually and collectively, 
consecrated sons of God who have become the 
habitation of God through the spirit, ye are the temple of 
God. Howbeit, though now it is but a tabernacle in the 
flesh, and though in this tabernacle we often groan, being 
burdened, we know that when this tabernacle is destroyed 
we have a building of God, "a house not made 
with hands, eternal in the heavens."— 2 Cor. 5:1,2. 

Though the Church, like a tabernacle in the wilderness, 
is now a habitation of God, owned by him, and 
blessed by his presence, and filled with a large measure of 
his glory, yet enveloped, as it generally is, by clouds of 
trouble, etc., which hide the glory from others, except as 
occasionally manifested, it is not always to be a moving 
tent with its glory concealed. By and by her glory will 
be manifested without the enveloping cloud;— "She shall 
shine forth as the sun." (Matt. 13:43.) The prophet 
Isaiah joyfully anticipates that blessed time when the finished 
temple of God shall displace the present tabernacle, 
saying, "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory 
of the Lord is risen upon thee,. ..and his glory shall 
be seen upon thee. And the nations shall come to thy 
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising."— 
Isa. 60:1-3. 

What a hope is thus set before the faithful ones, who, 
as living stones, come to Christ to be built upon this foundation! 
From the eloquent imagery of prophets and 
apostles we catch the inspiration of that holy joy which shall 
be fully realized when all the living stones of the glorious 
spiritual temple of God shall noiselessly come together 
without the sound of a hammer— in the first resurrection, 
and when the headstone shall crown this glorious building 
of God, amid shoutings of "Grace, grace, unto it." 
(Zech. 4:7.) What tongue can tell or pen portray the 
glory to be revealed in the saints by and by, when the 
sacrifices of this day of atonement (the Gospel age) are all 
over? and what plummet can sound or line measure 
the wealth of blessing that will flow to redeemed humanity 
from the glorified temple of God? 

But, aside from this inspiring theme, let us return to 
the thought which the Apostle would impress upon the 
minds and hearts of all God's people; viz., the sanctity 
of the temple of God,— "Know ye not that ye are the 
temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwelleth in you? 



If any man destroy the temple of God, him will God destroy; 

for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye 

are." 

If the spirit of God does not dwell in us, then we are 
not of the class addressed; "for if any man have not the 
spirit of Christ, he is none of his." And those who have 
that spirit are led by it in the paths of righteousness and 
truth. And not only so, but those who have and who are 
led by the spirit of God have therein an earnest or pledge of 
their future inheritance as the sons of God, as the Apostle 
tells us, saying, "After that ye were sealed with the holy 
spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance 
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto 
the praise of his glory."— Eph. 1:13,14. 

Yes, our present divine recognition as sons of God is 
the surest evidence we can have of his recognition when 
we shall have finished our course. If to-day we have his 
manifest approval and fellowship, and if these mortal bodies 
are quickened into loving, active zeal both to know and to 
do the will of God, we may also look forward with joyful 
anticipation to that blessed time when we shall see the Lord 
and be like him. 



R1982:page 115 

PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD. 

-MAY 24.-Luke 20:9-19.- 

Parallel accounts-Matt. 21:33-46; Mark 12:1-12. 

Golden Text— "The stone which the builders rejected, the 
same is become the head of the corner."— Luke 20:17. 

THIS parable formed a part of our Lord's discourse on 

the last day of his public ministry. He had been 

teaching daily in the Temple, and the people, much impressed 

by his mighty works and his wonderful words, 

"were very attentive to hear him." (Luke 19:47,48.) 

But the more his fame spread abroad and the people were 

influenced by his teaching, the more the envy and opposition 

of the scribes and Pharisees increased and intensified 

into a settled murderous hatred, which plotted and schemed 

to accomplish his death. It was in this spirit and intent 

that the chief priests and scribes and elders of Israel came 

upon him with what they esteemed puzzling questions, seeking 

to entrap him in his words and thereby to gain some 

pretext for his arrest. 

The shrewdness with which our Lord met their attacks 
commands the admiration of all. He was more than a 
match for all the gainsayers, putting them to silence and 
to shame. Then he spoke this parable, which they perceived 
to be against them, and which the more angered 
them, so that they would have laid hands on him then had 



they not feared the people.— Verse 19. 

In the parable, the owner of the vineyard represented 
God, and the "vineyard" represented the Jewish nation as 
described under the same figure in Isaiah 5:1-7.— "For 
the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, 
and the men of Judah his pleasant plant." God had done 
much for his vineyard in the way of planting and care and 
cultivation; and in view of this he inquires (Isa. 5:4), 
"What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I 
have not done in it?" But nevertheless it repaid him wild 
grapes instead of good grapes,— "and he looked for judgment, 
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold 
a cry, etc." And the "husbandmen" to whom the vineyard 
was let were the divinely constituted religious 
leaders of the nation. These husbandmen had this stewardship 
from the time of the exodus down to the time of the 
coming of Messiah, a period of nearly nineteen centuries. 

At various seasons during the age God specially looked 
for fruits of righteousness, sending to them his faithful prophets, 
who were lightly esteemed and illy treated— especially 
by the husbandmen. -Matt. 23:31,32. 

Last of all, in the harvest or end of the age, God sent 
unto them his Son, saying, "It may be they will reverence 
my Son." But no, in their selfish ambition to retain their 
stewardship, they said among themselves, "This is the heir: 
come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours." 
"So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him." 
The application of the parable was too manifest to be misunderstood. 
The guilty consciences needed no further accusation. 
The self-righteous hypocrites perceived that the 

R1982:page 116 

great Teacher had read their hearts and was aware of their 
dark designs. 

In the further progress of the parable was the prophecy 
of his own final triumph, even though they should kill 
him; for he was the stone of which the Psalmist prophesied, 
saying, "The stone which the builders refused is become 
the headstone of the corner" (Psa. 118:22), the 
building of God being referred to as a pyramid, of which 
the topstone is the chief corner stone. (See also Zech. 4:7.) 
This stone might indeed be rejected by them then, but 
that would not hinder its exaltation in God's due time as 
the chief stone in the glorious spiritual temple of God. 

In stumbling over Christ at his first advent, the Jewish 
nation was indeed broken to pieces; and ever since they have 
been a nation scattered and peeled (Isa. 18:2), all the 
world being witness to the fact. The world is also witness 
to the fact that those wicked husbandmen who crucified the 
Lord were destroyed as such. They lost their prestige and 
power and honor and office (and many of them doubtless 
perished literally in the destruction of Jerusalem), 
and were superseded by the more worthy apostles and 
teachers of the gospel of Christ. 

Such was the testimony of Christ against fleshly Israel 



R1983 :page 116 

as a people, and against their religious leaders and teachers; 
and as we read the prophecy and mark how true 
to the letter has been the fulfilment, we should not 
fail to mark also another prophecy, pointing to a double 
fulfilment,— first, upon fleshly Israel, and, secondly, upon 
nominal spiritual Israel, or the nominal Christian Church. 
It reads,— "And he shall be for a stone of stumbling and 
for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) 
In this as in other things the two houses of Israel, 
the fleshly of the Jewish age, and the spiritual of the Gospel 
age, stand related to each other as type and antitype; 
and the likeness is striking. The attitude of the public 
teachers of to-day, like those of the Jewish age, is against 
the Lord and the truth now due in these days of his presence. 
They are closing their eyes to the light that is now 
shining, and, as a result, both they and all who follow their 
leading are stumbling into the ditch of infidelity; and soon 
they will all be overwhelmed in the great tribulation of 
which the Lord and the prophet forewarn us.— Matt. 24:21; 
Dan. 12:1; Rev. 18:4. 

The result of the stumbling of the nominal gospel 
Church over this stone will be the same as in the case of 
the Jewish Church: they will be broken; the whole institution 
will be disintegrated, and only the faithful remnant 
of this age (as of that) will be gathered into the Kingdom of 
God— a "little flock" to whom "it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give the Kingdom." 

But when this corner stone crowns the finished temple 
of God, the Church glorified, when the Kingdom is established 
in glory and power, upon whomsoever this stone 
falls it will grind him to powder; it will utterly destroy him. 
"Every soul that will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed 
from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

With the example of the stumbling of fleshly Israel in 
view, how careful should every Christian be to see to it that 
he is not among those of this age who form the antitype— 
either of the blind leaders or of the blind multitudes who 
follow their leading into the yawning ditch which shall surely 
ingulf all of the unfaithful. 



R1983 :page 116 

THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM FORETOLD 

-MAY 31. -Luke 21:20-36.- 

Golden Text— "Heaven and earth shall pass away, 
but my words shall not pass away.— Luke 21:33. 

IT should be remembered that this lesson is but a fragment 
from our Lord's long discourse, in answer to 



three distinct questions propounded by the disciples:— 
When shall these things [the destruction of the Temple, 
etc.] be? What shall be the sign of thy [second] coming? 
What shall be the sign of the end of the age? 

Verses 20-24 have reference primarily to the destruction 
of Jerusalem and the Jewish polity in the close of the 
Jewish age, altho they have a secondary reference to events 
in the end of the Gospel age, the antitype of the Jewish 
age. This, however, is no part of our present lesson. 

The literal fulfilment of this portion of the prophecy 
is disputed by none. The Roman army besieged the city, 
and then suddenly withdrew (A.D. 69). Vespasian, the 
Roman general, learning of the death of the Roman emperor, 
and that insurrection prevailed at Rome, hastened 
thither and assumed the emperorship. Meantime, before 
Titus had assumed command of the army and renewed the 
siege of Jerusalem, the Christians of the city acted upon 
our Lord's instruction, fled from the doomed city and 
thus escaped the awful horrors of its siege, in which it is 
claimed that 1,100,000 Jews perished. Josephus, the Jewish 
historian, says of this event: "The misfortunes of all 
men from the beginning of the world, if they be compared 
to those of the Jews, are not so terrible as theirs were"; 
"nor did any age ever produce a generation more fruitful 
of wickedness, from the beginning of the world." As a 
nation, the Jews had experienced great blessings and privileges, 
and these being misused brought great darkness and 
ultimately a terrible national judgment, as predicted. (Verse 22 
and 1 Thes. 2:16.) All of these things correspond to 
the conditions in the "harvest" or end of this Gospel age. 
Here the light of the Lord's second presence rejected will 
bring special responsibility upon nominal "Christendom," 
whose wickedness at the time will be very great, proportioned 
to its light; and its fall will be in the midst of a 
time of trouble still greater than that which overwhelmed 
the typical city and nation. 

Our Lord's prediction, when uttered, seemed most improbable: 
the city and country were more prosperous than 
for a long time, and the temple, after forty-six years of 
building, had just been completed and was truly magnificent. 
Yet within forty years it was an awful ruin. (See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 4.) 

Verses 25-31, leaping over centuries, point to events 
near the close of Gentile Times, and mention the signs of 
the close of the Gospel age, and connected with the revealing 
of the Son of Man in glory. The signs in the sun, 
moon and stars were to give a general idea as to the time 
when the Kingdom would be nigh. We will not here particularize 
respecting these signs, but will mention them:— 
The remarkable darkening of the sun and moon, May 19th, 
1780; and the notable falling of stars or meteoric shower on 
the morning of Nov. 13th, 1833. While we believe also in a 
symbolic fulfilment of the darkening of the sun and falling of 
the stars, yet we cannot overlook the literal fulfilment, and 
hence expect, in harmony with 

Verses 32,33, that some of the generation which saw 



the falling stars will continue to live until God's Kingdom 
shall be fully established. 

Verses 34-36 are a general exhortation, as applicable 
to us to-day as to the disciples eighteen centuries ago. 



page 117 
VOL. XVII. JUNE 1, 1896. No. 11. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 118 

Venial and Mortal Sins 119 

Poem: A Sermon for Children 123 

The Thief in Paradise 124 

Questions and Answers 125 

Bible Study: Warning to the 

Disciples 126 

Bible Study: Christ Jesus Crucified 128 

page 118 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1983 :page 119 

VENIAL AND MORTAL SINS. 



ANY violation of divine law is sin; whether committed 
willingly or unwillingly.— 1 John 3:4; 
James 2:10. 

The terms "venial" and "mortal" as relating 
to sins are seldom used outside of the Church of 
Rome, the great counterfeit of the true Church; yet by 
the use of these terms two classes of sins are distinguished, 
properly and Scripturally, although in a way 
which the Church of Rome fails to recognize. 

A "venial sin" is one which may be forgiven or 
pardoned— a pardonable sin. 

A "mortal sin" is one which is not forgivable. It 



is a deadly sin: one incurring the penalty of death- 
everlasting death. 

The apostle John (1 John 5:16,17) refers to both 
of these sins, saying,— 

"There is a sin unto death [a mortal sin]: I do not 
say that he shall pray for it [to ask or expect its 
forgiveness]. ...And there is a sin, not unto death 
[a venial sin]." 

There is but one penalty expressed against 
sin by the Creator and Lawgiver. "The wages of sin 
is death." "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 
(Rom. 6:23; Ezek. 18:4.) But the great and just 
Judge never sits in judgment upon a case in which the 
one on trial has not a full and fair opportunity to know 
and do his duty. Thus it was in Adam's trial: he was 
created a perfect man in his Creator's image and placed 
amid a favorable environment where obedience was both 
possible and reasonable; and he was fully advised that 
the penalty of transgression would be death. (Gen. 2:17.) 
And thus in every case tried before the Supreme Judge 
of the universe and found guilty, the only penalty is 
death;— hence all sin is mortal sin at his bar. 

But God purposed a redemption for Adam and 
his race through Christ. He therefore provided for 
the ransom-sacrifice— the sinless Jesus for the sinner 
Adam and the race condemned in him. Thus the race 
of Adam was bought by Jesus with his own precious 
blood; divine law was vindicated (Rom. 3:26), and the 
race by God's will was in new hands for trial; for thus 
justly God committed the judgment of all to the Son 
(John 5:22; Acts 17:31), under the conditions of the 
New Covenant. All who come to know of the grace 
of God in Christ and the New Covenant, and who accept 
it, are reckoned as lifted out of the mortal sin 
of Adam and its consequences, and granted a new trial 
for life under the New Covenant, which takes cognizance 
of their fall and imperfection, and treats all their 
sins and shortcomings as "venial" or forgivable sins, 
except such as are committed intentionally or 
wilfully. 

All true Christians will of course seek to avoid every 
form of sin, and in all things will seek to do that which is 
pleasing to the Lord. But all, soon or later, find that 
they have the treasure of the new nature, the new will, 

R1984:page 119 

in an earthen vessel (2 Cor. 4:7); and that the imperfections 
of the earthen vessel (our human bodies) 
more or less mar all our efforts to please and serve 
God. Consequently, even the most devout find that 
they need to go repeatedly to the throne of divine grace, 
that they "may obtain mercy [forgiveness], and find 
grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.) And 
knowing that there are some sins that are not forgivable, 



R1984 : page 120 

it becomes important to all the saints to know just 
what is the difference; not that we may continue in 
(venial) sins that grace may abound (Rom. 6:1,2); 
for so to do would be to sin wilfully, which would 
change the sin from venial to mortal; but that we may 
be the more upon our guard against all sins; and that, 
on the other hand, those who have tender consciences 
may not unjustly accuse themselves of the sin unto 
death and become hopeless. 

Because we are imperfect in our judgments by 
reason of the fall, we all need divine instruction and 
"the spirit of a sound mind." Otherwise some would 
err in one direction and others in the opposite. For 
instance, some are of a humble, self-accusing mind, 
constantly disposed to judge themselves too harshly, 
and to forget that God "knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust"; and that, had it been possible 
for us to have commended ourselves to God by our 
works and words and thoughts, judged by his standard 
or law, then there would have been no redemption necessary, 
no sprinkling of our hearts with the precious 
blood, no imputing of the justification or righteousness 
of Christ, through faith. Of this class, usually, are 
those who are oppressed with a fear that they have 
committed mortal sin, while those who seem to commit 
the sin unto death are generally quite self-satisfied 
and have no suspicion of the penalty upon them. This 
latter class, like the Pharisees of old, have so much 
self-esteem and self-satisfied assurance that they often 
estimate their errors, weaknesses and imperfections as 
graces. Quite a few of them even go to the extreme of 
boasting perfection and believe, or at least profess to believe, 
that they have not for years come short of God's 
perfect standard. Of course, in such a frame of mind they 
cannot come to the throne of grace to obtain mercy; for 
perfection needs no mercy. They, on the contrary, more 
and more, lose their appreciation of the redeeming blood; 
and when in course of time the Adversary sets before them 
the doctrine that Christ was not our Redeemer, but merely 
our pattern for holy living, many of them are ready to 
deny the Lord that bought them, to count the blood of the 
covenant a common thing, and to do despite to the 
spirit of divine favor and mercy— relying upon their 
so-called "perfect" works;— which really are "filthy 
rags" of unrighteousness, in God's sight. Their 
trouble is that they have not before them the perfect 
standard by which to know their own imperfections. 

It is therefore of great importance that we all 
should form our judgments according to the revealed 
mind of God on this subject, as upon all others. 

Under the Law Covenant given to Israel, no such 
distinction obtained respecting sins: there were no 
venial sins; all sins were mortal sins. Hence the 
Apostle, speaking of that Law, and of himself as under 



it, says, "The commandment which was ordained unto 
life I found to be unto death." Under that Law the wages 
of sin was death; and nothing short of that— Rom. 7:10. 

True, Israelites were granted a typical Atonement 
Day, on account of which sins were covered for a year; 
but the necessity for repeating their sacrifices yearly 
proved that the sin was not actually canceled, but remained. 
(Heb. 10: 1 1.) Thus the penalty of the Law 
Covenant upon all Israelites would have been death, 
everlasting death, just as in Adam's case, had it not 
been that our Lord, by the one sacrifice, did a double 
work. He not only redeemed the world by becoming 
Adam's substitute, but he was born under the Law 
that he might [also] redeem those that were [condemned] 
under the Law Covenant— Gal. 4:4,5. 

As all the world were actually in Adam and could 
be redeemed by one sacrifice, so all Israel were represented 
in one man, Moses (1 Cor. 10:2), the Mediator 
of their Law Covenant; in order that in due time the 
antitype of Moses might meet all the requirements of 
the Law Covenant, and fulfil it, and supplant it with 
the New Covenant. Thus Christ is become "the end 
of the Law Covenant for righteousness to every one 
[every Israelite] that belie veth." (Rom. 10:4.) Thus 
Jews under the New Covenant find their unavoidable 
imperfections no longer mortal [deadly] sins but venial 
[forgivable] sins.— Heb. 9:15. 

It is the Gospel, under the New Covenant, sealed 
with the precious blood of Christ, that speaks pardon 
and mercy to believing (and penitent) sinners in respect 
to all manner of sin and blasphemy, except one, which 
can never be forgiven; neither in the present age nor 
in the age to come.— Matt. 12:31,32. 

The sins and blasphemies which may be forgiven 
are such as are committed in ignorance. The sins which 
cannot be pardoned are the wilful sins. Our race, because 
of the fall, is greatly under the dominion of weakness, 
ignorance, blindness, etc., inherited from Adam 
and augmented by all of our progenitors. And our Lord 
Jesus, having paid the penalty of Adam's transgression, 
can justly remit and forgive for his people all responsibility 
for such defects as they do not endorse but are 
striving against. 

The sins and blasphemies which cannot be forgiven 
are such as were not covered by the ransom. While 
God's grace of forgiveness in Christ is for "many offences" 
(Rom. 5:16), it is because those many offences 
are directly or indirectly the result of the first offence 
—Adam's disobedience— which was fully offset by the 
obedience and sacrifice of Christ on behalf of Adam and 
all his race. Hence, all those who come to a clear 
comprehension of right and wrong, righteousness and 
sin, and who then deliberately choose the sin, the 
wrong, not because of inherited weaknesses, physical, 

R1984:page 121 



mental and moral, but of preference for unrighteousness, 

—such cannot claim that their fault was of ignorance, 

nor of heredity; and hence it would be a fresh and 

wilful sin like the first; and is not covered by the ransom 

which redeemed from the first transgression. It is therefore 

a fresh sin unto death (a mortal sin), for which Christ 

did not die; and "Christ dieth no more." Only one redemption 

is provided. Such a sinner must die for his own 

sin; his life is forever forfeited; he can do nothing to 

recover it; and it is not God's will that Christ or any 

other creature should redeem such again, seeing they 

chose sin, after they clearly comprehended its character 

and knew that they had been redeemed from its 

power. You need not pray for such, says the Apostle 

John. We must pray in harmony with the divine plan 

and arrangement if we would have our prayers 

answered. 

Thus we have before our minds, in a general way, 
the fact that the only mortal sins are those committed 
against considerable knowledge, and of evil intention, 
wilfully. It is not, we think, unreasonable to suppose 
that, in comparison with the whole world of mankind, 
these intelligent, wilful sinners are now comparatively 
few; just as the saints are a "little flock"; and in part for 
the same reason,— because, as it requires the light of 
the knowledge of God to permit us to choose the right 
and accept Christ and be justified by faith, and to be 
sanctified through the truth, so it requires light to reject 
Christ and his righteousness and to choose wilful 
sin, unrighteousness. However, the fact that comparatively 
few during the Gospel age have had light and 
opportunity sufficient to permit them to be of the "little 
flock," the "few chosen" to be the kings and priests in 
the Millennial Kingdom, and the fact that few for the 
same reason could commit full mortal sin, does not 
prove that only a few will ever commit mortal sin. 
When, during the Millennium, the conditions are favorable 
for all for the attainment of Everlasting Life, the 
same favorable conditions will make it possible for all to 
commit mortal sin, whose penalty is the Second Death. 
We have no assurance that the "sheep" will outnumber 
the "goats." (And although in Europe and America 
the flocks of literal sheep do outnumber the goats, yet 
in the land of Palestine, where our Lord spoke the 
parable, their numbers even at this day are about 
equal.) 

It is evident, therefore, that as the vast majority 
of our race (heathen and imbecile), dying and dead, 
have not yet been enlightened by "that true light, 
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" 
(John 1:9), they cannot have committed mortal sin, 
and hence are not under sentence of the Second Death, 
however ignorantly wicked they may have been; because 
under the New Covenant no sin is mortal (deadly), 
of which ignorance or inherited weakness is the cause. 



And this New Covenant was made available for all, 
"for every man," and must be "testified in due time" 
to all. This opens before us the blessed thought 
that, though these heathen billions are yet in their sins, 
which cannot be blotted out except by faith, under the 
terms of the New Covenant, they are nevertheless not 
doomed to the Second Death. Their sins, judged by 
the New Covenant, would be venial and may be pardoned 
by their Redeemer; and themselves may be prepared 
for eternal life by certain experiences in purification 
in the great Purgatory— Christ's Millennial Kingdom 
—so different from the unscriptural Purgatory of 
Roman Catholic theology. Praise God for the worldwide 
redemption from Adam's mortal sin; and for the 
gracious provision that none of the ransomed race, except 
intelligent, wilful sinners, will be remanded to 
death,— the Second Death. 

R1985 :page 121 

MIXED SINS-PARTLY WILFUL. 



If it were merely a question of wilful or not wilful 
sins, it would be comparatively easy to decide respecting 
our own shortcomings and those of others; but it 
is a more difficult question. The Christian may be 
considered in some respects a dual being: he not only 
has his natural body, depraved by inherited sins and 
weaknesses, and his natural mind also depraved, and 
in sympathy with the weaknesses of the flesh, but he 
has also his renewed mind or will, which desires to 
serve the law of God. These two minds or wills are 
contrary: they cannot be harmonized; and the man who 
endeavors to recognize both, and to make the two joint-rulers 
of his mortal body, is the "double-minded man," 
"unstable in all his ways," described by the Apostle 
James (1:8). The "lukewarm," neither cold nor hot, 
neither for sin nor against sin, are failures in every sense 
of the word. (Rev. 3:16.) God wants positive characters, 
and others will not be approved or accepted. 

In every case, then, the new mind must be in control, 
and the depraved, fleshly mind must be subjected 
to it for destruction. But here comes the difficulty. 
The natural mind ("heart") is deceitful above all things, 
and desperate as well as wicked (Jer. 17:9), and the 
various members of our bodies in their depravity sympathize 
with the natural mind and favor it; so that when 
the new mind battles with the old mind and pursues it 
to destroy it, the latter feigns to be dead, and hides 
quietly for a time, only to come forth more craftily 
later. 

So then, with the Apostle, we can realize that even 
when the new mind is enthroned as the ruler of these 
mortal bodies, the old mind or will, favorable to sin, 



although dethroned and reckoned dead, is not actually 
dead, and will not be as long as our mortal bodies are 

R1985 :page 122 

defective— i.e., until death. Hence we must daily mortify 

[deaden] the will and deeds of the flesh. But sometimes 

the deadened will of the depraved flesh (selfish, or impure, 

or in any event despicable to the new will, "the 

mind of Christ"), encouraged and helped by the influence 

of the "spirit of the world" or by the devil 

(perhaps as a messenger of light to deceive), rises up to 

ensnare and destroy the new will and its new hopes 

and aspirations. In such cases how many have suffered 

at least partial and temporary defeat, until they 

have remembered to call for reinforcements of strength 

from Him who has promised to never leave nor forsake 

us, and to give grace and strength for every time of 

need. Then we realized that greater is he that is on 

our part, than all them that be against us,— within and 

without. -Rom. 8:23,31. 

And when such a battle is ended, and the new will 
sits down to reckon the damage inflicted by the raid of 
the old will, there must be some self-crimination— "Oh! 
why was I not more watchful? I knew from experience 
that I was quite vulnerable at the point from 
which the attack came. Nor did I repel the attack 
with proper diligence. I almost fear that I was willing 
to have the attack, and that I encouraged the enemy, 
Sin; and if so, was it not disloyalty to the Lord? 
And was it not also a wilful sin, since the new will did 
not repel it with sufficient energy?" 

Was this a venial or a mortal sin? 

Such a case as we have described would not be 
a mortal sin. This is shown by the fact that the new will 
eventually holds the field of battle, and that so far from 
having pleasure in the wreck of good resolutions and 
hopes and prayers, etc., etc., it feels chagrin, shame 
and contrition for failure to have done all that could 
have been done to oppose the depraved will. On the contrary, 
those who have sinned wilfully and with full intent, 
and whose sin is mortal, do not feel penitent; but 
afterward approve their sin, and boast of it, generally 
as greater light and liberty. (See Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-31.) 
In the latter text (verse 27), the "fearful looking 
for of judgment" does not refer to the wilful sinner, 
who is bold, defiant and self-satisfied, but to the people 
of God, who realize the fearfulness of the position of 
those who "count the blood of the Covenant a common 
thing," despising God's favor therein extended, and 
preferring to stand in the filthy rags of their own 
unrighteousness. 

But such a sin as we have described would not be 
wholly a venial sin if the will consented to it in any degree; 
—if only to the extent of not resisting it. If there 
was anything that could have been done and was thought 



of to resist it, but was not done, preferring to taste again 

"the pleasures of sin" only for a brief season, it would 

seem to contain a measure of wilful sin. Such is a 

mixed sin. Chiefly it originates with the weakness of 

the flesh and inherited weakness, aggravated by outside 

temptations, all of which are elements of venial 

sin, forgivable upon repentance, confession and restitution 

to the extent of ability, through the merit of 

the sin-offering presented by our great High Priest. 

"If any man [in Christ] sin, we have an advocate with 

the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous"; "If we confess 

our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 

sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 

(1 John 2:1; 1:9.) But to the extent that the will consented 

to sin, even for a moment, it was unforgivable; 

and for that measure of responsibility we must expect 

to suffer "stripes"; i.e., chastisements. This is dangerous, 

too, for every such raid by the old nature encourages 

and strengthens it for fresh attacks, and weakens 

and discourages the new nature, and tends to grieve 

the holy spirit whereby we are sealed; and, if encouraged, 

the new will would soon expire, the old will 

obtain complete mastery, and soon we would be walking 

after the flesh and not after the spirit; and "the 

end of those things is death"— the Second Death. It 

is evident, therefore, that the tendency of mixed sin is 

toward mortal sin. 

Whenever we find that we have been overcome of 
evil, we should "judge ourselves:" we should scrutinize 
our own course, and not only feel contrite toward 
God, and resolved to be more vigilant and more faithful 
in the future, but we should right the wrong to the 
extent of our ability, and humble ourselves before the 
Lord. The Apostle says, "If we would judge [reprove, 
correct] ourselves, we should not be judged 
[reproved, corrected, by the Lord]; but when we are 
judged, we are chastened of the Lord [punished with 
"stripes"], that we should not be condemned with the 
world."-l Cor. 11:31,32; 1 Tim. 5:24. 

THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY SPIRIT. 



A brief definition of sin or blasphemy against the 
Holy Spirit would be,— Any transgression, or words of 
evil disdain, against the light of truth, the spirit of truth, 
when clearly discerned. Such a sin contains at least a 
measure of wilfulness, and that measure cannot be forgiven. 
It must be expiated. If there were no extenuating 
circumstances, of weakness, blindness, temptation, 
etc., its expiation would cost the life of the transgressor, 
and constitute his share in the Second Death. But 
if, as generally now, there be extenuating circumstances, 
the transgressor, by availing himself of the terms 
of the New Covenant, may have forgiveness to the extent 



of the ignorance or other extenuation, and may expiate 
the wilful elements of the transgression by suffering 
"stripes,"— chastisements. These chastisements 

R1985 : page 123 

may consist in the natural consequences of a wrong 
course, or in special retribution or discipline by means 
of adversity, sickness, etc. 

Sometimes the light may be very clear and the 
wilful wrong-doing very pronounced, as in the case of 
the Pharisees who heard the Lord's teaching and saw 
him cast out a devil, and said, He casteth out devils by 
the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils. They were 
at least partly blinded by Satan and ignorance (Matt. 15: 14; 
Acts 3:17); hence had they rejected Jesus and denied 
that he was the Messiah promised by the Lord 
through the prophets, had they called him a fraud and 
a hypocrite, all this might have been attributable to 
their blindness, and might have been forgivable as 
venial sin, under the gracious terms of the New Covenant. 
But when they blasphemed the holy power, the 
holy spirit of God, operating through Jesus, to good 
works and never to evil works, they were overstepping 
their ignorance, and stating wickedly, wilfully, what 
they could not have believed. To that extent, therefore, 
they were guilty of more than venial sin. Because 
of this wilfulness their blasphemy became a sin 
which could never be forgiven, "neither in this world 
[age], neither in the world [age] to come." No provision 
has been made (nor ever will be made, as we 
understand the divine plan), for forgiving any wilful 
sin, except Adam's first transgression. All other wilful 
sins must be punished. 

But as the blasphemy of the Pharisees was more 
than a venial sin, so it was less than a mortal sin, because 
they did not sin against a clear understanding: 
they were "blind leaders of the blind," as our Lord 
testified (Matt. 15:14); and they did considerable in 
ignorance, as Peter testified. (Acts 3:17.) This unpardonable 
sin of the Pharisees, therefore, was one of 
the "mixed sins" which must needs receive a just 
penalty, proportionate to its wilfulness, in the Millennium, 
when the Son of Man shall sit upon the throne 
of his glory and judge the world in righteousness. 

It would have been a very different matter, had 
these Pharisees been disciples, and had they witnessed 
all of his mighty works and heard all of his precious 
words, and had they been privately instructed as were 
the twelve Apostles (Matt. 13:11), and with them made 
partakers of Christ's holy spirit, so that, in his name and 
power, they themselves cast out devils and healed diseases. 
In this respect— that they sinned against partial, 
not complete, evidence— consists the difference between 

R1986 : page 123 



their sin and the sin of Judas,* by which his and not 
theirs was mortal sin. 

Their case differed, too, from that of the enlightened, 
consecrated and spirit-begotten sons of this Gospel 
age. Because of our greater enlightenment and 
clearer perception, such a sin on our part would mean 
more wilfulness because of greater intelligence. It 
would probably mean mortal sin to us. Even in their 
case the Lord saw such a wrong condition of heart that 
he said, "Ye hypocrites, how can ye escape the condemnation 
of Gehenna [symbol of the Second Death]." 
The intimation clearly is, that many of them, having 
developed such perverse characters, so out of accord 
with righteousness, will, even when blessed with the 
fuller light and opportunity of the Millennium, be likely 
to come under the sentence of death. The lesson 
to us is, that even those who are not of the Church, 
now on trial, if they have come in contact with the light, 
have thereby come under some responsibility. Each 
one is either preparing and building a character or destroying 
one, getting more ready or less ready to benefit 
by the Millennial reign of righteous judgment. Our 
Lord's judgment (in the day of judgment,— the Millennium), 
as between those who knew and those who 
did not know his will, was expressed pointedly when 
he declared that, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom 
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for the 
city that rejected the Gospel messengers; because they 
sinned against greater light.— See Matt. 10:15. 

Whoever has heard something of the Truth has a 
great responsibility. Whoever has opportunity to learn 
more, whether he uses it or not, has greater responsibility. 
He who sins (with wilfulness) against a little 
light shall suffer some "stripes" or punishment. He 
who sins with wilfulness against more light or more opportunity 
for light will receive "many stripes." He who 
sins with complete wilfulness against a clear understanding 
of the truth has committed a full sin in the full 
sense of the word, and will receive the full penalty of 
sin— death— the Second Death. 



"See "Judas' Case a Hopeless One," in our issue of Apr. 15, '96 



R1986 :page 123 

A SERMON FOR CHILDREN. 

—Text— The Rose.— 

The roses are in bloom to-day! 

Come, children, from your games away 



A while to listen in the bower, 

And learn from every blooming flower 

Truths golden that shall evermore 

Be garnered with the heart's rich store! 

Within the garden meet our view 
Roses of varied form and hue, 
Unfolding now their graceful bloom, 
Lading the air with sweet perfume; 
From tiny buds to full blooms sweet, 
They bend in clusters round our feet. 

R1986 : page 124 

Some robed in white are here displayed, 
And dainty ones in pink arrayed; 
Some in their golden glory shine; 
Some wear the crimson hue of wine. 

Charmed by their grace and beauty rare, 
We cull some buds and blossoms fair. 
Some that were once as fair and gay 
We see now fading fast away. 
Within the garden's blooming space, 
Can we not here a semblance trace? 
And read in this, the rose-crowned rod, 
The love and power of nature's God? 

Only a few short months ago, 
The roses lay in death below; 
In glad springtime the sun and rain 
Aroused from sleep to life again; 
Triumphant, they arose to bloom 
In beauty o'er their winter tomb. 

The buds seem like to childhood's day, 
When happy children laugh and play; 
The half-blown rose an emblem seems 
Of youth, when life is sweet with dreams; 
Youth slow expands in grace and power 
Till, like the glowing, full-blown flower, 
It zenith gains; then age draws on, 
And soon the span of life is gone. 

The roses spring to bloom their day, 
Are early culled or fade away; 
So, soon or late, all yield their breath, 
Beneath the cruel hand of Death. 
The God who clothes the roses fair, 
Does he not for his creatures care? 

Ah, yes! they'll rise from out death's gloom. 

He by whose law the roses bloom 

In love devised a wondrous plan 

To save from death his creature, man: 

His Son for all a ransom gave;— 



Suffered e'en death our souls to save, 
And rose to life on high again 
Eternal life to give to men. 
He holds the key of Death's closed gates; 
The due time only he awaits. 

In all of nature's wide domain, 
There law and order ever reign; 
Just so within the realm of grace: 
For all things there's a time, a place; 
When, as around its seasons roll, 
They bring a springtime for the soul, 
Christ will unlock their silent tomb, 
And bid them rise again to bloom; 
Then all who love the right and truth 
Shall flourish on in fadeless youth. 

Here let us pause. Again behold 
The roses— how their leaves unfold: 
The bud, unfolding hour by hour, 
At length displays the perfect flower; 
Slowly its petals all unfold; 
Then do we see the heart of gold. 

So, too, unfold God's plans of grace; 

His scheme, deep-laid, no man could trace, 

Till time the mystery unsealed; 

The hidden riches stood revealed. 

The roses their sweet sermon preach, 

Graving it deep as any speech. 

Does not each glorious blooming flower 

Proclaim the wisdom and the power 

Of Him who, from his throne above, 

Watches o'er all his works in love? 

MARY E. PENNOCK. 



R1986 : page 124 

THE THIEF IN PARADISE. 



"He said to Jesus, Remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. 
And he [Jesus] said to him [the penitent thief], Indeed 
I say to thee this day, thou shalt be with 
me in Paradise."— Luke 23:42,43. 

THOSE who consider salvation to be an escape 

from everlasting torture to a paradise of pleasure, 

and dependent only on accidental circumstances of favor, 

see exemplified in this narrative the doctrine of 

election— that our Lord Jesus, pleased by the consoling 

words of the one thief, elected him to heaven, and 

equally elected that the other should suffer to all eternity, 



unpitied and unrelieved. Truly, if God has made 
salvation such a lottery, such a chance thing, those 
who believe it to be such should have little to say against 
church lotteries, and less against worldly ones. 

But this is not the case. This Scripture has been 
much misunderstood. To get its true import, let us 
take in the surroundings and connections. 

The Lord had just been condemned, and was now 
being executed on the charge of treason against Caesar's 
government, in saying that he was a king; though he 
had told them that his kingdom was "not of this world." 
There, upon the cross above his head, written in three 
languages, was the crime charged against him: "THIS 
IS THE KING OF THE JEWS." Those about knew of 
his claims and derided him, except one of the thieves 
crucified alongside. Doubtless he had heard of Jesus and 
his wonderful character and works, and said in his heart: 
This is truly a strange and wonderful man. Who can 
know that there is no foundation to his claims? He 
certainly lives close to God. I will speak to him in 
sympathy: it can do no harm. Then he rebuked his 
companion, mentioning the Lord's innocence; and then 
the conversation above noted took place. 

We cannot suppose that this thief had correct or 
definite ideas of Jesus— nothing more than a mere feeling 
that as he was about to die, any straw of hope 
was better than nothing. To give him credit for more 
would be to place him in faith ahead of all the Lord's 
apostles and followers, who at this time had fled dismayed, 
and who, three days after, said: "We [had] 
trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed 
Israel."— Luke 24:21. 

We can have no doubt as to the import of his petition: 

R1986 : page 125 

he meant that whenever Jesus reached his kingdom 
power, he desired favor. Now note our Lord's 
answer. He does not say that he has no kingdom; but, 
on the contrary, he indicates by his response that the 
thief's request was a proper one. The word translated 
"verily" or "indeed" is the Greek word "amen," and 
signifies "So be it," or "Your request is granted." "I 
say to thee this day [this dark day, when it seems as 
though I am an impostor, and I am dying as a felon], 
thou shalt be with me in Paradise." The substance 
of this promise is that, when the Lord has established 
his kingdom it will be a Paradise, and the thief 
will be remembered and be in it. Notice that we have 
changed the comma from before to after the word 
"today." 

This makes our Lord's words perfectly clear and 
reasonable. He might have told the thief more if he 
had chosen. He might have told him that the reason 
he would be privileged to be in Paradise was because 
his ransom was then and there being paid. He might 



have told him further that he was dying for and ransoming 

the other thief also, as well as the whole gaping 

and deriding multitude before him, the millions 

then entombed, and the millions yet unborn. We know 

this because we know that "Jesus Christ, by the grace 

of God, tasted death for every man," "gave himself a 

ransom for all," that all in due time might have opportunity 

to return to the Edenic condition, forfeited by 

the first man's sin, and redeemed for men by Christ's 

righteous sacrifice.— Heb. 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6; Acts 3:19. 

As already shown, the garden of Eden was but an 
illustration of what the earth will be when fully released 
from the curse— perfected and beautified. The 
word "paradise" is of Arabic origin, and signifies a 
garden. The Septuagint renders Gen. 2:8 thus: "God 
planted a paradise in Eden." When Christ shall have 
established his kingdom, and bound evil, etc., this 
earth will gradually become a paradise, and the two 
thieves and all others that are in their graves shall come 
into it, and then by becoming obedient to its laws they 
may live in it and enjoy it forever. We doubt not, 
however, that the kind words spoken in that dark hour 
to the suffering Savior will no more lose a special and 
suitable reward than the gift of a cup of water, or other 
small kindnesses, done to those whom this King is "not 
ashamed to call his brethren."— Matt. 10:42. 

But have we a right to change the comma? Certainly: 
the punctuation of the Bible is not inspired. The writers 
of the Bible used no punctuation. It was invented about 
four hundred years ago. It is merely a modern convenience, 
and should be so used as to bring out sense, 
and harmony with all other Scriptures. This harmony 
and sense are obtained only by the punctuation we have 
given above. As usually punctuated, the passage 
would teach that the Lord and the thief went that 
day to a place called paradise, a statement contrary to 
the following Scriptures, which read carefully:— Luke 24:46; 
John 20:17; 3:13. 



R1986 : page 125 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 



Question.— I am a news agent, and as such have 
calls for vile novels and newspapers giving novels as supplements. 
What do you think, from a Christian standpoint, 
of my dealing in such papers? 

Answer.— You ask a straightforward question, and 
no doubt desire a straightforward answer. We reply 
that we cannot see how saints can do a general book-business 
under prevailing conditions. We would consider 
the dealing out of poisonous mental food about as bad 



as the selling of spirituous liquors, and much worse than 
dealing in adulterated natural foods. We believe that 
the mind is the most important part of the man, and our 
conscience would be extremely sensitive as to what we 
would put before our fellow creatures, or in any manner 
induce them to use to their injury. 

This advice, we fear, will be very far reaching in 
its relations to your business; but your candid inquiry 
demands it. 

Question.— Please explain 1 Cor. 15:29. 

Answer.— The word "for" in the Greek signifies 
"on behalf of." The thought of the Apostle seems to 
be that our immersion into death is made on behalf of 
the "dead," not those who are in the tomb, but those 
who are nominally alive, though under sentence to death 
because of sin, "dead in trespasses and sins," dead in 
God's sight, condemned in Adam. We would not need 
to sacrifice anything were it not for the dead and dying 

R1987 : page 125 

condition of the world, and it is on their behalf (to bring 

them to Christ or to serve them after they are brought 

to Him, and to shine as lights in the world, reproving 

sin) that it is necessary for us to lay down our lives. 

Therefore, while our sacrifice is no part of the ransom 

price, it is, as Paul expresses it in his letter to the Colossians (1:24), 

a filling up of "that which is behind of 

the afflictions of Christ for his body's sake." 

Question.— Please harmonize 1 Pet. 3:19,20 and 
1 Pet. 4:6 with other Scriptures stating that the dead 
"know not anything." 

Answer.— For explanation of the former passage 
see TOWER for July 15, '94. With this 1 Pet. 4:6 has 
no connection. It refers to the preaching of the Gospel 
to men resting under the Adamic penalty. In the 
Lord's estimation the entire race is dead, even though 
some have a measure of what we call "life." So our 
Lord expressed it when he said to one, "Let the dead 
bury their dead; but go thou and preach the Kingdom 
of God." (Luke 9:59,60.) We do not understand by 
this that our Lord required the disciple to absent himself 
from the funeral of his own father; but the young 
man was already a disciple (Matt. 8:21), and his thought 
probably was to leave the Lord's service and serve his 
father until his death. Our Lord knew that if he served 

R1987 : page 126 

his father for several years, other business or pleasure 
would crowd upon him, and he might never return to 
the higher service. 

Those of the "dead" who hear the Gospel and accept 
it are reckoned as passed from death unto life, as 
translated out of the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son. Thenceforth, though men 



continue to judge of them according to the flesh, and 
by the outward appearance, they are judged by God 
according to the intents of the mind, here rendered 
"spirit." 

Question.— What did the Lord mean when he said, 
"Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he 
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." 

Answer.— Nicodemus was no doubt acquainted 
with the fact that John the baptist had conducted a 
ministry, calling upon the people to repent of their sins 
and reform their lives, and that those who accepted his 
teaching were immersed in water as signifying that 
change of life. Our Lord and the apostles seem to have 
continued the arrangement to a considerable extent, 
preaching likewise, Reform ye, for the Kingdom of 
heaven is at hand. This water baptism became, therefore, 
to the Jews a symbol of reformation of heart and 
life. As only a mere fragment of the conversation with 
Nicodemus is reported, it is fair to suppose that the entire 
teaching and custom of our Lord with reference to 
the conditions for entrance into the Kingdom He 
preached were discoursed upon. In this conversation 
our Lord seems to bring out the fact that such a baptism 
unto repentance was not sufficient to insure entrance 
into the Kingdom, but that as the baptism symbolized 
a reformation, and thus the birth of a new 
character, it must needs be supplemented with the 
begetting of the spirit before the Kingdom privileges 
could be claimed. Hence it was that they were exhorted 
not only to be symbolically begotten and born to 
a reformed life, by baptism in water, but also to seek 
the begetting and birth of the spirit to the spirit nature. 

In this connection it is well to remember that the 
Jews addressed by John and the disciples of Jesus were 
already God's people by covenant, and were already 
reckonedly justified; but that on account of disobedience 
to their covenant they needed to reform, and to return 
again to harmony with God in order that they might 
be fit subjects for the privileges and liberties of the 
Gospel age; namely, to become sons of God through 
begetting of the spirit now, and through birth of the 
spirit in the resurrection. 

For other suggestions on this conversation see 
DAWN, VOL. I., pp.277-282. On the subject of baptism 
see TOWER, June 15, '93. 



R1987 :page 126 

WARNING TO THE DISCIPLES. 

-JUNE 7.-Luke 22:24-37.- 

Golden Text— "Let this mind be in you 
which was also in Christ Jesus."— Phil. 2:5. 



ALTHOUGH the twelve apostles had been for 
three years in very intimate association with 
Jesus and had been greatly benefited and blessed by the 
association, they had yet many things to learn, and one 
of the last lessons that Jesus endeavored to impress upon 
them was that of humility and self-forgetful service 
of others. The occasion of this lesson was furnished 
by a little discussion among them on the evening of the 
last supper, as to which should be greatest. The 
context seems to indicate that the discussion originated 
with Peter; for while they all seem to have been involved, 
or at least interested in the discussion, and all 
were addressed in the Lord's reply, a pointed portion 
of the answer was addressed specially to Peter. Peter 
was one of the most prominent and active of the apostles, 
and by his zeal and energy he naturally became a leading 
one, as he himself probably realized in a measure, 
and the others doubtless conceded. 

But the Lord realized what the apostles evidently 
did not, that even a very little prominence may become 
a dangerous snare unless it be coupled with great humility. 
Hence the warning to the disciples, and especially 
to Peter, against the ambition for self-exaltation 
and preferment. The warning lesson was given by an 
apt illustration, Jesus himself, their Lord and Master, 
performing for them the most humble service, washing 
their feet. (Compare Luke 22:1,24; John 13:1,13-17.) 
To the illustration he also added his words of counsel, 
showing how different must be the disposition among 
his disciples from that which characterizes the godless 
world. 

"And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles 
exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise 
authority upon them are called benefactors." Thus 
he called attention to the fact that the disposition of 
the world is toward tyranny on the one hand, and servility 
on the other; the one class becoming arrogant and 
self-assertive, and the other class dependent and truckling, 
both of which are ignoble traits of character which 
he desired to see entirely eliminated from all of his 
disciples. "But ye shall not be so [Ye shall not cultivate 
in yourselves a spirit of arrogant pride, by seeking 
to lord it over others; nor shall ye cultivate in 
others a spirit of truckling servility, unworthy of noble 
manhood], but [on the other hand, cultivate in yourselves 
the spirit of humility and loving service, "in 
honor preferring one another"; and thus, also, by example, 
show others how becoming and beautiful is true 
worth of mind and heart linked with loving, self-forgetful 
humility] he that is greatest among you 
[he that has superior ability of one kind or another, 
let him not allow his talent to be offset by a corresponding 

R1987 : page 127 



weakness of character which tends to self-glorification, 

and is easily intoxicated with the spirit 

of pride and selfish ambition, but let him think soberly 

of himself, realizing how far short he is of actual perfection], 

let him be as the younger [very meek and 

modest]; and he that [by qualifications and providential 

circumstances] is chief, as he that doth serve." 

"Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your 

servant, even as the Son of man came not to be ministered 

unto, but to minister, and to give his life a 

ransom for many."— Matt. 20:27,28. 

Peter, while considering the question of superiority 
with some measure of self-complacency, little knew how 
great a trial would in a few hours put the metal of his 
character to the test. Nor did the other disciples 
comprehend the critical hour to which they had come. 
But the Lord fully realized it, and endeavored to prepare 
them for it; and to Peter he solemnly said, "Simon, 
Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you that he 
may sift you as wheat [this is no time for considering 
questions of superiority and self-exaltation; it is a time 
for sober thought and for humble watchfulness and 
prayer]. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail 
not [under the coming trial], and when thou art converted 
[from this disposition, to a sober humility, then] 
strengthen thy brethren." The other brethren would 
also need strengthening, and Peter's hopefulness and 
fervent devotion and leading characteristics would be 
of great service to them; but not until he himself should 
first come into the proper attitude. But Peter, still unconscious 
of his weakness and his need, though full of 
loving loyalty to the Lord, replied, "Lord, I am ready 
to go with thee into prison and to death." But Jesus 
knew his weakness, and said, "I tell thee, Peter, the 
cock shall not crow this day before that thou shalt thrice 
deny that thou knowest me"; and it was so. So great 
was the trial that all the disciples were in dismay, and 
though they loved the Lord, yet in fear they all forsook 
him and fled (Matt. 26:56); and while Peter, loth 
to leave him, followed him afar off, yet by and by his 
devotion succumbed to his fears so that he openly denied 
him. 

How much Peter needed the Lord's prayer and 
warning, and how graciously the Lord considered his 
need! But while we thus view Peter's error and Peter's 
need, as well as the needs of all the disciples, let us not 
forget our own; for we also are men of like passions: 
a very little exaltation, a very little success or praise 
or preferment, often serves to engender a pride of heart 

R1988 :page 127 

which becomes manifest to others in unbecoming 
self-inflation and self-exaltation. Let us guard 
against these tendencies by prayer and by the cultivation 
of humble, sober thought, remembering always 



the inspired teaching, "Let not thy left hand know 

what thy right hand doeth"; and with the apostles, 

let our rejoicing be this,— "the testimony of our conscience, 

that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with 

fleshly wisdom [the wisdom of this world which depends 

on self and takes credit to self], but by the grace 

of God, we have had our conversation in the world."— 

2 Cor. 1:12. 

While the words of warning were solemnly given, 
the Lord did not forget to give them also words of encouragement, 
pointing them to the glory to follow the 
present scenes of suffering and humiliation, saying, 
"And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father 
hath appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at 
my table and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes 
of Israel." Yes, the end of all the humiliation and 
cross-bearing and suffering according to the will of God 
in this present time was to be the glory of the kingdom 
and joint-heirship with Christ. But none can gain that 
glory except by the way of present humiliation and 
cross-bearing. "And he said to them all, If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up 
his cross daily, and follow me." "And whosoever 
doth not bear his cross and come after me cannot be my 
disciple."-Luke9:23; 14:27; Matt. 10:38. 

This present Gospel age is the appointed time for 
this cross-bearing, when all the true members of the 
body must "fill up that which is behind of the sufferings 
of the Christ"; for the body, as was also the Head, 
must be subjected to the discipline of suffering and 
thereby be proved worthy to reign with him. It is important, 
therefore, that we realize this; for if we 

turn aside from the path of humiliation and daily cross-bearing, 
and strive for present exaltation and preferment, 
we are forgetting the very conditions upon which 
the future exaltation depends, and seeking instead the 
mean rewards of the present. 

In verses 35-37 the Lord indicated that the disciples 
would henceforth meet with changed conditions 
in their work. Hitherto he had sent them out without 
purse or scrip or shoes (Mark 6:7-1 1) to preach the 
gospel of the Kingdom to a covenant people whose 
duty it was to receive and entertain the messengers of 
the Lord, and whose receiving or rejecting of them 
would be a test of their fidelity to God as his covenant 
people. In receiving the disciples of Christ they were 
to that extent receiving Christ, and the Father also 
whom he represented— "He that receiveth you receiveth 
me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that 
sent me. "-Matt. 10:40. 

In thus going forth under the Lord's direction, 
and as his representatives, the disciples had lacked 
nothing, and great success attended their labors; for 
the common people heard them gladly, and were greatly 
moved by their teachings and their works. But henceforth 
they would find all this changed; "for," said he, 



"I say unto you that this that is written must yet be 
accomplished in me. And he was reckoned among the 
transgressors; for the things concerning me have an 
end [the prophecies concerning me are about to be fulfilled 
in my crucifixion]." Israel as a nation had now 
rejected Jehovah's Anointed, and were about to crucify 
him; and henceforth the name of Jesus would be a name 
of reproach, and his disciples would be hated and despised, 
and their teachings denounced. 

Consequently the instruction he would now give 
them would be the very reverse of that formerly given; 
—viz., that henceforth they should go out in no wise 
dependent upon the people to test their loyalty to God 
which had already been disproved; but they should provide 
for themselves such things as they should need, 
and thus, being independent of the people, show them 
that self-denying zeal for God which would gladly espouse 
an unpopular cause with no hope of earthly gain, 
and for it endure reproach and persecution that thereby 
they might recover some from the blindness and sin into 
which the nation had stumbled. 

R1988 :page 128 

The instruction to provide themselves with swords, 
and the statement that two were enough, was probably 
merely to show that though there were at hand these 
weapons of defence he would not permit their use, but 
that he gave himself up a free-will offering for the sins 
of the world. When he was betrayed he sought not to 
escape, but, knowing the plot beforehand, he deliberately 
went to the place where they would seek him; 
when he was falsely accused, he opened not his mouth; 
when Peter unsheathed the sword in his defence, he 
ordered it to be put away, and immediately healed the 
wound of his enemy; and while twelve legions of angels 
were at his service for the asking, he asked not. Thus he 
freely gave his life a ransom for many; and though in him 
was no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, yet he 
was numbered with the transgressors, condemned as a 
law-breaker, and crucified between two thieves. 

The golden text of this lesson is aptly chosen,— 
"Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ 
Jesus." Amen, so let it be. 



R1988 :page 128 

CHRIST JESUS CRUCIFIED. 

-JUNE 14-Luke 23:33-46.- 

IN these days when the theories of the self-styled 
higher critics, and all who entertain theories of 
salvation by evolution, are making advances in every 



direction, we are glad to see the "International Lessons" 
drawing the attention of Bible Students frequently 
to lessons like the present one, summed up in 
the Golden Text,— "Christ died for our sins." 

The greatest transaction ever made, the purchase 
of all (over fifty billions) of the slaves of the great task 
master, Sin, was not appreciated in its day, and has not 
been appreciated since, except by the very few— in all 
a "little flock." The masses of mankind since have 
been doing just what the people did upon the day of 
our Lord's crucifixion. Some looked, but sympathized 
little, and appreciated not; others derided and blasphemed; 
others made sport of it, and still others with 
rude jest gambled over his raiment. They knew him 
not; they knew not the value of the work which he 
performed on their behalf. They appreciated his life 
to some extent, though very imperfectly, but as for 
value to his death, they could see none in it. The 
Apostle, by inspiration, calls attention to their condition, 
saying that the god of this world had blinded 
their minds, so that they could not see. False theories, 
false expectations, false reasonings, and a lack of 
true consecration to the Lord, have blinded the eyes of 
many since, not only of the world, but also of those 
professing to be disciples of Christ. 

But to all who do see the real value of the ransom 
sacrifice "finished" at Calvary and whose eyes have 
been opened to see the wonderful results which must 
ultimately flow from that great transaction— to all these 
the Master's words apply forcibly: "Blessed are your 
eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear; for verily 
I say unto you that many prophets and righteous 
persons have desired to see the things which ye see and 
have not seen them and to hear the things which ye 
hear and have not heard them." Such as do see this 
"great light" which illuminates the entire plan of God 
have certainly great cause for thankfulness; for such 
have been translated out of darkness into God's marvelous 
light. We can thank God, too, in the light of 
the cross, not only for the blessings which have reached 
us, his Church, who truly believe in his great sacrifice; 
but also for the assurance that in "due time" this gracious 
message of redemption through the precious blood 
will be made known to all, and that all the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped! In due time all shall see the real 
significance and merit which were in the great atonement 
sacrifice given once for all; for it is written concerning 
the blessed Millennial Day— "Then the eyes of the 
blind shall be opened and the ears of the deaf shall be 
unstopped"; and "the earth shall be full of the knowledge 
of the Lord as the waters cover the sea."— Isa. 35:5; 
11:9. 

Aside from the weeping of the disciples, the penitent 
thief's conduct is the only mark of appreciation of 
the Lord's righteousness found in this picture. It is 
suggestive, too, of the fact that, as then, so in every 



age, many of the chief priests and scribes and Pharisees 
have crucified the truth without sympathy or appreciation; 
often the only sympathizers have been some of those 
apparently deeply degraded. 

But if human hearts were unsympathetic and unappreciative 
of the great transaction, nature was not, 
for she, as a witness to the wonderful scene, vailed her 
face in darkness and trembled. The rending of the vail 
between the Holy and the Most Holy would seem to 
teach symbolically that a way into the Holy of Holies 
had been opened. The Apostle seems to interpret it 
thusinHeb. 10:19-22. 

Our Lord Jesus, faithful and trustful to the last, 
commended his spirit in his dying moments to the Heavenly 
Father, whose promises supported him during his 
eventful life, and now were his strength in his dying 
hour. Nevertheless, from another account we have the 
record that at the very last moment the Heavenly Father 
withdrew from our Lord this support, and left him, 
probably but for a moment, alone; and his last experiences 
were those of utter loneliness and complete separation 
from the Father. This we may know was not 

R1989 : page 128 

because of the Father's displeasure; for he had the full 

assurance that in all things and always he pleased the 

Father, and the Father subsequently testified to this in 

raising him from the dead, as said the Apostle Peter. 

(Acts 17:31.) That experience was necessary, however, 

because he was taking the place of the sinner. 

The sinner, Adam (and we all in Adam), had forfeited 

not only our rights to life, but also to fellowship 

with the Father; and in being our ransom-price in full, 

it was necessary that our Redeemer should not only die 

for us, but that he should die as a sinner, as a felon under 

sentence of death; and it was appropriate also that 

he should taste of the proper experiences of the sinner 

in being fully cut off from the Father's favor and communion. 

This last experience would seem to have been 

the most trying through which our dear Redeemer 

passed. It was then, as on no other occasion, that his 

soul sent forth the agonizing cry, "My God! my 

God! Why hast thou forsaken me?" 



page 129 
VOL. XVII. JUNE 15, 1896. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 130 

Views from the Tower 132 

Modern Delusions 134 

The Attempt of Ritualism 136 

An Eruption of Evil Spirits 137 

Questions and Answers 138 

Poem: "A Cup of Cold Water" 141 

Bible Study: "The Lord is Risen" 141 

Bible Study: David, King of Judah 142 

Encouraging Letters 144 

page 130 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE objectionable Post Office ruling, unfavorable to our mailing of 
tracts and DAWNS, has been withdrawn. Join with us in acknowledging 
to God the answer of our united prayers; and in using effectually 
this "open door." 



R1995 : page 130 

A Brother residing in St. Louis reports preservation from the terrible 
tornado which recently visited that city. He says, "The storm 
did damage all around us, but we escaped injury or damage." 

In another quarter all the houses were wrecked but two. One of these 
unharmed is a barber shop owned by a son of a sister in the truth. This 
suggests not only the Lord's power to protect whom he may please, 
but also his interest in and care over the friends of his saints. 
We anticipate that there will be some remarkable preservations during 
the fierce trouble, after the Church has been glorified. 



THE "new branch" of the work prospers. Bro. Draper is now in Eastern 
New York and Pennsylvania, Bro. McPhail in Missouri and Kansas 
and Bro. Cone in Illinois. A blessing seems to attend their efforts. 
They aim to build up and not to tear down the most holy faith. They 



are blessed themselves as well as a blessing to others. The Colporteur 
work is blessed also. MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., is in preparation 
in French and in Polish and VOL. III. in Swedish. Over 500,000 
copies of VOL. I. are now in circulation. The signs of the times are 
awakening some to study who heretofore scoffed. Let us all take courage 
for greater diligence, thanking our Lord for the privilege of being his 
"servants" to feed his "household." 



R1989 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE North American Review has recently published 

four articles from the pen of Hon. Wm. 

E. Gladstone, ex-Premier of Great Britain, on the subject 

of Natural Immortality of the Soul. The subject 

is ably discussed, from records of earliest times to the 

present— Biblical and profane. He states his own convictions 

with becoming moderation. He believes that 

many confound "survival" of the soul, with "immortality" 

of the soul, but he does not so err. He sees 

that the resurrection hope was the one which the Lord 

and the apostles held out, that the Scriptures do not 

declare that probation terminates with the present life; 

that eventually some will "survive," some will be 

granted immortality and some become extinct in the 

second death. 

We, of course, recognize no man, lay or cleric, as 
authority upon this or any other subject revealed in 
God's Word. Whoever speaks in harmony with God's 
Word deserves respect to that extent. It is the test. 
We are glad, however, that so able a thinker has drawn 
attention to the fallacy cherished by so many, and which 
is the basis of the eternal torment theory— natural immortality 
—immortality out of Christ. See our issue of 
Oct. 15, '95. 



People who talk about the barbarism of the past, 
and the greater genius and ability of the present along 
lines of Evolution; and particularly all who talk about 
"Some Mistakes that Moses Made," are respectfully 
requested to carefully consider the following item:— 

"The Prussian government has recently issued an 
order that the commissary of the army shall use no other 
meat as food for the army and navy except such as is 
slaughtered by the Jewish method. The tests made by 
the chemical and medical departments showed that such 
meats were far more wholesome and susceptible of preservation. 
Notwithstanding this the anti-Semitic factions 
in Saxony and Switzerland enacted laws prohibiting 



the Jewish method of slaughtering. But 350 

scientific non-Jewish authorities in physics and physiology 

in leading European universities have declared 

that the Jewish method is by far the most humane and 

best adapted means for obtaining animal flesh for food. 

Many intelligent Christians in European capitals use 

no meats unless the animal be slaughtered by Jewish 

methods." 



The general M.E. Conference, recently held at 
Cleveland, O., demonstrated, what we have already 
called to attention, that a democratic spirit is at work 
in that denomination which ere long will transform it, 
removing the control from the clergy and putting it 
where God puts it, into the hands of the church. 

Speaking of this a daily journal remarked.:— 

"The next indication, and the most important up 
to this time, was the action of the seventh district during 
a meeting discussing lay representation. Almost 
at the opening of the meeting this resolution was 
introduced: 

"Resolved, that it is the sense of the seventh 
general conference district that lay representation in 
the church shall recognize in some form the right of 
the members of the church to a voice in the election of 
their representatives. 

"This alarmed some of the more conservative 
members, but it was not enough for the radicals, one of 
whom offered a substitute, which reads: 

"Resolved, that we favor the election of all class 
leaders, stewards and trustees by direct vote of the 
adult members of the church. 

R1989 : page 132 

"The substitute was lost, but the original motion 
was passed with hardly a dissenting voice. In the 
course of the debate there was much complaint of the 
concentration of power in the clergy, and although 
most of the speeches were guarded in form, their meaning 
was unmistakable. One clergyman who was present 
said that in the matter of church government Methodism 
is approaching Congregationalism, 'and must inevitably 
reach that point.'" 

This will have a bearing upon the coming Protestant 
federation. As the people tend toward freedom and 
power, the ministers will all the more seek to hold 
their present position. Before long they will see that 
their interests will be best conserved by accepting the 
proffered hand of "the historic Episcopacy." 



"When the priests spoke of the Czar as the God-selected 



man, the God-ordained man, my blood grew 
warm. It is not true that God selected this Czar to 
rale and rob a hundred millions of human beings. It 
is all an ignorant, barbaric, superstitious lie— a lie that 
pomp and pageant, and flaunting flags and robed 
priests, and swinging censers cannot change to truth." 
—Robert Ingersoll. 

Very rarely are we able to quote the great Infidel 
with approval; but we can endorse him heartily when 
he assails the theory of "the divine right of kings." 
Yet this same doctrine supports all the thrones of 
"Christendom." The Church of Rome set the example, 
followed by the Greek and the Anglican 
churches. Her head, the Pope, claimed authority as 
Christ's representative to supply the thrones of earth 
with rulers, and to call them divisions of Christ's Kingdom 
("Christendom"). When the other systems broke 
away from Papacy, they carried along her doctrines 
and practices on many subjects, including this one. 

All of these kingdoms have over and over again 
demonstrated their unlikeness to Christ's Kingdom; 
cruel, selfish and bloody they all have been and are, 
and the Czar's is one of the worst of them. At the recent 
coronation of the Czar and Czarina this false doctrine 
of the "divine right" of kings to squander the 
substance of their subjects was illustrated. The gown 
worn by the Czarina is reported to have cost two hundred 
thousand dollars; the carriage in which she rode 
was "worth almost its weight in gold"; the harness of its 
six horses cost eighty thousand dollars; and every thing 
else was proportionately gorgeous and wasteful. The forty 
millions of dollars wasted in this vain coronation show 
were wrung from his poor subjects, who in their ignorance 
almost worship him. To charge the misrule of 
earth upon our gracious Creator from whom cometh 
every good and perfect gift is blasphemy. Thank 
God! very shortly now the world will witness the close 
of "the times of the Gentiles" and the beginning of 
"the times of restitution." The desire of all nations 
will come when "the powers that be" shall give place 
to him whose right the Kingdom is, and who will cause 
that God's will shall be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven. 



"The excitable and superstitious people of Madrid 
have distinguished themselves by a gorgeous religious 
ceremony as a means of invoking the aid of the Almighty 
in bringing to a speedy close the devastating Cuban 
war. It is said to have been a most striking and singular 
demonstration. At least one hundred and fifty thousand 
persons joined in the religious procession which 
marched the streets of the city, so say the dispatches, 
while nearly the whole of the population showed signs 
of deep enthusiasm. 



"But what avails such religious mummery. The 
prayers that ascended bore no plea for justice or mercy, 
but implored instead that Spain might triumph in her 
cruel and barbarous warfare against a people striving 
to throw off the chains of slavery, and establish their 
own independence." 

As we clipped the above from a secular journal we 
thanked God that he is raising up, outside the nominal 
churches, those who can see principles of justice, and 
point the people to them. 



The subject of baptism is being stirred up considerably 
in various quarters. While two congregations 
of the "Disciples" or "Christian" denomination 
(which has always made "baptism for the remission of 
sins" its specialty) concluded to receive members without 
baptism, the Methodists are discussing the removal 
of the rule which for years has prevented its membership 

R1990 : page 132 

from practicing immersion, if they had been 
sprinkled in infancy. One minister who favored the 
change remarked that this rule had driven thousands 
of Methodists into Baptist churches. 

The following will show that Presbyterians also 
are forced to consider the subject. The result no doubt 
will be that within a few years all denominations will 
remove restrictions, and permit each individual to 
choose for himself. And this in turn will prepare for 
the great confederation which will take form and power 
just before the total wreck of Babylon. The matter 
referred to is a second letter from Rev. A. T. Pierson 
to the Philadelphia Presbytery, which the Philadelphia 
Press says was in substance as follows:— 

'"I had foreseen that my course might compel a 
change of denominational connection, but I have preferred 
that such sundering of former ties should become 
necessary by your act rather than mine. 

'"I can only say that to submit myself to baptism 
as a believer had come to be a condition of my peace 
and of unclouded fellowship with God. For years the 
conviction grew upon me that the basis of infant baptism 
is traditional and ecclesiastical, rather than Scriptural; 
and side by side with this conviction grew another; 
viz., that by New Testament standards baptism is the 

R1990 :page 133 

act of a believer confessing Christ as Savior and Lord, 
and by typically claiming identification with him in his 
death, burial and resurrection. Hence I came, somewhat 
slowly and reluctantly, I confess, to the conclusion 
that I had never been baptized in a New Testament 



sense, and, therefore, should yield my implicit 
obedience to a plain command.' 

"It must, however, be my solace that whatever 
discord it may create in my business relations, it has 
brought conscious harmony with God, consistency with 
gospel teaching and practice, and liberty to preach a 
full gospel message, from which nothing is eliminated 
by a tortuous exegesis. As your action in my case 
seems to compel my withdrawal, perhaps you will forbear 
with me if I first state briefly why I have previously 
stated that 'this act was not meant by me as a 
change of denomination.' 

'"Not only was it very natural preference not to 
have changed my church relations after forty years of 
such identification, but I have ventured to hope my divergence 
from Presbyterian doctrine and usage might 
not be deemed radical and fundamental. Even while 
doubting the legitimacy of infant baptism, I have never 
questioned the right of parental covenant or the privilege 
of infant consecration, nor, indeed, the peculiar 
relation sustained by the children of believers to the 
Church of God; but I cannot see the warrant for applying 
to infants an ordinance meant for regenerate 
believers, and implying a voluntary putting on of 
Christ. 

'"It seems to me to lower the dignity of baptism 
to encourage a loose administration of a sacramental 
ordinance, and to lead to at least a modified form of 
baptismal regeneration, however the latter may be 
disclaimed. 

'"While thus holding substantially the same views 
as most of the godliest Presbyterians I have known, it 
is not yet clear to me that my Baptist brethren have a 
Scriptural warrant for making immersional baptism the 
condition of church membership and of approach to the 
Lord's table, which implies, also, a serious barrier to 
fellowship with other denominations. Hence, while 
largely sympathizing with the Baptist position in other 
respects, I had hoped that the body of disciples to which 
I had so long been attached might prove sufficiently 
flexible to allow me to continue among them. 

'"Had I this act again to perform I would only 
do it more promptly, for in the nature of the case there 
could be no motive prompting it but a desire to fulfill 
all righteousness. 

'"If, after the hearing of this final statement, the 
Presbytery still regards my position as a renunciation 
of my life-long connection with the Presbyterian body, 
I can only request that my name be erased from the roll 
as one who has withdrawn to another body of Christians, 
and I will return the letter which your action has revoked.' 
Dr. Pierson concluded by thanking the Presbytery 
for its 'very considerate course' toward him." 

The Presbytery was as much in doubt as before as 
to what action it should take, and held the matter for 
further consideration. 



A missionary in India notes that the census of 1891 
revealed the fact that while 500,000 had been nominally 
converted from 1881 to 1891 there had been an 
increase of population of 30,000,000 during the same 
period. In this he sees the futility of hoping to convert 
the world by present agencies. He is now hoping 
and praying— "Thy Kingdom come." 



We live in a day of wonders and rumors of wonders. 
The most skeptical age is fast becoming the most credulous 
in all matters related to invention. It is an enforced 
credulity. The following, from the Philadelphia Press, 
relates to the latest marvels. Should it prove true, it 
will render useless present power machinery— such as 
engines, boilers, etc., and throw out of work nineteen 
coal-miners out of every twenty. 

"In addition to the magic names of Edison and 
Tesla two other electricians now claim attention. They 
are McFarlan Moose and Dr. W. W. Jacques. Mr. 
Moose has attacked the glow lamp problem and seems 
to have solved it, getting light without heat, and Dr. 
Jacques has attacked the coal pile and gets electrical 
energy, which can be used for any purpose, by the 
direct oxidation of carbon without the loss of energy 
through heat, as occurs in the ordinary combustion of 
coal. By heating carbon with caustic soda and passing 
air through the liquid mass of soda Dr. Jacques 
obtains 82 per cent, of electrical energy from his coal, 
which burned in a boiler in ordinary manner would 
give only 6 per cent, of electrical energy. 

"This is revolutionary enough, to be sure, but Mr. 
Moose seems to cap it at the other end of the wire, for 
he is able to take the ordinary commercial current of 
electricity, and, by using a converter in a vacuum, to 
transform it into a current of such a character that it 
will light up a vacuum tube with a beautiful glow. His 
converter, the electrician says, costs but $1 against 
Tesla's $10,000 oscillator, and the amount of energy 
that is represented in actual illumination is vastly increased. 
Not only that, but his entire apparatus is 
simplicity itself." 

Mr. Edison also has a new and powerful light— an 
X-ray light— from a "Crooke's tube." The lights, 
and powers, and machinery for the Millennium are 
rapidly preparing, and the whole world bears witness 
and marvels, but believes not in the great event. Mistaught, 
it is facing to the West instead of the East. 
Heeding the "traditions of the elders," it is looking to 
its own efforts to establish righteousness, and sees not 
the Millennial dawn, the plan of the ages consummating, 
the time at hand, the Kingdom come, and the 



day of vengeance near, to be followed by the results of 
the great ransom— "times of restitution." 



R1990 :page 134 

MODERN DELUSIONS. 



THIS ARTICLE FROM THE PEN OF REV. DR. GORDON, ENGLAND, 
IS IN REMARKABLE ACCORD WITH THE PRESENTATIONS 
OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

"RITUALISM is an ecclesiastical eccentricity 
into which men of unquestionable piety 
and consecration have fallen. But at the risk of a 
seeming breach of Christian charity I must classify it 
where its origin and history place it, among the strong 
delusions which have come in to corrupt the Church 
and despoil it of the simplicity that is in Christ. Most 
gladly do I bear tribute to the humble self-denial 
which many of the Ritualistic priests are practising, 
and to the much sound theology which they are setting 
forth from their pulpits. Nevertheless, I must remind 
you how often, in the history of the Church, the highest 
saintship has been found in intimate conjunction 
with the lowest superstition. 

"John Henry Newman, in a work which he put 
forth as a justification for his departure to Rome, makes 
this striking concession. In speaking of holy water 
and some other elements of the Roman Catholic ritual, 
he declares that originally they were 'the very 

INSTRUMENTS AND APPENDAGES OF DEMON WORSHIP,' 

though 'sanctified by adoption into the church.' Literally 
true is this statement, and as comprehensive as 
true, for it covers almost every element and particular 
of the Ritualistic service. 

"Going into a church where this system is in 
vogue you see the congregation turning reverently toward 
the east at certain stages of the service. It seems 
innocent enough to assume this position, though you 
know no reason for it. But open your Bibles to the 
eighth chapter of Ezekiel, and there hear God denouncing 
the abominations which Israel is committing by 
mingling the worship of Babylon with the service of 
God. Among these abominations was the spectacle in 
the 'inner court of the Lord's house' of 'about five and 
twenty men with their backs toward the temple of the 
Lord and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped 
the sun toward the east' Such is unquestionably 
the origin of the eastward posture— a relic and 
remnant of primitive sun-worship. In the same chapter 



of Ezekiel there is a reference to the ceremony of 'weeping 
for Tammuz,' Tammuz being another name for the 
pagan god Osiris. Remember that, if in the Ritualistic 
church you see some making 

R1991 :page 134 

THE SIGN OF THE CROSS, 

this was originally a pagan and not a Christian ceremony; 
for though X, the initial letter of Christ, very early 
became a Christian symbol, the T-shaped cross was 
originally simply the mystic Tau— the initial letter of 
Tammuz, and this sign was used in Babylonish worship 
and emblazoned on Babylonish vestments fifteen hundred 
years before the crucifixion of Christ. If the 
Ritualism is sufficiently advanced to make use of 

THE WAFER 

in the Communion, turn again to the description 

of Jewish apostacy contained in Jeremiah 45: 19, where 

the Israelites confess, 'We burned incense to the queen 

of heaven and poured out drink-offerings unto her, and 

we did make our cakes to worship her.' Here the pedigree 

of the wafer is suggested, and if one will examine 

the literature of the subject, we challenge him to resist 

the conclusion that it has come down directly from this 

Babylonish cake. This cake was round, for the reason 

that it was an image or effigy of the sun, and was worshipped 

as such, and when it became installed as part 

and parcel of Christian worship the shape was strenuously 

insisted on, and is to this day. John Knox, in 

referring to this fact, says with his usual vigor of speech: 

If, in making the roundness, the ring be broken, then 

must another of his fellow cakes receive the honor to 

be made a god, and the crazed or cracked miserable cake 

that was once in hope to be made a god must be given 

to a baby to play withal.' 

LIGHTED CANDLES. 

"So, too, in regard to that which is universally 
characteristic of Ritualism, the lighted candles about 
the altar. In the Apocryphal Book of Baruch there is 
a minute and extended description of the Babylonish 
worship, with all its dark and abominable accessories. 
Of the gods which they set up in their temples it is 
said that 'their eyes be full of dust through the feet of 
them that come in.' And then it is added that the 
worshippers 'light for them candles, yea more than for 
themselves, whereof they cannot see one.' In the pagan 
worship at Rome, which was confessedly borrowed 
largely from Assyria and Egypt, we have accounts of 
processionals in which surpliced priests marched with 
wax candles in their hands, carrying the images of the 



gods, and we find a Christian writer in the fourth century 
ridiculing the heathen custom of 'lighting of candles 
to gods as if he lived in the dark,' which he certainly 
would not have done had the practice formed any part 
of Christian worship. 

HOLY WATER, ALTARS, INCENSE, ETC. 

"And time would fail me to tell of the confessional, 
so closely reproducing that imposed on the 
initiates in the ancient mysteries, and of holy water, 
whose origin has already been pointed out, and of ceremonies 
and vestments nameless and incomprehensible. 

"Granting, for the sake of charity, that altars and 
incense were borrowed from Jewish worship, which 
things indeed were done away in Christ, it still remains 
true that the great bulk of the Ritualistic ceremonies 
were originally part and portion of primitive idol worship. 
I am ready to challenge anybody who will make 
a candid investigation of the subject to disprove it. 

THE CLAIM OF NEWMAN. 

"But what if it be said with Newman that these 
things are 'sanctified by adoption into the Christian 
Church?' 

"Our answer would be, Alas, how has the Christian 
Church been unsanctified by their adoption! For of 

R1991 :page 135 

what are they the accessories? What have they brought 
in with them as they have crept stealthily back into the 
sanctuaries that were once purged of them? These two 
central errors— baptismal regeneration and transubstantiation 
—falsehoods of Satan which have done more 
to deceive souls, and accomplish their present and eternal 
undoing, than is possible for the strongest language 
to set forth. 

"Concerning the doctrine of transubstantiation, 
let me quote the words of a godly English rector, whose 
soul is stirred within him as he is compelled to see what 
he calls 'the centre and sum of the mystery of lawlessness' 
gaining recognition in his own church. He says: 
The crowning error in the process of Satanic inspiration 
is this, that the priesthood possesses a divine power 
to locate the Lord Jesus Christ on an earthly altar, and 
to lift Him up under the veils of bread and wine for 
the adoration of the people.' It is in this blasphemous 
fraud that the Apostle Paul's prophecy finds its accurate 
fulfilment. Of the apostacy forerunning the second 
coming of Christ, he says that the deluded followers of 
the lawless one should believe the lie. 'Of all the impostures 
that the father of lies ever palmed upon a 
credulous world this doctrine, which, both logically and 
theologically, repeats millions of times the humiliation 



to the blessed Redeemer necessarily transcends all.' It 
is worthy by pre-eminence to be called the lie. 

THE ABOMINATION. 

"Admitting now that Ritualism is of pagan origin, 
what is the conclusion to which we are brought? To 
this: that by its revival in the Church there is a repetition 
of that sin which God so constantly denounces in 
the Scriptures as an abomination— the mingling of the 
worship of demons with the worship of God. Here we 
go expressly by the Book. In Deuteronomy (32:17), 
when the Israelites are charged with provoking the 
Lord to jealousy by strange gods, the ground of offence 
is declared to be that 'they sacrificed unto devils, not 
to God.' In the Septuagint version of Psalm 96:5, it 
reads: 'For all the gods of the nations are demons.' 
And in 1 Cor. 10:20, it is written: The things which 
the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice unto demons and 
not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship 
with demons.' Dr. Tregelles, commenting on this 
last passage, says: 'Did the ancient heathen think they 
were adoring evil spirits— demons— when they sacrificed 
to their gods and demi-gods— when they honored 
Jupiter and Hercules? And yet the Scripture thus 
teaches us that the worship did actually go to demons; 
it was thus directed by Satan. And this put the idolatrous 
nations under the distinct tutelage of demons, 
whose power showed itself among them in many ways. 
We should form, I believe, a very inadequate estimate 
of Romish idolatry if we were to overlook the solemn 
fact that it is demon worship commingling itself with 
that of the living and true God, so that Romish nations 
stand under demoniacal tutelage, just as did the Gentiles 
of old.' And this conclusion accords as closely 
with the teachings of history as with the teaching of 
Scripture. 

SATAN THE REAL POPE. 

"How can we account for the course of the 
Roman apostacy for the last twelve hundred years— 
that career of blood and blasphemy unmatched by anything 
in human history, except under the supposition 
that behind the scene it is Satan who is the real pope 
and his subordinate demons who are the real cardinals 
—that just as through the mystery of godliness the 
Holy Spirit became incarnated in the body of Christ to 
guide and enlighten it, so through the 'Mystery of Iniquity' 
the evil spirit became incarnated in the great 
apostacy to inspire it with 'all deceivableness of unrighteousness. 
Is then Ritualism an ecclesiastical pastime 
—a harmless freak of religious aestheticism? So it 
seems to many, even of those who have no affiliation 
with it. But look at it just as it is. Trace the history 
of the ceremonies piece by piece back to their original 



source, till you find that true of almost every one of 
them which Newman admits of a part of them, that 
they were 'the very instruments and appendages of 
demon worship,' and then imagine the exultation 
among these demons as they see Christian priests, 
clothed in their paraphernalia, marching in their idolatrous 
processions and preaching their delusive doctrines. 
And how must their joy be enhanced by the anticipation 
of the yet greater triumphs still to come in the 
culmination of idolatry and man-worship. 

THE ANTICHRIST. 

"Some, looking for a future infidel Antichrist, have 
imagined how easily some master genius, inspired with 
infernal energy and magnetism, might evoke a worldwide 
allegiance to himself, and out of the restless elements 
of Socialism, Atheism and Paganism get himself 
worshipped as a god. 

"But I ask you to look not at what may be possible, 
but at what has actually been accomplished along 
the line which we are considering, and this, too, not merely 
in the first centuries of the papacy but in our own day. 
It is hardly more than fifty years since the Tractarian 
movement began in Oxford. From among the company 
of its originators we may select two, Newman and 
Manning, as noble and sincere souls, so far as we can 
judge, as any age of the Church has produced. But 
they came under the fascination of Ritualism; and it 
threw its spell little by little over their minds. Watch 
their course from the beginning to the present day. 
Observe the mental struggles, the ill-concealed reluctance, 
as fold after fold of mediaeval delusion closes 
about them. Almost can we hear cries of pain here 
and there as the process of branding the conscience 
with a hot iron goes on. But at last the work is complete; 
they have reached old age and with it the dotage 
of superstition. And where do we find them now? 
Prostrate on their faces before a defiled man; all the 
ascriptions which could be claimed by a god on earth 
they yield without reluctance to the Pope. Infallibility 
in his decrees, indefectibility in his conduct they now 
ascribe to him who sits upon the throne of Rome. 
Cardinal Manning, speaking for the line of Popes, 
says: 'In the person of Pius IX. Jesus reigns on earth, 
and He must reign till He hath put all enemies under 
His feet' Words, which as I read them, constrain me 

R1992:page 135 

to ask of this sovereign: 'Art thou the Antichrist that 
was to come, or do we look for another?' 

"Cardinal Newman, voicing the sentiment of the 
Church, which he calls 'a never-failing fount of humanity, 

R1992 : page 136 



equity, forbearance and compassion,' uses, with emphasis, 
these words: 'We find in all parts of Europe scaffolds 
prepared to punish crimes against religion. Scenes 
which sadden the soul were everywhere witnessed. 
Rome is the one exception to the rule. The Popes, 
armed with a tribunal of intolerance, have scarce spilt 
a drop of blood: Protestants and philosophers have 
shed it in torrents'— so 'drunk with the blood of martyrs' 
that she does not even know that she has been 
drinking ! 

"Here is the goal which the advance-couriers of 
Ritualism have reached in half-a-century; is it unlikely 
that the thousands of clergymen and laymen who 
have within a few years entered upon the same path 
will fail to arrive at the same destination? 

THE ATTEMPT OF RITUALISM. 

"To sum up this part of our subject, then, I believe 
that Ritualism is a desperate but marvelously insidious 
attempt of the great enemy to regain for the 
Man of Sin what was wrested from him by the Reformation. 
It is a scheme so fascinating that already 
many of the very elect [?] have been deceived by it, and 
are being led back to Rome as sheep to the slaughter. 
To such I would commend again the solemn words of 
Tregelles: 'A recurrence to Romish connection, a recommingling 
in any way with the maintenance of 
Romish idolatry, would place a Protestant nation again 
under the sway of those demons to whom idolatrous 
worship really ascends, whether the name under which 
they are adored be that of Jupiter or Simon Peter, the 
Apostle of Christ' 

"All this is hard to say for one who prefers the 
charity which covers a multitude of faults to the criticism 
which lays them bare. And in dwelling on this 
subject we are not insensible to the perversions of another 
kind which have crept into our non-liturgical 
bodies. For, so far as we know, the liturgical churches 
have not fallen into the cooking stove apostacy which 
is turning so many of our church basements into 
places of feasting; nor have they been ensnared with 
the entertainment heresy which sets up all sorts of shows 
and exhibitions for amusing the unchurched masses into 
an interest in the gospel. We deplore these things, 
and here and now lift up our warning against them as 
another device of the enemy for corrupting and enervating 
the Church of God. 

"But while considering ourselves, lest we also be 
tempted, we must none the less warn our neighbors 
against the fatal infatuation of Ritualism. We take up 
a Ritualistic catechism, and find it streaked through and 
through with the tinge of the scarlet woman— baptismal 
regeneration, eucharistic sacrifice, apostolic succession, 
prayers for the dead, intercession of departed 



souls,— we find its eminent author so enamored of 

the papacy that he draws away from all Protestant 

bodies and embraces her, declaring that the three chief 

branches of the holy Catholic Church are the Church 

of Rome, the Greek Church and the Anglican Church, 

and that the body thus formed is the true Church Catholic, 

'because she endures throughout all ages, teaches all 

nations, and maintains all truth.' When we find Protestant 

ecclesiastics so smitten with what the reformers 

used to call 'the trinkets of Antichrist,' as to allow themselves 

little by little to be reinvested with the cast-off 

clothing of Babylon, so that a recent writer describes 

the Bishop of Lincoln as 'adorned with mitre and cloth 

of gold, his orpheys so lavishly decorated with amethysts, 

pearls, topazes and chrysolites set in silver, as 

fairly to dazzle the beholder'; when we see all these 

we are moved to repeat with solemn earnestness the 

warning of Bradford, the Smithfield martyr, 'O England, 

beware of Antichrist; take heed that he doth not 

fool thee.' 

THEOSOPHY AND SPIRITUALISM. 

"Theosophy is the latest religion of transcendentalists. 
In it, the attenuated unbelief of our times is 
seeking to find relief from the ennui of denial. How 
to describe that which takes for itself the name of 
'Occultism,' how to give an idea of doctrines which 
claim to be hidden from all but the initiated, we do not 
know. It is enough to say that substantially it is 
Buddhism seeking conquests in Christian lands; 'the 
light of Asia' offering itself to those who have turned 
away from 'the light of Christ' It has its circles in 
many of our great cities, where its occult philosophy is 
diligently studied; though its following is small compared 
with that of Spiritualism, it being the religion of 
the literary elite, as the other is of the common people. 
If we question it in regard to its doctrines, it tells us 
that they are the same as those of 'the sacred mysteries 
of antiquity.' It inculcates a very attenuated philosophy 
of evolution; it teaches the pre-existence and the 
transmigration of souls, and instructs its disciples how 
by a rigid asceticism they may cultivate what is called 

'THE INTUITIONAL MEMORY,' 

by which they can enter into profound recollection of 
what they knew in far distant ages. In a couplet which 
it is fond of repeating it declares that 

"Descending spirits have conversed with man 
And told him secrets of the world unknown." 
And these words give the most reasonable hint of 
its origin. For its creed is 'the doctrines of demons 
from beginning to end.' No personal devil, that which 
is mystically called the devil being but the negative and 
opposite of God; no atonement except man's 'unification' 



with himself; no forgiveness of sin, souls being 

required to wear away their guilt by self-expiation; 

miracles, mysteries, ultimate deification— these are specimen 

articles of its delusive creed. Its whole character 

and contents, so far as we can comprehend them, 

are yet another phase of Satanic delusion. Now if we 

compare these three systems, counting ritualism as incipient 

Popery, we find them agreeing remarkably to fill 

up the outlines of the predicted apostacy. The 'forbidding 

to marry' realized in the celibacy of Romanism; 

the enforced continence of Theosophy, and the anti-marriage 

doctrine of Spiritualism; the 'commanding to 

abstain from meat' appearing in the superstitious fasts 

of Ritualism, and the rigid abstinence from flesh enjoined 

on the initiates of esoteric Buddhism; the 

doctrines of demons manifested in the magic and idolatry 

which Ritualism substitutes for the chaste and 

simple doctrines of ordinance of Christ, and which in 

many particulars hold a common ancestry with those 

of Theosophy and Spiritualism; and the fantastic miracle-working 

R1992 : page 137 

which characterize them all. All three 
of these delusions give a practical denial of Christ's 
second advent— that doctrine at which demons tremble- 
Spiritualism and Theosophy declaring that in them the 
promised Epiphany of Christ is taking place; while 
Ritualism by its doctrine of transubstantiation makes 
the Communion declare the 'real presence of Christ' 
in flesh and blood, when the Lord ordained it to declare 
his real absence 'till He come'— I mean, of course, 
bodily absence. 

AN ERUPTION OF EVIL SPIRITS. 

"What now is the prophetic significance of all that 
we have said? This, it seems to me: that according to 
the predictions of Scripture we are witnessing an eruption 
of evil spirits who are again working powerfully 
along their favorite lines— Ritualism, Superstition and 
Philosophy. 

"We hear much about infidelity and communism 
'heading up' in a personal Antichrist. Believing as I 
do, that Antichrist came long ago, and that he was 
crowned a few years since in St. Peter's at Rome as 
the deified man— infallible and supreme, I see in the 
present aspect of affairs his final bodying forth, rather 
than his ultimate heading up. As in the case of Christ, 
so in the case of 'the Man of Sin': the head is revealed 
first, and the body gathered throughout all generations 
grows up 'in all things into him who is the head'; 
for the career of Antichrist is the exact parody and evil 
counterpart of that of Christ. If you say 'the Antichrist 
cannot be a system, but must be an individual 
as certainly as Christ is,' I remind you that the word 



Christ does not always stand for a single individual in 

description; for in 1 Cor. 12 the Apostle describes the 

body of believers, gathered to the Lord through all 

time, with its divers gifts and administrations, and this 

corporate whole, with its many members, but 'all baptized 

by one spirit into one body' he names Ho Christos 

—the Christ. So that evil system, with its various 

offices and administrations, yet baptized into unity by 

'the spirit which now worketh in the children of disobedience,' 

is the Antichrist. The one is the head of 

the ecclesia, and the other is the head of the apostasia; 

but [in each case] the head and the body are so identical 

that they bear the same personal name. 

'"But he is called the Man of Sin,' you say, 'and 
therefore must be an individual.' Not of necessity. 
For the line of believers, extending through all ages, 
is declared by the Apostle to be taken out from Jews 
and Gentiles to 'make of twain one new man.' 

"I cannot believe that 'the Mystery of Iniquity,' 
which Paul declared to be already working in his day, 
has been toiling on for nearly two thousand years in 
order to bring forth a single short-lived man, and he so 
omnipotently wicked that the Papal Antichrist, with 
the blood of fifty millions of martyrs on his skirts, is 
too insignificant a sinner to be mentioned in comparison. 
And now I hear the objections coming thick and fast. 
'But is he not an open infidel since he is said to deny 
the Father and the Son?' Search your concordances 
for the meaning of the word 'deny,' and observe how 
constantly it signifies the denial of apostacy and false 
profession. But is he not 

R1993 : page 137 

THE INCARNATION OF SATAN 

since he is called 'the son of perdition?' Yes; Judas 
was named 'the son of perdition'; and 'Satan entered 
into Judas Iscariot'; but so far from atheistically denying 
Christ he openly professed Him, saying, 'Hail, 
Master,' and then betrayed him with a kiss. But is 
he not a godless blasphemer, since he is declared to 
have 'a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies?' 
The counterfeit of Christ again, for Christ was twice 
falsely accused of blasphemy, because in claiming to be 
the Son of God he made himself equal with God, and 
because he presumed to forgive sins. The Pope is justly 
accused of blasphemy on both these grounds; for he profanely 
calls himself God, and assumes to forgive sins. 
Said Alexander VI.: 'Caesar was a man; Alexander 
is a God.' But must he not be a Jew, established in 
Jerusalem, since it is said that 'He sitteth in the temple 
of God, showing himself that he is God?' No. This 
particular phrase, 'temple of God,' is never in a single 
instance in the New Testament applied to the temple 
at Jerusalem, but always to the Church, the Body of 



Christ, to its head or to its members, in heaven or on 
earth. But could the Holy Ghost call that 'the temple 
of God' which has become apostate? Just as possibly 
as Christ could call the apostate Laodiceans whom he 
spues out of his mouth 'the Church in Laodicea.' 

"But does not this view commit one to the year-day 
interpretation, since the career of Antichrist is three 
years and a half, and the papal system extends through 
centuries? Yes, for the one instance of prophetic 
time which has by unanimous consent been fulfilled, 
the seventy weeks of Daniel is demonstrated to have 
been upon this scale, since the period was actually 
490 years— a day for a year— and this may be taken as 
a clue to the prophetic time of Revelation. But if the 
holy Spirit meant years in the Apocalypse why did he 
not say years? you reply. Why, when he meant 
churches and ministers and kingdoms and kings and 
epochs, did he say candlesticks, and stars, and beasts, 
and horns, and trumpets? Yet, having used these 
miniature symbols of greater things, how fitting that 
the accompanying time should also be in miniature! 
To use literal dates would distort the imagery— as 
though you should put a life-sized eye in a small-sized 
photograph. 

"I have said that Antichrist is the evil counterpart 
of Christ. When Satan offered Christ all the kingdoms 
of the world if he would fall down and worship 
him, he refused, accepting present rejection and crucifixion, 
and waiting the Father's time for the kingdoms 
of the world to become the kingdom of our Lord and of 
his Christ. The Papal Antichrist accepted the kingdoms 
of this world when the temptation was presented 
him, and proceeded to announce himself the 'King of 
kings' and that the kingdom had come, and that in 
himself was fulfilled the Scripture, 'He shall have 
dominion from sea to sea, and from river to river, unto 
the ends of the earth.' 

"The Bride of Christ— the Church— was left in 
the world to share her Lord's rejection and cross, enduring 
present suffering and widowhood, and waiting 
for the return of the Bridegroom. But the harlot bride 
of Antichrist accepts an earthly throne and a present 
glory, boastfully saying, 'I sit a queen and am no 

R1993 : page 138 

widow and shall see no sorrows.' Do we not see that 
it was this usurpation of the headship of the Church 
by the Man of Sin; this premature grasping of the 
kingdom, and the setting up of a mock millennium under 
the rule of a pseudo-Christ, that destroys the millennial 
hope of the Church, and has infected generation 
after generation with 

THE DELUSION OF A PRESENT REIGN 



and a present kingdom, while Christ is yet absent from 
his flock? But this enemy of God and his saints must 
soon come to an end. In Daniel and in Thessalonians 
this end is predicted in two stages; gradual, and then 
sudden and complete. 'They shall take away his dominion 
to consume and destroy unto the end,' says 
Daniel. 'Whom the Lord shall consume with the breath 
of his mouth and shall destroy with the brightness of 
his coming,' says Paul in Thessalonians. The consuming 
process has been going on mightily in our generation 
by the breath of the Lord's mouth in the worldwide 
diffusion of the inspired Scriptures. 'And now 
the devil is come down with great wrath because he 
knoweth that he hath but a short time.' He is putting 
forth the energy of despair. He is sending his 
legions to work along various lines, which all centre, 
visibly, or invisibly, in one head. On the line of 
sacerdotalism he is seeking to thwart the work of the 
Reformation by again insinuating popish worship into 
our churches; on the line of superstition he is aiming 
to bewitch the godless and curious multitudes through 
the energy of unclean spirits; on the line of culture he 
is moving to foist upon the literary elite a diluted Paganism 
as an extra fine religion. But these things cheer 
us rather than sadden us, for all the shadows point to 
the dawn. The Church's salvation means Antichrist's 
destruction, and the same Scripture which speaks to us 
so powerfully to-day in the light of evils, 'Yet a little 
while and he that shall come will come and will not 
tarry,' says also, 'And the God of peace shall bruise 
Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.' 

BEWARE OF THE STRONG DELUSIONS OF 
ANTICHRIST. 

"All this which I have set forth I have declared 
with unutterable sorrow. All this I can think of only 
with weeping, crying, 'O Bride of Christ, how are 
they increased who would rob thee of thy chastity!" 

"Men and Brethren: We are here for a candid 
and courteous discussion of certain great prophetic questions. 
Among these none are more important as affecting 
our present testimony than the one upon which 
I have just now touched. 

"I need not remind you that one of the first tasks 
which the Ritualistic leaders fifty years ago felt called 
upon to undertake was that of getting rid of the Protestant 
interpretation of Antichrist as headed by the 
Pope of Rome. How desperately they wrought at this 
task will be apparent to those who read Newman's 
essay on 'The Man of Sin,' and observe especially his 
earnest wrestling with the ominous saying of Gregory 
the Great, that 'Whosoever adopts or desires the title 
of universal bishop is the forerunner of Antichrist.' 

"If I must take sides between parties on this question, 



my sympathies will be with Latimer and Cranmer 
and Bradford, whose vision was clarified by the fires of 
martyrdom, to recognize their persecutor and call him 
by name, rather than with Manning and Newman, 
whose eyes are holden by the charm of mediaevalism. 

"But our appeal is not to man, but to the sure 
word of prophecy. I speak rather of The Book than of 
any human books, and avow my conviction that the 
Papal 'Man of Sin' was accurately photographed on 
the camera of prophecy thousands of years ago; that 
no detective searching for him to-day would need any 
other description of him than that which is found on the 
pages of the Bible. Taking those photographs of Daniel 
and John and Paul, and searching the world upside 
down for their originals, I am confident that this same 
detective would stop at the Vatican, and after gazing 
for a few moments at the Pontiff, who sits there gnawing 
the bone of infallibility, which he acquired in 1870, 
and clutching for that other bone of temporal sovereignty 
which he lost the very same year, he would 
lay his hand on him and say: 'You are wanted in the 
court of the Most High to answer to the indictment of 
certain souls beneath the altar, who were slain for the 
word of God and for the testimony which they bore, 
and who are crying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell upon the earth?' 

"My brethren, let us search the Scriptures anew, 
and let us be sure that they do not require it of us before 
we silence our testimony against the Man of Rome 
[system] as Antichrist." 



R1993 :page 138 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



"IS COME" OR "COMING"? 

Question.— Some quote 1 John 4:2 and 2 John 7 
as evidence that our Lord Jesus is to return in the flesh, 
claiming that the verb "is come" should be "coming." 
Is this claim well founded? 

Answer.— In reply we give, by the kindness of Bro. 
J. M. Blose, a written opinion on these two texts furnished 
him by J. R. Rinehart, Ph.D., Professor of 
languages in Waynesburg College, a thorough scholar. 

After quoting the above passages in Greek, Prof. 
Rinehart says:— 

"(1) The foregoing quotations are from the Emphatic 
Diaglott of Wilson, purporting to be from the original 
Greek text of the New Testament. The word eleluthota 
is the accusative, singular, masculine, of the second 



perfect participle of the verb erchomai, having the same 
relation to this verb that any other perfect participle 
has to its verb. It stands with the verb homolegei in 
indirect discourse, and represents a finite, perfect tense, 
according to ordinary Greek syntax.— Goodwin's Greek 
Grammar, No s. 1588, 1288. 

"The following translation of the first quotation 
is, therefore, essentially correct. 'Every spirit that confesseth 

R1993 : page 139 

that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh, is of God.' 

"(2) The word erchomenon in the second quotation 
is the accusative, singular, masculine, of the present 
participle of the verb erchomai, and is subject to the 

R1994 : page 139 

same rules of syntax as the word above. Its relation 

to eiselthon through homologountes, as well as the context, 

justifies its translation as of past time.— Ibid, No. 1289. 

"The translation of the second quotation, therefore, 
is properly given as follows: 'For many deceivers 
went forth into the world— those who do not confess 
that Jesus Christ did come in the flesh.'" 

In our issue of March, '87, we published a report 
from the Professor of Greek in Rochester, N.Y., to 
the same effect. Indeed, we have never known a Greek 
scholar to take any other view, and do not believe that 
any Professor of Greek in any creditable University 
would hesitate for one moment to pronounce the above 
and our Common Version rendering correct. Only 
those who have first of all formed the opinion that our 
Lord's second advent will be in the flesh find anything 
whatever in these texts over which to confuse and 
stumble themselves and others. 

TABLETS AND CHRONOLOGY. 



Question. -In the TOWER for June 1, '94 (page 2), 
reference is made to the "Tellel-Amorna tablets" and 
the deductions of Rev. T. Harrison in "Science," that 
these corroborate the Bible account— "The date fixes 
that of the Bible." You then cite 1 Kings 4:1; Josh. 10:3; 
and 11. Now my question is,— Do these tablets 
corroborate your chronology? Or in what way do they 
fix Bible dates? 

Answer.— The word "date" is indefinite and does 
not indicate any particular moment, hour, day, year, 
or even century. It would have been better had we 
said, "The record corroborates that of the Bible." Read 
the references cited and you will see that none of them 
give dates. Nor do the "tablets" mentioned give 
dates. As already pointed out in MILLENNIAL DAWN, 



VOL. II., Chap. 2, and again in the WATCH TOWER of 

May 15, '96 (pages 104-106), dates were not attached 
to ancient records (sacred or secular),— "The first effort 
to bring time-order into the world's general history 
was in the second century of the Christian era." The 
hitching together of the broken pieces of the world's 
history is mere guess-work back of the first year of 
Cyrus, B.C. 536. The Bible chronology which we 
present, and for which we give chapter and verse, connects 
from Adam down to Cyrus, 536 B.C., and thus 
we get the chronology which we present but which is 
not ours more than yours. God's Word is for us all. 

Keeping these facts in memory we should understand 
Rev. T. Harrison to mean that these "tablets" 
mention the names of certain prominent generals and 
kings in Israel and the surrounding nations. These 
corroborate accounts and names mentioned in the Bible 
and thus corroborate Bible records (rather than fix 
Bible dates). 

SERVANTS RENDER SERVICE. 



Question.-In the WATCH TOWER for March 1, '96, 
in the treatment of the Sunday School lesson for March 
22d, you pointed out "that servant," "his fellow-servants" 
and the Lord's general "household" in what 
seems to me an orderly manner; but you failed to 
particularize whom you understand to be represented by 
the three parties mentioned— "that servant," "his 
fellow-servants" and the "household." I can readily 
recognize the "household" as meaning the believers of 
this time; and his "fellow-servants" would seem to be 
associated servants engaged in serving truth to the 
household; but who is "that servant?" Your article 
does not say who "that servant" is, and I am somewhat 
puzzled over it. Could it refer to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER? or to the Tract Society? 

My second query is,— Should we understand that 
"that servant" must be divinely inspired, so as to be 
infallible; and that "his fellow servants" and the 
"household" would be cut off by his service from fellowship 
with the Lord through the Scriptures? 

Answer.— (1) We purposely avoided making an 
application of "that servant." We merely corrected 
a former too careless criticism of the lesson; and showed 
that the language of the Scripture was so carefully 
chosen as to leave no room to question its reference to 
some one servant (animate or inanimate) whom the 
Lord would specially use in the present time to dispense 
the present truth to "his fellow servants" as well as to 
the "household." 

The account contains no suggestion of either the 
inspiration or infallibility of "that servant." This 
distinction belongs only to the Lord, the Apostles and 



the prophets. The whole force of the statement shows 
"that servant" to be merely a special channel for 
distributing the truth. His business is not to make 
truth, but to circulate it;— to put it into the hands of 
"his fellow servants" and the truth-hungry "household." 
There certainly is no intimation that the "household" 
is cut off from access to, or feeding on, the Word 
of God; neither by "that servant" nor by "his 
fellow servants." None of the "servants" are to come 
between the "household" of faith and God's Word. 
On the contrary, each one of the "household" is to 
prove all that he accepts as spiritual food, whether he 
gets it from the Bible himself or from "that servant" 
or from "his fellow servants." None of these servants 
are "lords over God's heritage"; their highest privilege 
will be to serve, and the only difference between 

R1994 : page 140 

"that servant" and "his fellow servants" will be that 
his service will be more general, a wider service. 

More perhaps than any other servant, ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER has opposed the thought that the 
Church of Christ is composed of a clerical class commissioned 
to teach, and a lay class not commissioned 
to teach the divine Word: it specially has held up the 
inspired words, "all ye are brethren" and "one is your 
Master"; and has pointed out that all consecrated believers 
are of the "royal priesthood" each fully commissioned, 
not to "lord it" over others, but to sacrifice 
himself in the service of the truth, doing good unto all, 
especially to the household of faith. So with the servants 
of Matt. 24:49; service is their only commission, 
not lordship or self-appointment. 

All the members of the "body" are "anointed to 
preach" the gospel, and instructed to search the 
Scriptures, as we have heretofore clearly shown. 
This has been true ever since Pentecost, and is as true 
as ever to-day. But the plan of the ages, as a general 
arrangement and "feast," provided by God for his 
people, was not provided until its due time. Each one 
who is served with the present truth may invite others 
to sit down while he joins the servants in ministering 
to them. There is abundant opportunity for all who 
desire to be "servants"; for the majority of the household 
of faith have as yet barely "tasted that the Lord is 
gracious"— not yet tasted of "the riches of his grace in 
Christ Jesus our Lord." 

IS INTEREST USURY? 

Question.— A brother desires your views on Rom. 14:23. 
Does this apply to other acts of this life? For 
instance, the brother had a small sum left him, invested 
and bearing interest. This interest he has collected 
and used, the principal not being available. Now, from 



Ezek. 18:8; Psa. 15:5, and other Scriptures, he is inclined 
to think he should not receive interest or increase, 
but not being fully persuaded, he is in doubt. He 
wishes to know if it is sin to him, as it is not of faith. 
Please answer privately or through the TOWER. 

Answer.— No: we would not think that the brother's 
case comes under Rom. 14:23. His mind is merely in a 
quandary. He is merely questioning the subject with 
a view to doing whatever he considers to be the Lord's 
will. If he is using reasonable energy to reach a decision, 
it is not to be considered that meantime he is in 
the condition of the doubter of Rom. 14:23. But if 
after he has reached a conclusion in his mind, he violate 
his conscience, and does not act in accordance with his 
belief, he will then be under condemnation as a violator 
of his conscience. 

We do not understand the taking of a reasonable 
interest to be usury. The laws of God under which 
the Jews were placed left very little room for judgment 
on their part in any sense. It was decided for them 
beforehand what they should eat and should not eat, 
what they should do and what they should not do, and 
their consciences and judgments of right and wrong 
were ignored. In the present age, in God's dealing 
with the Christian Church, it is wholly different. Everything 
is left to the judgment and nothing is particularized. 
Upon them that are in Christ Jesus and who are 
walking not after the flesh but after the spirit, God imposes 
no special regulations concerning their financial 
dealings, their food, etc., except such as are implied 
in the general principles of the New Covenant; namely, 
truth, righteousness and love. 

Under our covenant (according to our understanding) 
it might sometimes become our duty as well as our 
privilege entirely to give something away, principal and 
interest, where love and righteousness would seem to 
our judgment so to dictate. In another instance it 
might be entirely proper to loan to another for use and 
for profit money which we could not use as advantageously 
ourselves, and it would be proper also to stipulate 
for a share of the profit, and that share might be either 
a larger or a smaller share, depending upon the amount 
of risk involved and the amount of profit made by the 
user. A reasonable proportion of the profits made 
would not be "usury" in the sense of oppressive interest 
or extortion. 

On the other hand there might be circumstances 
under which the acceptance of even a small interest 
might mean oppression and injury to the neighbor. 

If the brother is loaning his money at a high rate 
of interest, taking advantage of the necessities of the 
borrower (as pawnbrokers are represented to do), then 
it would be in the nature of injury. But if the party 
using the money is making something out of it, and 
paying a portion of that profit to the brother, it is not 
usury in the sense of oppressive charge, but interest in 



R1995 : page 140 

the sense of reasonable profit. This is the sense that 
our Lord commended in the parable of the pounds and 
talents, when he said to the servant, "Thou oughtest 
to have put my money to the exchangers, that at my 
coming I might have received mine own with usury." 

The meaning of the English word "usury" has 
somewhat changed from early times, and now is always 
used to indicate oppressive interest. Formerly its 
meaning was simply interest. 

ARE SOME SPARED TO COMPLETE THEIR TRIAL? 



Question.— The recent death of a relative has set 
me thinking. I do not know how it is with the truly 
consecrated in other places; that is, those of them who 
have accepted the present truth, whether or not they 
pass away as rapidly as those who are not fully consecrated. 
I notice that among the denominations frequently 

R1995 :page 141 

their best and most faithful workers are taken 
(die), while the faithful and physically weak among us 
are spared. Would this mean that we will all go 
together? 

Answer.— We have ourselves noticed and remarked 
what you mention. It would seem that the testing of 
those who have come unto the "harvest" light is to 
be specially severe and prolonged. The test of endurance 
is one of the severest; but we have the assurance, 
though "the love of many shall wax cold, because iniquity 
shall abound," yet "he that shall endure unto 
the end, the same shall be saved." (Matt. 24:12,13.) 
If we are together approaching some crisis, so much 
more necessary is it that we improve the present favorable 
opportunity to put on the whole armor of God that 
when the "fiery darts" come we shall be able to quench 
them and to stand. Note the Apostle's very explicit 
direction as to the articles constituting this armor 
(Eph. 6:10-18), not forgetting that they cannot be 
put on at all until the body be washed and clothed in 
the garment of Christ's imputed righteousness.— 2 Cor. 7:1; 
Rom. 4:7,8,24,25. 

However, we do not think it probable that all the 
living faithful will die and be "changed" together. 

R2458 :page 141 

"A CUP OF COLD WATER" 



The Lord of the harvest walked forth one day 

Where the fields were white with the ripening wheat, 

Where those he had sent in the early morn 
Were reaping the grain in the noonday heat. 

He had chosen a place for every one, 

And bidden them work till the day was done. 

Apart from the others, with troubled voice, 

Spoke one who had gathered no golden grain: 

"The Master has given no work to me, 
And my coming hither has been in vain. 

The reapers with gladness and song will come, 

But no sheaves will be mine in the harvest home." 

He heard the complaint and he called her name: 
"Dear child why standest thou idle here? 

Go fill the cup from the hillside stream, 

And bring it to those who are toiling near; 

I will bless thy labor, and it shall be 

Kept in remembrance as done for me." 

'Twas a little service, but grateful hearts 

Thanked God for the water so cold and clear; 

And some who were fainting with thirst and heat 
Went forth with new strength to the work so dear; 

And many a weary soul looked up, 

Revived and cheered by the little cup. 

—Selected. 



R1995 :page 141 

"THE LORD IS RISEN INDEED." 

-JUNE 21. -Luke 24:34-53.- 

ALTHOUGH the disciples had been informed 
concerning our Lord's resurrection, they 
seem to have but imperfectly comprehended his words. 
At all events, they evidently were not expecting him 
to rise from the dead, and hence, when he appeared in 
their midst, they were greatly affrighted and troubled. 
Our Lord foreknew how they would regard the matter, 
and had chosen the most favorable manner for manifesting 
himself, and communicating to them the wonderful 
fact of his resurrection. He could have appeared 
to them as the angel appeared to Moses in the burning 
bush. They would then have seen a flame, as Moses 
did, and could have heard his voice, and could have 
been impressed with the dignity of his presence by being 
commanded, as Moses was commanded, to take off 
their shoes because the ground was holy. This would 
have made a deep impression upon their minds, but it 
would not have made the kind of impression the Lord 



desired to make. It would not have convinced them 
that their Master, whom they had seen crucified and 
buried three days before, was no longer dead, but risen 
and alive. 

Our Lord could have chosen another method. He 
could have appeared as a glorious angel and have manifested 
something of his spiritual glory, as he did later 
to the Apostle John on the Isle of Patmos (Rev. 1:13-18), 
and as he did to Saul of Tarsus on the way to 
Damascus. He was just as truly a glorious spirit being 
at this time as he was afterward, and as he will be to 
all eternity. He had been put to death in the flesh, 
but, as the Apostle assures us, he had also been quickened 
(made alive) in spirit. (1 Pet. 3:18.) This change 
had come to him in his resurrection, just as it is promised 
that a similar change will come to his faithful 
Church,— "sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown in 
weakness, raised in power; sown a natural body, raised 
a spiritual body." (1 Cor. 15:43,44.) But had he 
appeared to the disciples a glorious, shining being, as 
he appeared to Saul, the effect upon them no doubt 
would have been similar to the effect upon Saul. They 
would have fallen before him, and perhaps also have 
lost their sight as Saul lost his. This might have impressed 
them powerfully, but it would not have led 
their inexperienced judgments to accurately connect 
this glorious being with the man Christ Jesus whom 
they had followed for three years. 

The manner chosen by our Lord for revealing himself 
was much more favorable for the disciples. He 
wished to gain their attention, and to avoid anything 
that would unnecessarily excite them, and hinder them 
from learning the lessons which he wished to impart. 
Hence he appeared as a man on several occasions,— 
once as a gardener to Mary, again as a stranger to 
the two who went to Emmaus, and on another occasion; 

R1995 : page 142 

and in each case, he revealed his identity by his conversation 

or by his manner so that they recognized him as 

their crucified Master,— Jesus. But on the occasion 

mentioned in this lesson he appeared in a body of flesh 

and bones, similar to that which had been crucified. 

The body which they saw was not he for he had 

been "changed" in his resurrection and was now a 

spirit being with a glorious body such as John and Saul 

saw. But he appeared to them in a body of flesh and 

in ordinary garments specially prepared for the occasion, 

just as angels (using the same power) had appeared 

as men previously. Just as our Lord (centuries before 

he became a man) appeared as a man to Abraham, and 

ate and talked with him, so now, after he had ceased 

to be a man, and had been changed and was a spirit being 

highly exalted, far above angels, he again appeared 

as a man because this was the best means of communicating 



to the disciples the grand truths which he 
wished to communicate. Hence also he assured them, 
to allay their fears, that what they saw was not a spirit. 
He at that time was a spirit (1 Cor. 15:45; 1 Pet. 3:18; 
2 Cor. 3:17), but they did not see him, but merely the 
body of flesh which veiled yet represented him; and 
which, as he intended, helped their imperfect faith and 
knowledge to grasp the important lesson that he was no 
longer dead but alive for evermore. 

Then he reminded them of his own previous utterances 
on the subject of his resurrection; he quoted to 
them and expounded the prophecies which bore the 
same testimony, and showed them the necessity for the 
great transaction which he had accomplished, saying, 
"Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to 
suffer and to rise from the dead the third day." All 
of this discourse probably is not given, but we may 
presume, reasonably, that he explained to them particularly 
the necessity for the ransom-sacrifice, and something 
concerning the wonderful results which must yet 
flow therefrom to all the families of the earth. 

He was present with them for forty days before 
his ascension, yet was invisible to the "brethren," except 
during the few times of his manifestation; and 
these manifestations were but brief; during all this 
period of forty days none except the "brethren" saw 
him; and, as we have seen, they saw him only by reason 
of the miracle which he performed, appearing in 
their sight as a man; because human beings cannot see 
spirit beings. In this our Lord fulfilled his statement 
made before his death— "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more."— John 14:19. 

Those who hold the view that the flesh of our dear 
Redeemer given for us (John 6:51) was resumed by 
him, and constitutes his resurrection body, miss the real 
lesson taught the disciples during those forty days preceding 

R1996 : page 142 

his ascension. The lesson of the occasional 

appearances, and then in different forms or bodily appearances, 

and of his vanishing after each manifestation 

was (1) that he was no longer dead but risen; 

(2) that his resurrection conditions were totally different 

from those of the man Christ Jesus. 

To imagine the care-worn, thorn-marked features 
and the wounded hands and feet, of "flesh and bone," 
to be Christ's resurrection body would be thoroughly 
inconsistent every way. If his marred, fleshly body 
is his resurrection body, why did the Apostle so carefully 
explain that "there is an animal body and there 
is a spiritual body"? (1 Cor. 15:44) And why tell the 
saints that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be" in 
the resurrection? (1 John 3:2.) If we shall be like as 
we are now, with all of our present blemishes and scars, 
then it doth appear and surely would be very disappointing 



to those who have believed the Lord's word that 
flesh and blood (human nature) cannot inherit or enter 
the Kingdom of God, and that therefore we, who are 
alive and remain unto the second coming of our Lord, 
must be "changed"— that we may "be like him and 
see him as he is." Originally a spirit being, our Lord 
humbled himself and was changed to our nature and 
was "made flesh" "for the suffering of death" as our 
ransom price. He then was "made like unto his 
brethren:" but now, having redeemed us, he has been 
glorified with the glory which he had with the 
Father before the world was created, and now his 
promise is that the "brethren" shall be "changed" 
and made like unto him and share his glory.— 1 John 3:2; 
1 Cor. 15:41-46,51-53. 



page 142 

JUNE 28.-REVIEW STUDIES OF THE QUARTER. 

Golden Text— "Repentance and remission of sins 
should be preached in his name among all nations."— 
Luke 24:47. 



R1996 : page 142 

DAVID, KING OF JUDAH. 

-JULY 5.-2 Sam. 2:1-11.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord reigneth, 
let the earth rejoice."— Psa. 97:1. 

DAVID was a man of a high and varied order 

of natural ability, a combination of the rare 

qualities of the successful statesman, warrior, musician 

and poet. His disposition was, in the main, noble, 

generous, humble, kind, enthusiastic and heroic. He 

was reverential toward God, and seemed from his youth 

to have almost implicit faith in the promises and providences 

of God. Yet David was not a model saint: 

there were some strange inconsistencies in his character 

which stand out the more prominently in contrast 

with the beautiful and noble traits which fill us with 

admiration. But since these, so far as he was able to 

see them, were most sincerely repented of, we can appreciate 

the humility that led to repentance, and regard 

David from the same standpoint of that loving and 

merciful consideration from which God regards all his 

fallen and weak followers who struggle against inherent 

depravity, humbly acknowledging their shortcomings, 

and leaning upon his tender mercy. While in his youth, 



when God was about to anoint him king of Israel, it 
was said of David, "The Lord hath sought him a man 
after his own heart" (1 Sam. 13:14), the same in many 
respects might also have been said later, notwithstanding 
his faults, in view of his deep contrition. This 

R1996 : page 143 

statement, however, is not to be regarded as a testimony 
to the perfection of either the youth or the man, 
but rather to his fitness for the office to which God had 
appointed him; and as the office was one of great honor 
and trust, fitness as God's choice for the office implied 
a high order of character and ability, especially at the 
time he was chosen. So it was also in the case of Saul 
at the time of his anointing, of whom Samuel the prophet 
said, "See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, 
that there is none like him among all the people?" 

The peculiar experiences of David's early life had 
much to do toward preparing him for his life work as 
king over Israel. His encounter with the lion and the 
bear when a shepherd boy, his later conflict with the 
giant Goliath, his experience at court with Saul, his 
acquaintance and friendship with Jonathan and others, 
his flight from the pursuit of Saul, all served to develop 
and prepare the chosen man for the office he was to 
fill after the death of Saul. In this school of experience 
he learned the valuable lessons of courage, fortitude, 
reliance upon God, how to act wisely under peculiar 
difficulties and under severe temptations and 
trials. He also became acquainted with the circumstances 
and conditions of court life; and his subsequent 
seven years in exile among other nations acquainted 
him with their characteristics, and were doubtless of 
service to him later in knowing how to deal with them. 
In his exile there gathered around him a company of 
discontented people, mostly victims of Saul's oppression. 
Among these were a number of prominent men 
of the nation, and these were of service to him later. 

Thus God not only chose, but trained, his servant 
for the duties to which he had called him. And this 
providence in David's case reminds us of God's providences 
in general, how wisely he adapts means to ends 
and guides in all things to the accomplishment of his 
will. Many of the most comforting psalms of David 
were the results of his hard experiences in this time of 
his exile. In fact, the peculiar and varied experiences 
of the man, and the lessons derived from those experiences 
as expressed in his psalms, have been the comfort 
and blessing of God's people in all ages since. In a 
general way, David's experiences correspond to those 
of the gospel Church whom God is similarly preparing 
for the Kingdom of heaven. And doubtless it is for 
this reason that the lessons of David's experience find 
an echo in so many of our hearts. 

The record of David's course from the time of his 



anointing to his establishment in the kingdom shows 
an implicit trust in God— that he who had called and 
anointed him was able also in his own good time to 
bring him to the throne and to establish his kingdom. 
He took no measures whatever to displace Saul, nor to 
undermine his authority, even when Saul was pursuing 
him to take his life. And when Saul was unconsciously in 
his power, so that he could have slain him, he would not 
put forth his hand to touch the Lord's anointed. He 
was willing to wait patiently the Lord's time, knowing 
that what God had promised he was able also to perform; 
and so, even after Saul's death, he was not in 
haste to claim the vacated office, but he first inquired 
of the Lord to know if his time had come. 

The Lord's time having come, David was directed 
to Hebron with his family and the men that were with 
him and their families, and there, without ostentation or 
any assertion of his rights, he calmly waited the further 
indications of providence. "And the men of Judah 
came, and there they anointed David king over the 
house of Judah"— thus falling in line not only with 
the divine anointing, but also with their own preferences. 
Thus the kingdom came to David, not only by 
divine appointment, but also by choice of the people. 

In David's course in all this and in the course of 
divine providence with him there is a wholesome lesson 
for the anointed people of God of this age— the gospel 
Church. Having been called and anointed of God to 
be kings and priests unto him, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ of his Kingdom and glory, it is 
our part to wait patiently the Lord's time for that exaltation; 
and in the meantime, like David, to patiently 
endure all the discipline which God in his providence 
sees to be necessary to fit us for the position of authority 
and power we are to hold in the future, and to exercise 
with loving consideration for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

On coming to the throne David's course was marked 
with the same wisdom and magnanimity that had characterized 
him previously. Among other wise measures 
the honor he paid to the memory of his deceased rival 
and enemy is very notable, and without a precedent on 
the pages of history. David sent messengers to the 
men of Jabesh-gilead to express his appreciation of 
their kindness in rescuing the bodies of Saul and his 
sons from the ignominy to which the Philistines had exposed 
them, and giving them a decent burial. This 
the men of Jabesh had done in remembrance of a kind 
service Saul had once done for them. (1 Sam. 11:1-11.) 
And David said to them, "Blessed be ye of the Lord, 
that ye have showed this kindness unto your lord, even 
unto Saul, and have buried him. And now the Lord 
show kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite 
you this kindness, because ye have done this 
thing." 

How different is this from that evil spirit which 



would triumph over the death of a powerful rival and 
relentless enemy. Instead of doing so, David seemed 
to call to mind all the good traits of Saul and to lament 
the evil spirit that had come upon him in his later 
years and driven him to such a wicked course; and the 
memory of the love of Jonathan was ever precious to 
him. In this, more than in any thing else, David triumphed 
over his enemy. 

While David was thus the acknowledged king of 
Judah, the other tribes of Israel, ignoring the divine 
anointing of David, made Ish-bosheth, the surviving 
son of Saul, their king. In this David set up no opposition 
claims, and his course with reference to the rival 
kingdom was merely defensive, not aggressive. However, 
in various battles and skirmishes his forces were 
victorious; and his strength and influence grew while 
those of his opponent declined. Would that the same 
spirit of forbearance and disinclination to assume authority 
were general among both political and religious 
leaders. The usual course is for leaders rather to force 
themselves upon the people— to seek the office, instead 
of allowing the office to seek the man. 

The golden text— "The Lord reigneth, let the earth 
rejoice"— is prophetic of that blessed time when the 
antitype of David's throne, the Kingdom of Jehovah's 
Anointed, our Lord Jesus, shall be established in all 
the earth. Then indeed may the earth rejoice; for 
that king will reign in righteousness, and justice and 
judgment will be the habitation of his throne. 



R1997 : page 144 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Michigan. 

DEAR FRIEND:— I never can be thankful enough that a colporteur 
introduced the TOWER and DAWNS to my notice. They are to me like 
a bright light in a very dark place. I lend and give them where I hope 
they will do the most good. One good old Congregationalist minister 
accepted the truth at once, and died rejoicing in the light. Another 
could with great difficulty be persuaded to read them, but has accepted 
their teachings, rejoices that he has been enlightened, and now persuades 
his congregation to believe also. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, MRS. C. W. G. 



Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In sending this remittance to pay my 
account, I say as a word of cheer in passing, I know in whom I am 
trusting, and, having placed all in his hands, I have no desire to draw 
back. My health is poor, and I often think I will soon pass over; but 



I am in my Father's hands, and am content. I am learning to know 
him as I never did; and oh, how wonderful the knowledge! To know 
Him is to love Him; and we cannot love Him without knowing Him. 
I so like the Diaglott translation of Eph. 3:18,19. 

In the raising of Lazarus is there not an evidence of the great love 
which Jesus had for him? Dying before his Master he could be only 
one of the ancient worthies; but dying after him he may be one of the 
"body." [Yes!] 

Well, dear Brother, God bless you in your work. I appreciate it 
greatly. See Heb. 13:20,21. 

Yours in the faith, W. H. HOUGHTELIN. 



England. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Just a line that you may rejoice with 
us in our happiness in the Lord. Our little church met on New Year's 
eve to draw near the Lord through praise and thanksgiving for having 
preserved us from harm during the year that is past. Oh, what gladness 
fills our hearts as we recognize his care and blessing to us through 
the past year! How he has fed us from his table! We also carried 
out the suggestion given in Nov. 15 TOWER, with regard to order in the 
Church, appointing Brother Hemery as "elder" or overseer for the 
coming year, recognizing in him the Lord's choice. 

Before we parted we renewed our consecration to the Lord. Believing 
the past year to have been a notably prosperous one to us as regards 
our building up in love and knowledge, also as regards the spread 
of the truth, we look in faith to the dear Master for his grace in the 
coming year, believing that he will perfect that which he has already 
begun. The Church sends greetings. 

Yours in His service, E. SHARPLES. 



California. 

DEAR SISTER AND BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have had it on my 
mind to write to you ever since coming to California. We are enjoying 
so many blessings that I like to tell you of them. We are abiding in 
Christ and rejoicing in his love, and in favor from God the Father. 
What a gracious plan it is that we may come into this family of God, 
even though we be poor and unlearned, having nothing to bring. I 
pray always to God that I may never bring reproach on his holy name. 
We have every blessing— home and peace and quiet and freedom to 
give out words of truth on all sides, and are privileged to meet together 
with God's saints, and to partake with them of the feast spread before us. 

I have taken a new interest in my boys. I have come to realize 
that they are not my boys, but the Lord's, bought and owned by him, 
and perhaps consecrated to him (they always say they are); so I am 
trying to be more careful of them, and I feel free to admire them as 
never before. I can see what precious little souls they are, and how all 
their intentions are for righteousness. It is pleasing to notice that they 
are perfectly truthful and always scrupulously honest in all business 
matters. They are always more interested in spiritual things about 
Passover time. Laurie (the eldest) made a dollar and twenty-five 
cents on his rabbits. He says it is not his money, and he thinks God 
would be better pleased to have his money put into the Tract Fund, so 



he asked me to send it in for him. I can see he has some conception 
of what consecration means. 

Here is a blessed little company of DAWN readers. We have two 
meetings every Sunday; and I don't believe there is one enemy among 
us, nor one cold one: we do enjoy such freedom and fellowship. In 
the morning we have some lesson, and in the afternoon we have testimony 
and singing and prayer and questions. We sisters have started a 
Wednesday afternoon meeting, and we are going through the second 
volume of DAWN. I often wish you knew these dear people personally. 

May God's blessing rest on you both and the work he has put into 
your hands. Christian love to all. MRS. W. J. WEBB. 



Texas. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our little Baptismal service came off 
very nicely last Monday afternoon. We had the use of the baptistry in 
the Disciple church, and opportunity to speak to a little audience of 
about twenty. They listened attentively as I reasoned from the Scriptures 
that the baptism unto repentance and for the remission of sins was applicable 
only to those who were under the Law Covenant, that the real 
baptism is into Christ's sacrificial death, that it commenced with our 
covenant to present ourselves a sacrifice to God, and did not end until 
our offering was consumed in death. 

A noted Free Thought speaker lectured in Denison recently. 
Two young men from the Y.M.C.A. assisted me in giving out about 
400 Do You Know tracts. His talk was against Churchianity rather 
than against Christianity. 

Yours in the Master's service, H. W. DEMING. 

[We commend to all, reasonable cooperation with other Christians 
in any good work. Only let us be careful not to sacrifice principles for 
the sake of human sympathy or Christian cooperation.] 



Indian Territory. 

DEAR BRETHREN:-Some one told an infidel that I sold "an infidel 
book." So he hailed me on the street and bought "What Say the 
Scriptures About Hell," without looking into it. He was surprised and 
very glad to learn that the doctrine of eternal torture was not a feature 
of the Mosaic law. His wife (a Baptist) says she twitted him about 
"reading that old infidel book and neglecting the customers." When 
he had read it all, he told her and his mother that if they would read it 
they might learn something good about the Bible. They also were overjoyed 
and praised God that he had touched the heart of the honest skeptic. 

Our new friend listened like a little child while I told him the old, 
old story of God's and Christ's love, and bought the DAWN without 
urging, because he now believes in the Bible. I think the new tract is 
having the same effect on many others. 

My heart is made glad occasionally by the evidence of the Lord's 
providence in feeding those that hunger for his truth. One evening, recently, 
I started to a meeting which is conducted by an Evangelist who 
is quite interested in "The Plan of the Ages." I missed the meeting place, 
and came upon some campers at the edge of town. One man from Texas 
was telling them about MILLENNIAL DAWN, and our Bible talk which the 
Elder interrupted in Sherman. How God makes the wrath of men to 



praise him! They were all anxious to know more about it. I offered a passage 
of Scripture, and another, until he knew me. We talked till 1 1 P.M. 

"The Lord knoweth them that are his." I am glad for this great 
privilege of sowing the precious truth. Pray for me. 

Yours in Him, H. T. BLATCHLEY. 



page 145 
VOL. XVII. JULY 1, 1896. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 146 

Restitution, Faith Cures, Prayer 

Cures, and the Gift of Healing 147 

The Gift of Healing 147 

The Prayer of Faith 151 

Questions and Answers 152 

Bible Study: David, King Over All 

Israel 154 

Bible Study: The Ark Brought to 

Jerusalem 155 

page 146 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1997 : page 147 

RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 



"Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a work in 
your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man 
declare it unto you."— Acts 13:41. 

WE are constantly in receipt of inquiries concerning 
Mind Cures, Faith Cures, Prayer Cures, 
etc. We make general answer again, that since the 
Scriptures teach that we are already in the "harvest," 
the lapping time during which the Gospel age closes 



and the Millennial age dawns, we should expect to see 
just what we do see,— beginnings of great changes. 
And not only do we see political, social and religious 
changes in progress, but, as we should expect, we see 
also beginnings of personal, physical restitution here 
and there. These great changes are stealing along so 
quietly as not to attract much attention or occasion 

R1998 : page 147 

great surprise, just as inventions and general knowledge 
are spreading gradually. This is God's usual 
method of operation: he is thus preparing the world 
in some measure for the wonderful manifestations of 
his power in the near future, which will be in restoring 
both health to the sick and life to the dead,— the 
great work of Restitution "of that which was lost" by 
the fall. Thus the new dispensation is being gradually 
ushered in as the dawning day. 

Accordingly, just as the troubles of this Day of 
the Lord break out here and there, and in intermittent 
paroxysms, but gradually and to the unobservant 
imperceptibly, increasing in severity and bitterness 
with each spasm, so with the marks of physical healing: 
they come in a variety of ways, here and there a 
number, and then a subsiding, a lull in which there are 
few or none, but all the while gradually becoming more 
common, and from a greater variety of sources and 
seeming causes. 

THE GIFT OF HEALING. 



But, one inquires, is not this the "gift" of healing 
mentioned by the Apostle in 1 Cor. 12:28,30? And 
has not this gift been in possession of the Church ever 
since Pentecost? 

No; the gift of healing possessed by some members 
of the early Church was totally different from the healings 
of to-day. The Apostles in exercising this gift 
did not practice "mental healing," nor even "prayer 
healing." 

Take as an illustration the case of the lame man 
healed by Peter and John as related in Acts 3:1-11. 
Peter and John did not kneel down and pray with the 
man, nor did they get him to fix his attention as "mind-healers" 
would; they gave him no medicine and used 
no oil, nor did they even require the man to believe in 
Jesus first, nor to have faith in their power to heal him. 
But while he looked at the apostles expecting to receive 
some money, Peter took him by the hand and 
lifted him up, saying, "In the name of Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth rise up and walk." And immediately his 
feet and ankle bones received strength, and he, leaping 
up, stood and walked. This is an illustration of the 



use of the gift of healing, and there are many more such 
recorded.-See Acts 9:34; 14:10; 16:18; 19:12. 
We do not think that after a careful scrutiny of 

R1998 : page 148 

the subject, any one to-day would claim to possess this 

gift. The gifts described by Paul were given only to the 

early Church, as a means for its introduction to the attention 

of both Jews and Gentiles, and also as a means 

for edification and instruction to the Church itself. For 

this last named reason one or more gifts were bestowed 

upon each one who associated with the Church (1 Cor. 12:7,11; 

14:26), being conferred, by the laying on of 

the hands of the apostles, upon all who confessed Christ 

by immersion. Thus it was that these gifts became a 

token or sign of the possession of the holy spirit. Yet 

the gifts of the spirit and the spirit itself are separate 

and distinct. To-day we possess the spirit, but certainly 

not all of those miraculous gifts. And even then 

some had gifts of the spirit who were evidently far from 

being filled with the spirit. That one might have those 

gifts and yet be "nothing" and as sounding brass and 

tinkling cymbals, devoid of love, and hence without 

Christ's spirit, the apostle clearly shows in 

1 Cor. 13:1-3. 

The power of conferring those gifts was vested in the 
apostles, and in them only: none others in their day or 
since have been able to confer those gifts which Paul 
describes; hence they did "vanish away" when the 
apostles died. By that time the Church had been brought 
prominently before the attention of the world, and 
therefore those miraculous gifts were not necessary for 
that purpose; and by that time, too, they began to have 
the New Testament and parts of the Old Testament in 
the possession of each congregation, so that coming together 
they could edify and instruct and build one 
another up with the truth from those inspired sources, 
and not longer require, as at first, the miraculous gifts 
as a means for their edification and instruction. 

That only the apostles could confer those gifts is 
proved: first, by the fact that the claimed successors 
of the apostles cannot communicate them since, and 
second, by the cases recorded which show that none 
except the apostles ever did have the power to bestow 
those gifts. Notice, in proof of this, that though Philip, 
the evangelist, possessed gifts and preached and baptized, 
yet he was not able to bestow gifts of the holy 
spirit upon others, and when a necessity arose for their 
impartation the apostles Peter and John were sent from 
Jerusalem for the purpose. Further, notice the case of 
Simon Magus: although one of the baptized, and evidently 
one of those granted a gift, he had no power to 
bestow gifts upon others. It was this apostolic privilege, 
of bestowing these gifts upon others, which Simon 
wanted to purchase with money, and for which he was 



so sharply reproved.— Acts 8:13-20. 

Instead of miraculously receiving gifts as at first, 
we now grow the fruits of the spirit, which are meekness, 
gentleness, patience, moderation, brotherly kindness, 
charity, etc. These fruits may really be counted 
as gifts or acquirements also, though they come to us 
not by apostolic benediction, but in a different way— by 
cultivation. Hence we find, too, that although St. Paul 
calls these graces "gifts" in one place, he calls them 
"fruits" elsewhere. (Compare Gal. 5:22; 1 Cor. 13:1-8. 
In Eph. 5:9, these are called fruits of the light. See 
readings of old MSS.) Under God's present dealing, 
all the needs of the church are none the less provided 
for than when the "gifts" were bestowed, as at first, 
in a miraculous manner, by the laying on of the apostles' 
hands. Now we find that the spirit of truth is 
pleased to mould and fashion and use every consecrated 
one by utilizing his natural talents and advantages of 
education, language, etc., in teaching, edifying and 
nourishing the true Church which is the body of Christ. 

So, then, whatever may be said of the various prevailing 
mind cures, faith cures and prayer cures, they 
surely are not of the gifts possessed by the early Church, 
and recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. 

"THESE SIGNS SHALL FOLLOW." 



But, says one, you seem to take no notice of that 
remarkable passage so frequently quoted by our Faith 
Cure friends, "These signs shall follow them that believe, 
In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall 
speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; 
and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt 
them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall 
recover."— Mark 16:17,18. 

Yes, we are aware of this claim, but we have two 
objections to urge. First, neither observation nor 
history attests the fulfillment of such a statement. Of 
one thing we all have evidence; viz., that those signs 
do not now accompany belief in Christ. Nor is there 
evidence that they extended beyond the apostles' days 
and the time of the miraculous gifts. Even then, we 
have no record of all these things being fulfilled in all 
that believed. 

Second, the oldest and most authentic Greek 
manuscripts (the Sinaitic and Vatican MSS.) do not 
contain these verses at all, but end at verse 8. It seems 
evident that Mark's gospel was originally incomplete 
and that some one undertook to finish it for him about 
the fifth century; for the Alexandrine MS., written in 
the fifth century is the oldest Greek MS. which contains 
the last twelve verses. Read these spurious verses 
carefully, note the marginal reading in the Revised 
Version, note their untruthfulness in the light of facts, 



and mark them in your Bible. 

"ASK WHAT YE WILL.' 



But, suggests another, even setting aside this spurious 
statement of Mark 16:17,18, and all claim to 

R1998 : page 149 

possessing the "gifts" of the early Church, did not 
our Lord's promises regarding the answering of our 
prayers cover the entire ground, and make possible the 
healing of the sick or even the moving of mountains 
during this entire age; and is it not because of lack of 
faith that these things have not been more common in 
the past? And is it not because of increased faith, 
rather than because of the dawning of the Millennium, 
that the healing of the sick is now becoming more 
frequent? 

Our answer to both of the questions is, No: a 
great misunderstanding prevails concerning our privileges 
in prayer. And it is because of this misunderstanding 
concerning what we may ask for and who may 
ask, and not because of any unfaithfulness to his promise 
on our Lord's part, that so many thousands of 
prayers offered daily go unanswered. 

The statement, "Ye shall ask what ye will and it 
shall be done unto you" is linked with certain conditions 
and limitations, found in the sentence preceding, 
which reads: "If ye abide in me, and my words abide 
in you." These limitations are wonderfully comprehensive: 
they show who may ask,— ye, believers, who 
are in me, whose wills are buried or immersed into the 
will of Christ Jesus; and not only so, but ye are privileged 
to ask thus, only so long as ye "abide in me;" for 
if any man abide not in Christ, he is not only "cast forth" 
(John 15:6), but he has no longer a share in the promise 
of having his petitions granted. These limitations evidently 
cut off from all share in this promise the vast 
majority of the prayers offered. And as we continue to 
scrutinize our Master's words we find still further 
limitations which cut off many other prayers, even of 
those offered by the class abiding in Christ. We refer 
to the second condition mentioned by our Lord, as 
describing who may ask what they will; viz., if "my 
words abide in you." 

R1999 : page 149 

Alas! that we must write it— There are few among 
God's professed children, very few even among those 
who profess to be entirely consecrated to and abiding in 
him, who have his Word abiding richly in them. 

The significance of this last specification or limitation 



is this: In going to God to ask for anything we 
should realize his omniscience and wisdom, and that he 
is ordering and operating general affairs according 
to a perfect and orderly plan— his Plan of the Ages; 
and we should realize our own finiteness, our lack of 
such wisdom and appreciation of surroundings, etc., 
as would enable us to rule creation, if God were to 
give it over to our control. All true children of God 
who are not the merest "babes" realize this, and if 
God should say without limitation, Ask what you will, 
and your will shall be done, sensible ones would shrink 
from so grave a responsibility and cry, "Not so, O Lord," 
"I dare not touch things which involve so much." 

As for the Lord's promise that if we had faith we 
might command a mountain to remove and it would 
obey us, we reason thus: This, like the other promises, 
was given only to such as abide in him and have his 
words abiding in them, and is given merely as an extreme 
illustration: If an emergency should occur so 
great as to necessitate the removal of a mountain, either 
literal or figurative, and we were sure it were the will 
of God, we might ask and receive. 

But we need not speculate about how the mountains 
and lakes, seas and clouds, and rain and sunshine 
would move promiscuously about, and interfere with 
one another, if all the prayers offered heavenward in 
Christ's name were answered. God is not devoting 
himself to the answering of such prayers; but, ignoring 
them, he is working out gradually his own grand 
plan, predetermined before the foundation of the world; 
and he assures us that notwithstanding the prayers of 
those who do not search his Word to know what his 
plan is, but who pray to him to carry out their plans 
and schemes, yet nevertheless, "All his purposes shall 
be accomplished." And though few even of his children 
respect his Word or seek to learn from it his plan,— 
content rather to follow the plans and theories of men 
as laid down in creeds and confessions and voiced by 
councils and human standards, nevertheless, in the end, 
God's Word shall not return to him void, but shall accomplish 
that which he intended, and prosper in the 
thing whereunto it was sent— Isa. 55:11. 

No, thank God, he has not left his plan, even in 
spiritual matters, subject to the prayers of his prejudice-blinded 
and sectarian children, else each would 
want the whole world moulded to his own ideal whether 
that were Methodism, Lutheranism, Presbyterianism, 
Brahmanism, or what not; and all the various 
errors would flourish, while ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
and MILLENNIAL DAWN would have been financially 
swamped long ago. Yes, we may well thank God that 
he does not answer all prayers. 

There was then, we see, a special and very particular 
reason for the close and searching limitations 
which our Redeemer placed about the promise that the 
Father would grant our requests. The import of his 



words, as we study them and endeavor to grasp their 
meaning, appears to be this:— 

If you abide in me, entirely subject to my will 
and plan, even as I abide in the Father's love, and 
seek not to do mine own will but the will of him that 
sent me,— if thus my will is your choice and your own 
wills are buried and ignored, then you will seek earnestly 
to know what the Father's will is, which you 
know I am seeking to accomplish, that you may use 
your time, talents, prayers and all in the same direction 

R1999 : page 150 

toward the same end. And if you have this heartfelt 
desire to know the will of God you will remember how 
I studied his plan as revealed in the Law, the Psalms 
and the Prophets, and how I endeavored to carry out 
that plan, and not plans of my own making or choosing. 

Then you will remember how I pointed out to you 
how— "Thus it is written and thus it behooveth us to 
fulfill all that is written," and how I taught you to 
search the Scriptures. Following in this course, the 
holy Spirit will guide you, as it has guided me, into an 
understanding of more and more of the divine plan as 
it becomes due. And if this be your attitude, if your 
hearts and energies are thus absorbed in the Father's 
plan, you may ask all the desires of your hearts— "Ye 
may ask what ye will." I make you this liberal promise, 
not by way of intimating to you that the Father 
would change his plans to yours, and do your will, but 
as intimating to you that, in the course I have specified, 
you can come so fully into sympathy with the 
Father and the plan of the ages which he is working 
out, that you will never be dissatisfied, but always able 
to see your wishes being accomplished, because your 
will and wish, your pleasure and satisfaction, will be to 
see God's will and plan progressing in God's own way 
and time. Thus your every prayer and wish will be 
accomplished— the very reverse of the experience of 
those who seek to do their own wills and carry out human 
plans, and pray for their own desires; for they are 
ever meeting with disappointments. 

Settle it therefore in your hearts and have no fear 
for the results. No matter how dark may be the storm, 
or how sharp the persecution, God's great and gracious 
plan will not miscarry, and thus your will and your 
plans (which are his) cannot fail; and your prayers in 
that interest will always be heard and will be answered 
so far as they are correct or not in conflict with the 
Father's plan. And you, if perfectly in harmony with 
the Father, would desire to have it so. And in any 
case, where there is the slightest room to question his 
will in the matter, having my spirit or disposition, and 
not the spirit of the world, you will pray as I have done 
in your hearing, saying in connection with your petition, 
—"Nevertheless not my will, but thine, Father, 



be done." All such prayers are sure to be answered; 
and in proportion as you come closer and closer into 
harmony with the Father's plan, and understand it, 
you will be less likely to ask or desire anything which 
would be contrary to his good pleasure to grant. 

As you come to see the bountifulness of the Father's 
provisions, and the wisdom and care exercised by him 
touching your earthly interests; as you come to realize 
that he who has clothed the lilies of the field with 
beauty, and who provides food for the sparrows, loves 
and cares much more for you than for them, and 
knoweth better than you do what things you have need of; 
—what would strengthen and benefit, and what might 
injure you, as runners in the race for the great prize 
he has offered through Christ— as you realize these 
things your prayers for temporal things must become 
very modest and moderate. Indeed, you will by and 
by, as you realize his wisdom and care, use prayer principally 
as the avenue for spiritual communion. Contenting 
yourself with laying the cares and burdens of 
life at the Master's feet, you will tell him of your confidence 
in his love and wisdom, saying, Thy will be 
done; and instead of your cares you will "bear a song 
away." More than ever your prayers will be for the 
spiritual gifts, graces, fruits and blessings, singing in 
your hearts— 

"Content whatever lot I see, 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

Thus, properly instructed, all who abide in Christ 
and in whom his word abides, might be relieved of all 
care (worry) concerning those earthly things which 
constitute the burden of so many prayers. Leaving 
those things to our Father's wisdom and love, our 
prayers would be more in the nature of thank-offerings, 
our hearts going out toward God in worship and adoration 
and in recounting the blessings and favors we already 
enjoy, rather than in asking those things for 
which the Gentiles seek.— Matt. 6:32. 

True, earthly affairs sometimes perplex us, and we 
cannot help wondering and feeling a deep interest as to 
how they will result. But the soul that abides in Christ, 
and in which his words abide, would not dare take the 
helm into his own hands to steer his own course, even 
where he thinks he can see; but, laboring still at the 
oar, pulling as best he can, he leaves the helm in the 
Father's hands and could not ask to have the course 
changed in any degree. 

But may we not in all our trials and perplexities 
take them to the Lord in prayer? Yes, yes; truly we 
can. And no comfort will be greater to the perplexed 
or sorrowing than the privilege of telling all to the 
Lord. His ear is ever open to the cry of his "little 
ones;" and the very telling of them to him and realization 
of his interest in all our affairs will refresh and 
cheer us. It will bring to remembrance his promises 
never to leave nor forsake us, and his wisdom and 



love and ability to cause all things, favorable and unfavorable, 

to work together for our good. Casting all 

our care upon him, and realizing that according to his 

promise, present trouble and all other things may be overruled 

for the good of all concerned, and to his praise, 

we may arise from our knees stronger, happier and more 

confident, as well as in closer fellowship and communion 

with the Lord, than if we had attempted to order our 

own affairs, and to get the great Jehovah to become our 

R1999 :page 151 

servant to execute our plans, which doubtless often are 
foolish in his sight, and would, if permitted, work injuriously 
to us or to others. 

THE PRAYER OF FAITH. 



Death is not, as most people suppose, a natural, 
normal, necessary thing. It is not a step in a process of 
evolution to a higher state of existence, but, on the 
contrary, it is a catastrophe, a calamity, a penalty for 
sin. God indeed shows us that his wisdom is sufficient 
to enable him to bring a good lesson out of an evil thing, 

R2000 :page 151 

but it is nevertheless an evil, an enemy, an awful thing; 
as truly so as is sin, which God also promises that his 
wisdom shall yet cause to work out a result the very 
opposite of its natural course and action, to those who 
obey him. This fact, that death is a penalty, we shall 
not discuss here, but merely refer the reader to Paul's 
statements in Rom. 5:12-20. 

As death is a curse and penalty, so is sickness; 
for sickness is the death -poison working in our systems. 
All sickness is part of the dying process, and hence it 
is as foreign to man's natural, normal condition, as designed 
by God, as is death itself. As death is a mark 
of sin, and would not have come except as a penalty 
for sin, so sickness is likewise a mark or brand of sin, 
because it is part of the dying process. 

Hence it was that our Lord (who came to ransom 
the race of sinners), being free from sin, was free also 
from pain, sickness and death: so whatever he experienced 
of these had to be by his own consent,— a 
sacrifice on our behalf. The penalty of our sins was 
death, the sickness and pain being only incidentals; 
hence our redemption price was fully paid by our 
Lord's death. But it pleased Jehovah to bruise him 
[to allow him to have an experience with pain, sorrow, 
etc.], as well as to make his soul [being, existence] an 
offering for sin. (Isa. 53:10.) And since he could not 
suffer pain and sickness because of sin, being without 



sin, he was placed for a time among sinners, 
where his full, generous, loving sympathy for the poor 
and sick and miserable would lead him to spend for 
others his own vital energy. And as "virtue [vitality 
—healing vigor] went out of him" to the sick (Luke 6:19 
and 8:46), so their weaknesses and pains bore 
down upon him. And it was in this way that "himself 
took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses." 
(Matt. 8:17; Isa. 53:4,5); and thus he was "touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities" and is able perfectly 
to sympathize as a great High Priest,— now on behalf 
of the church or under-priesthood, and by and by, in the 
Millennial day of trial and blessing, on behalf of "all 
the people." 

As it pleased the Father that the High Priest 
should taste of the sinners' cup, so we may reasonably 
read his will relative to all the members of the Royal 
Priesthood to be, that they also should drink of the cup 
of suffering, and be immersed in the baptism of death 
with their Lord and Leader, in the pathway to divine 
glory and power. 

Thus reading the Father's plans for ourselves, in 
the light of his will exemplified in his dealings with 
our Master, we may settle it at once that it is not his 
will to keep us from all pain and trial and sufferings, 
and to carry us triumphantly to glory on flowery beds 
of ease. Quite the reverse, indeed, must be our course 
if we would follow in the footsteps of him whom God 
set forth to be, not only a satisfaction for the sins of 
the whole world, but also a pattern to the church 
which is his body. And this much learned of God's 
plan and will promptly teaches us that we must not 
expect and should not ask freedom from pain and 
trouble, which his wisdom has ordained to be the path 
to glory. 

Here some will ask: Did you not say that sickness 
is a mark of sin, and that Christ died for our sins, and 
is it not your claim that whosoever believeth in him 
and accepts of his ransom work is freed or justified 
from all sin? And this being the case, ought not such 
to be free both from sin's penalty, death, and from all 
its attendant evils, such as pain and sickness? 

Yes, that reasoning is good; but you do not take 
all the circumstances into account: you have left out 
an important part; namely, It is the Father's plan 
that the suffering and death of the Redeemer should 
be followed by the suffering and death of every member 
of his "body" or church, before the Restitution age 
should be ushered in, the purpose of that age being to 
heal the morally and physically sick and blind and 
lame; to restore all who will to perfect life and every 
blessing lost in Eden by Adam, and redeemed at Calvary 
by our great High Priest's sacrifice— once for all. 
The plan of the ages needs to be recognized, if we 
would avoid the error of so many, in striving for present 
glory, in the time appointed for trial and suffering 



with Christ. Examine Rom. 8:17; 2 Cor. 1:5; Col. 1:24. 
Surely the Bible gives no suggestion that the 
"body" will be free from like sufferings with the 
"head." 

When the sufferings of the body of Christ are 
ended, their glory we are assured will follow (1 Pet. 1:11); 
and then will ensue the great work of filling 
the world ocean-deep with the knowledge of the Lord, 
the "restitution of all things spoken by the prophets," 
and the blotting out of the sins of those who accept the 
terms of the New Covenant sealed by the precious 
blood. (Acts 3:19-21.) Thus in God's due time and 
order all tears will be wiped away, when the former 

R2000 : page 152 

things, sin, sorrow, pain and death, shall have passed 
away. See the beautiful picture of this in Rev. 21:4. 

But we may suppose another inquiry,— Why did 
our Lord and the apostles heal the sick, if that work 
is not really due to take place until the Millennial age 
of Restitution begins? 

There were several reasons why they were granted 
the "gift of healing," as well as other gifts, not granted 
now. One reason was the necessity for such miracles, 
to introduce Christianity to the attention of the 
people. Our Lord mentioned his miracles to John the 
Baptist as a proof of his Messiahship. Messiah was to 
heal the sick, cause the blind to see and the deaf to 
hear (Isa. 29:18; 35:1-6; 42:6,7); consequently our 
Lord must do these things and in a measure begin the 
work of restitution so that Israel could recognize him 
and be responsible for rejecting him and his "works." 
(John 10:38.) But when they as a nation rejected 
him, as God had foreseen (Zech. 9:9; Matt. 21:5), 
then they were rejected from the position offered them 
as the "royal priesthood" and Seed of promise. And 
then, as God had foretold, the Gospel was sent to the 
Gentiles to complete from them the "Seed of Abraham," 
the "body" of Christ, the "royal priesthood;" 
and the restitution work which had a beginning in our 
Lord's ministry was deferred until the true Israel 
should be complete, when Messiah, at his second coming, 
shall accomplish fully all those glorious features 
of the divine plan foretold by the holy prophets, and 
foreshadowed faintly in his miracles at the first advent. 

That our Lord's restoring work at the first advent 
—the healing of some of the sick and the awakening 
of a few of the dead in Israel— merely shadowed forth 
the greater work to be accomplished at his second presence, 
during the Millennium, seems clear. Had God 
designed a general healing of all the sick, even among 
the people of Palestine, it could have been done on a 
large scale instead of in exceptional cases here and 
there; for undoubtedly many others than Lazarus, the 
son of the widow of Nain, and Jairus' daughter, died 



during Christ's ministry. And there were many more 
lame and palsied and leprous and blind than those 
then healed. 

Our Lord's object in performing the miracles is 
explained by the statement, "These things did Jesus 
and manifested forth [showed beforehand] his glory"— 
the coming glory of the Millennial age. And it was of 
his people's share in that coming glory, rather than of 
any physical healings which have since taken place 
amongst his disciples, that he said, "Verily, verily, I 
say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that 
I do shall he do also; and greater works than these 
shall he do, because I go unto my Father." (John 14:12.) 
His redemptive work at Calvary and his subsequent 
presentation of it to the Father as a "propitiation 
[satisfaction] for the sins of the whole world," was 
the basis for all the great works of restitution in which 
we with him shall be engaged in the Times of Restitution 
—which will indeed be far greater than anything 
done by our Lord at the first advent; for then the sick 
and the dead were only partially restored, and for a 
limited time only— which is as nothing compared to 
the full restitution of the health and vigor of perfect 
and everlasting life, and all that was lost in Adam, 
which will be offered to all on the terms of the New 
Covenant during the Millennium. 

The thought we wish to impress is, that God not 
only had a due time for REDEEMING the world from sin, 
but that he has also a due time for restoring the sick 
and the dead. Therefore whatever work of this sort takes 
place before the due and appointed time must be for 
some special object and reason, as shown in our Lord's 
ministry, and in that of the Church in the days of the 
apostles. Just so it was in the redeeming of the world, 
—typical sacrifices were instituted and were permitted 
to stand good for temporary, typical justification, but 
those were not the real sacrifices for sin, and never 
actually put away sins. As God deferred the redemption 
of our race until his due time, and in the fullness 
of time sent forth his Son to redeem us, so, in the 
matter of healings, though it has pleased God to make 
exceptions in the past for the purpose mentioned, let 
us not forget that these were exceptions, and that his 
appointed time for restitution is the Millennial age. 
Seeing this to be God's plan, and realizing that his 
plan is wisest and best, we must restrain ourselves and 
neither desire nor ask restitution work before restitution 
times— except we see cases in which it would seem 
to be the Father's will, and reasons why it would 
seem to be to his glory to make exceptions to his general 
rule and arrangement. 

This subject will be continued in our next— considering 
what are the causes of sickness, the proper 
methods of prayer (for sickness and other matters), 
prayer cures, Christian Science and other unscriptural 
methods of healing, etc., etc. 



R2001 :page 152 

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS. 



Question.— Since the Apostle says, "It is not of 
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God 
that showeth mercy" (Rom. 9:16), to what extent do 
our efforts avail? 

Answer.— We understand the Apostle to mean that 
even though it be as a reward for our "willing" and 
our "running" that the Lord will give the crown 
of life to the overcomers, yet back of all this lies the 

R2001 :page 153 

fact that we of our own selves could never intrinsically 
have merited such reward. We needed and received 
first of all God's mercy through Christ in the forgiveness 
of the sins that are past, and the call to run the 
race for the glories promised, to encourage us on the 
way, and we still must have imputed the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice, which covers the blemishes of our best efforts. 
It is therefore by our willing and by our running that 
we obtain the prize; but it is not of our willing nor of 
our running, but of God's mercy. The Apostle recognizes 
the same distinction in the use of the prepositions 
"of" and "by" in 1 Cor. 8:6— "To us there is but one 
God, of whom are all things,. ..and one Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom are all things." 

God is the originator or author of our salvation 
upon whom all depended, yet in his plan it lies with 
us to "work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. 
-Phil. 2:12. 

Question.— Please harmonize the statements of our 
Lord that in the "last day" he will raise up those 
who believe (John 6:39,40,44,54) and 1 Cor. 6:14; 
which says that God will raise them up. 

Answer.— The same principle applies here as in the 
preceding question. It is of God that the dead are to be 
raised, but by Jesus. Our Lord is the Father's agent 
in carrying out the entire plan of redemption. Of his 
own self he has done nothing, and of his own self he 
will do nothing. His power is delegated. (Matt. 28:18.) 
He and the Father are one in man's redemption as in 
his creation, though, as before shown, Father and Son 
are not one in person.— See TOWER, June '92. 

Question.— If the holy Spirit is not a person, as 
(a) conclusively shown in the TOWER for June '92, 
why were the disciples commanded to baptize in the 
name of the holy Spirit (Matt. 28:19)? and (b) why is 
the pronoun "he" used in referring to the Holy 



Spirit? 

Answer.— (a) It is proper to use the expression 
"holy Spirit" when performing symbolic immersion; 
first, because the Lord so instructed his disciples; 
second, because it is the holy influence and representative 
of the Father and the Son in directing the Church 
into all truth. The holy Spirit also represents the 
anointing which came upon the Lord at his baptism, 
and into which all the members of the body are immersed 
when they are united to the Head. 

(b) The different Greek pronouns used in reference 
to the Comforter, the spirit of truth, "he," "himself," 
"him," might be, and are in other connections, 
translated she, it, herself, itself or her. 

The word rendered "himself" (Greek, heauton) is 
translated "itself" nine times in our common version 
English Bible. The word rendered "he" (Greek ekeinos) 
is more frequently rendered "that" and "those," and is 
once rendered "it"— "I do not say that he shall pray 
for it."— 1 John 5:16. 

As the holy Spirit is an influence from God, and 
since God is always referred to as masculine, it is proper 
in the Greek to refer to it by a masculine pronoun; but not 
so in English, where inanimate subjects (influences, 
etc.) are not personified. Those acquainted with German, 
French or other languages personifying inanimate 
things will understand this. 

Question.— Recently I quoted Heb. 2:14 as evidence 
that the devil would be destroyed. A minister 
stated in reply that the word here rendered "destroy" 
does not mean "destroy" in the sense of annihilate or 
put out of existence, but simply "to render impotent," 
"to annul the power of;" that in the Revised Version 
it is rendered "bring to naught him that hath the 
power," etc. 

Answer.— The word rendered "might destroy" in 
Heb. 2:14 is katargeo. It has the sense of "to render 
powerless," but it does not limit in what way the thing 
shall be rendered powerless. To take away the life of 
Satan will certainly be to render him powerless, and that 
more effectually than in any way of which we can conceive. 
If he were merely restrained of his liberty he 
might still have power to exercise his will and other 
powers in opposition to God and righteousness. The 
only way to render him absolutely, effectually, completely 
powerless would be by rendering him unconscious 
as in death— by his destruction. 

The following translations of this Greek word in 
the New Testament (italicised) clearly indicate that it 
is used in the sense of utter destruction:— 

Rom. 6:6— "that the body of sin might be 
destroyed." 

1 Cor. 1:28— "to bring to nought the things that 
are." 

1 Cor. 6:13— "God shall destroy both it and them." 

1 Cor. 13:8— "prophecies, they shall fail [or cease]; 



knowledge, it shall vanish away." 
1 Cor. 13:10— "that which is in part shall be 

done away." 
1 Cor. 15:24— "when He shall have put down [destroyed] 

all rule and authority and power." 

1 Cor. 15:26— "the last enemy that shall be destroyed 
is death." 

2 Cor. 3:7— "ministration of death. ..was to 
be done away." 

2 Cor. 3:11— "which is done away." 

2 Cor. 3:14— "which vail is done away in Christ." 

Eph. 2:15— "having abolished [destroyed] in his 

flesh the enmity." 
2 Thess. 2:8— "whom the Lord shall consume 

with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy by the 

bright shining of his presence." 

R2001 :page 154 

A careful examination will show that in all the 
above cases no less than in the text (Heb. 2:14) this 
word katargeo has properly the sense of destroy. Note 
especially how it is used with reference to Antichrist, 
the Jewish Law Covenant and the destruction of the 
Adamic death. 

Speaking of the destruction of the devil and reprobate 
men, it might be well to remark that we have 
no thought of the destruction of their component elements, 
but of their destruction as organisms or intelligent 
creatures.— See TOWER, October 15, 1895, page 
241. 



R2001 :page 154 

DAVID, KING OVER ALL ISRAEL. 

-JULY 12.-2 Sam. 5:1-12.- 

Golden Text.— "David went on and grew great, and 
the Lord God of hosts was with him.— 2 Sam. 5:10. 

THIS lesson is a simple matter of history which 
needs little comment. It shows how, in God's 
own good time and way, his purpose of establishing 
David as king over all Israel was fulfilled. It was not 
by David's might or power, but by the providence of 
God; and in the meantime David learned how blessed 
a thing it was to wait upon the Lord, who doeth all 
things well, and his faith grew strong. 

Now that the Lord's time had come to establish 
the throne of David, not only over Judah, but over all 
Israel, David was not only the Lord's choice, but he 
was also the people's choice, and by their representatives 
they came to him with arguments in favor of his 



immediate acceptance of the office over the whole nation. 
His seven years reign in Hebron had manifested his 
wisdom and ability; he was just the man they needed 
to order the affairs of the whole nation, and he was also 
bone of their bone and flesh of their flesh, and his 
courage, fidelity and great ability had been proven 
even in the days of Saul. So David made a league 
with them. This league was probably some kind of 
a charter defining the rights and limitations of the king. 
And the people on their part pledged their allegiance 
and support. The government of Israel was not an 
absolute, despotic government, but a limited authority. 

David chose Jerusalem for his new capital of the 
now united kingdom, because, while within the boundaries 
of his own tribe, Judah, it was near the border, 
and central as a capital for all Israel. It was a fortress 
also which had withstood the Israelites from the days 
of Joshua, and was considered by its possessors impregnable. 
Jerusalem, however, was still inhabited by 
the Jebusites, a remnant of the Canaanites, whom Israel 
was commissioned to destroy out of Canaan. These 
people, feeling the strength of their position, refused 
to surrender to David, and defiantly replied that they 
would not do so, and that even the blind and the lame 
among them would be able to defend the city. David 
surveyed the situation and perceived that, the fortress 
being situated on top of a steep hill, the best means of 
attack would be by way of the water courses (here 
translated gutters); and he promised a reward to those 
who would scale the height and smite those representing 
themselves as blind and lame. In all this we have 
a typical suggestion of the proper course of the Christian 
in boldly attacking and overcoming in their strongholds 
the weaknesses and sins of the fallen nature. 

This lesson is set forth as a lesson on patriotism. 
We have nothing to say against a spirit of patriotism 
on the part of the world towards the kingdoms of this 
world. Under the existing state of things it insures a 
measure of peace and order which otherwise would be 
greatly disturbed; and as men's minds and hearts are 
not large enough and generous enough to take in the 

R2002 : page 154 

interests of our common humanity, it is well that there 
is a measure of common interest that binds the individuals 
of a country into one homogeneous society or 
nation, and thus insures their united progress along 
the various lines of human weal. But the good of all 
this is, alas, sadly offset by national selfishness, greed, 
pride and unholy ambition, so that the sentiments of 
patriotism in each nation indicate generally a bitterness 
of animosity and hatred toward neighboring nations; 
and the ardor of patriotism is generally only to 
the extent that the national interests are believed to 
affect the interests of the individual. There is little 



indeed in the politics of nations that is purely unselfish. 

This worldly, selfish patriotism, which conserves 
merely the home interests, and ignores or plays havoc 
with the rest of humanity, is not the patriotism that 
should actuate the Christian. The patriotism of the 
Christian should embrace the interests of all humanity. 
And since none of the kingdoms of this world are founded 
in perfect righteousness, nor are able nor willing 
to devote all their energies toward the elevation and 
blessing of mankind in general, and since they are all 
to a considerable extent under the dominion of the 
prince of this world, our sentiments of patriotism must 
be reserved for that one and only righteous government 
which is worthy of our devotion; viz., for the 
Kingdom of God, which in due time shall bless all the 
families of the earth. 

True, that Kingdom is not yet established, except 
in the hearts of God's people. Over them Jehovah's 
Anointed is now the reigning King, and by and by his 
dominion will extend over all the earth. To this 
worthy King they owe all their allegiance; to the lofty 
principles of his government and to all the interests of 
his Kingdom they should be devoted with a holy zeal 
and patriotism which know no limit except their ability 
to serve it. 

The complete separation of the Lord's people from 
the world, although repeatedly emphasized by the Lord 
and the apostles, is very generally overlooked by professed 
Christians, who seem to think they should still 
be part and parcel of the world and sharers in its aims, 
ambitions and self-imposed responsibilities— political, 
social and military. Of his people Jesus said, "They 
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." 
(John 17:16.) We are to be in it, not as citizens, but 
as aliens,— but law-abiding aliens, rendering unto 
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the 

R2002 : page 155 

things that are God's; owing no man anything but to 
love one another; rendering to all their dues,— tribute 
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear 
to whom fear, honor to whom honor, and being subject 
always to the higher powers.— Rom. 13:1,7,8. 

If we were now under a theocracy, a divine kingdom 
such as was established in Israel, and of which 
David was appointed king, then as Christians we should 
have the most patriotic feelings toward it. But we 
should remember that God abolished his typical earthly 
throne and declared that it should no more exist until 
Christ should come and set up his Kingdom, the antitype 
of the throne and kingdom of David. And to as many 
as believe this testimony and consecrate themselves 
fully to the cause of the new King, whose dominion 
begins in their hearts long before its establishment in 
the earth, will be granted the privilege of heirship with 



him when, in due time, his kingdom is established. 

But the world does not know or understand this 
kingdom, nor with the natural, depraved heart are they 
able to comprehend or appreciate its principles of righteousness 
and the wide distance between the kingdoms 
of this world and the Kingdom of God. And for this 
reason they cannot understand the course of any of 
God's people who do not join with them in calling 
these earthly kingdoms the kingdom of God— "Christendom" 
—and serving them as though they were his. 

If we wholly follow the Lord in this as in every 
thing else and so walk apart from the world in all things, 
as in it but not of it, we can only expect to be misunderstood 
and disliked. But we should remember the 
Lord's words, "If ye were of the world [sharing its 
sentiments, policy, methods, etc.], the world would love 
its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I 
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you. ...If the world hate you, ye know that 
it hated me before it hated you. Remember the word 
that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than 
his lord." (John 15:18-20.) Let us see to it that we 
are indeed a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 



R2002 : page 155 

THE ARK BROUGHT TO JERUSALEM. 

-JULY 19.-2 Sam. 6:1-12.- 

Golden Text.— "O Lord of hosts, blessed is 
the man that trusteth in thee."— Psa. 84:12. 

THE special teaching of the incident of this lesson 

is the reverence of the Lord. "Holy and reverend 

is his name;" and "the Lord will not hold him 

guiltless that taketh his name in vain."* "God is 

greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and 

to be had in reverence of all them that are about him." 

When God appeared unto Moses in the burning bush 

to speak with him, he commanded him, saying, "Put 

off thy shoes from off thy feet; for the place whereon 

thou standest is holy ground." So also when he appeared 

on Mount Sinai in the sight of all the people of 

Israel, enveloped in a thick cloud, there were great demonstrations 

of awe-inspiring solemnity, and special 

restrictions to guard against any irreverent familiarity. 

Israel was also specially commanded to reverence his 

law and his sanctuary.— Psa. 111:9; Exod. 20:7; Psa. 89:7; 

Exod. 3:5; 19:11-13; Lev. 19:30. 

Reverence is defined as a feeling of profound respect, 
often mingled with awe and affection; a feeling 
of worshipful regard when directed to the divine or 
sacred: also conduct inspired by, or conformed to, such 



feeling. "The fear [reverence] of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom." (Psa. 111:10.) This is the only 
proper attitude of the creature toward the Creator, the 
Author of our being, and the Creator, Preserver and 
Lord of the whole universe. When he speaks, therefore, 
our ears should be reverently attentive to his voice, 
and every power alert to do his bidding. Our safety, 
our happiness, and that nobility of character which 
prompts to love and gratitude, and which promptly and 
wisely heeds instruction and advances in knowledge 
and wisdom, all depend primarily upon our supreme 
reverence for the Lord. And therefore the Lord would 
foster and cultivate in us that becoming, filial reverence 
that is due to his name. 

The ark of God was the symbol of the divine presence 
in Israel, and as such it was the most sacred thing 
about the typical tabernacle. It was made by divine 
direction, as was everything belonging to the tabernacle; 
and its place was in the holy of holies, where 
only the high priest (who represented Jesus, the great 
high priest) was permitted to enter; and that only 
once a year, on the day of atonement. As the symbol 
of the divine presence, like the divine presence itself, 
it was guarded from irreverent handling, and also from 
the common view. Only the priests, who typically 
represented the body of Christ, the saints of this age, 
were permitted to see or to touch it. The Levites, who 
represented all justified believers of this age, were appointed 
solemnly and reverently to bear the ark when 
the Tabernacle was removed from place to place, but it 
must be first carefully covered by the priests; for even 
the Levites might not look upon it nor touch it.— 
Num. 4:15-20. 

Previous to the event of this lesson religion was at 
a very low ebb in Israel, and for many years the ark of 
the covenant had been separated from its place in the 
tabernacle. As the visible symbol of the divine presence, 
wherever the ark went the power and favor of God 
went with it; as, for instance, when Israel crossed over 
Jordan on dry land, the waters parting before them as 
soon as its bearers reached the brink of the river; and 
again when the walls of Jericho fell before it and Israel 
had a great victory. But when Israel sinned against 
God, no such power accompanied the symbol. It was 
even permitted to fall into the hands of their enemies, 
and the Philistines were allowed to capture it while 
Israel suffered a great defeat. But though Israel was 
thus punished God did not long permit the sacred emblem 
of his presence to remain in Gentile hands, and 
the Philistines were punished for retaining it until they 
were glad to restore it again to Israel. In returning it 
there were no anointed priests among the heathen to 
cover it, nor Levites to bear it; so the Philistines placed 



*See our issue of May 15, '93. 

R2002 : page 156 

it upon a new cart, and left the oxen without a driver 

to take their own course, and God guided them back to 

the land of Israel, to Beth-shemesh. Thus was the 

ark restored to his people. But the people of Beth-shemesh, 

ignoring the restrictions of the divine law 

with reference to the ark, presumed to look into it, 

and God punished them with a great slaughter in which 

fifty thousand and seventy men perished. Thus they 

were taught to fear the Lord and to reverence his commandments; 

and they said, "Who is able to stand before 

this holy Lord God, and to whom shall he [this 

symbol of his presence] go up from us? And they 

sent messengers to Kirjath-jearim....And the men 

of Kirjath-jearim came and fetched up the ark and 

brought it into the house of Abinadab...and sanctified 

R2003 : page 156 

Eleazer his son to keep the ark of the Lord." 
There it remained for twenty years. (1 Sam. 6:1-21; 
7:1,2.) The Lord's dealings with Israel were on the 
lines of the Law Covenant made with them at Mount 
Horeb. The lesson to us of the New Covenant is that 
those favored by one part of God's covenants are held 
accountable proportionately. We are not, however, to 
think of those fifty thousand men as destroyed in the 
Second Death; for the trial of Israel under its Law 
Covenant was only typical, and did not decide the final 
destiny of all under it. 

But when David was finally established upon the 
throne of all Israel he purposed to bring the ark up to 
Jerusalem, and to lead the people as a nation back to 
the hearty and reverent worship of God, the restoration 
of the sacred ark of the covenant being necessarily 
the first step to that end. He gathered together thirty 
thousand representative men of the nation thus to make 
the restoration a national act, and in so doing to call 
the whole people to a revival in the worship of God. 

The method chosen for the conveyance of the ark 
to Jerusalem was not, however, according to the law 
which prescribed that it should be reverently borne by 
the Levites, but patterning after the example of the 
Philistines in returning it to Kirjath-jearim they set it 
upon a new cart drawn (probably) by oxen. While 
God tolerated the ignorance and inability of the Philistines, 
who were not his people, to comply with the requirements 
of his law in this matter he did not so regard 
the forgetfulness or carelessness of Israel, but gave 
them a severe reminder of his displeasure. In the 
midst of the general joy and rejoicing with music of 
many voices and all kinds of instruments the sudden 
jostling of the cart seemed to endanger the position of 



the ark so that Uzzah put forth his hand to steady it, 
when instantly he was stricken down dead. 

This was a severe and a most necessary rebuke. It 
halted the procession, and was understood by the king 
and all the people as a rebuke to the whole nation in 
that they had ignored the commandment of the Lord 
and had failed to properly reverence the symbol of his 
presence. And the fear of the Lord fell upon the king 
and all the people; the music and the festivities were 
hushed; the multitudes dispersed and thoughtfully returned 
to their homes: and the king, fearing to continue 
his purpose of taking the ark to Jerusalem, turned 
aside and bore it to the house of Obed-edom, a Levite, 
who doubtless reverently received it; for we read that 
in consequence "the Lord blessed the house of Obed-edom 
and all that he had."-l Chron. 13:13,14. 

There the Ark remained for three months, while 
King David, still zealous for the Lord and anxious to 
lead the people to a closer observance of his worship 
was quietly studying the lesson of this strange providence. 
And it was told David, "The Lord hath blessed 
the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertaineth unto 
him, because of the ark of God." Then David read 
the lesson clearly, and he determined to act upon it at 
once— to carry out his original purpose of bringing up 
the ark to the chief, the capital city, to give it the 
chief place of honor in the whole nation, as he had before 
intended, and again to call the representatives of 
all the people together that the restoration might 
be a national act and lead to a great national revival of 
religion. But this time he would see to it that the 
symbol of the divine presence should be reverently 
borne according to the divine directions. 

"And David made him houses in the city of David, 
and prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched 
for it a tent. Then David said, None ought to carry 
the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the 
Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister 
unto him forever... For because ye did it not at 
first, the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that 
we sought him not after the due order. So the priests 
and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the 
ark of the Lord God of Israel. And the children of 
the Levites bare the ark of God upon their shoulders, 
with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded, according 
to the word of the Lord. Thus all Israel brought 
up the Ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting, 
and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets and 
with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and 
harps."-l Chron. 15:1,2,13-15,28. 

"And it was so that when they that bare the ark 
had gone six paces he [David] sacrificed oxen and fadings, 
and David danced before the Lord with all his 
might [another expressive symbol of joy], and David 
was girded with a linen ephod. So David and all the house 
of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord with shouting 



and with the sound of the trumpet."— 
2 Sam. 6:13-15. 

While Israel was thus taught the reverence of the 
Lord, the lesson applies with equal force to the Church 
of the Gospel age. It is not our part to change one iota 
of the ordinances of God. We may not turn the ordinance 
of the baptism of believers into the sprinkling of 
infants, nor change the simplicity of the Lord's supper, 
or the time of its observance as indicated by its superseding 
the celebration of the typical passover. Nor 
have we a right to abate the just requirements of his 
holy law, nor to render null and void the authority of 
his precepts and instructions in order to please the 
worldly-minded. The law and the testimonies of God 
must be received into good and honest hearts without 
regard to human philosophies and idle speculations. 
The reverence of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom 
and blessed is the man that trusteth in him, and to 
whom a "Thus saith the Lord" is the end of all controversy 
on every subject. 

"If our lives were but more simple, 

We should take him at his word; 
And our lives would be all sunshine, 

In the sweetness of our Lord." 



page 157 
VOL. XVII. JULY 15, 1896. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 158 

Views From the Tower 159 

Restitution, Faith Cures, Prayer 

Cures and the Gift of Healing 161 

The Model Prayer 161 

Three Causes of Sickness 165 

For Whom May We Pray? 168 

Should the Consecrated Use 

Medicines? 168 

Bible Study: God's Promises to David 170 

Bible Study: David's Kindness 171 

Encouraging Letters 172 

page 158 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST. 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



My doctrine is to lay aside 
Contention and be satisfied. 
Just do your best; and praise or blame 
That follows that counts just the same. 
I've always noticed great success 
Is mixed with trouble more or less; 
And it's the man who does his best, 
That gets more kicks than all the rest. 
James Whitcomb Riley. 



R2011 :page 158 

Honor to the true man ever, who takes his life in his hands, and, 
at all hazards, speaks the word which is given to him to utter, whether 
men will bear or forbear; whether the end thereof is to be praise or 
censure, gratitude or hatred. — Whittier. 



page 158 
Tracts No. 4 and 7 are out of print. 



Tract No. 1 has been published in the Hollandish language. 
Order free samples for any of your Dutch friends. 



We still have "Missionary Envelopes" which we supply at the rate 
of 25 cents per hundred. This is an excellent way to bring the gospel 
to the attention of your friends unobtrusively. 



If you have friends that you would like to interest in the TOWER 
send their addresses for sample copies free. Or, if you choose, you 
may send one dollar and the addresses of four friends and we will send 
them the WATCH TOWER for the remainder of the year 1896. 



R2003 : page 159 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



WHILE the WATCH TOWER takes no part in 
politics in a partisan sense it must needs take 
note of all politics which have an important bearing on 
public welfare, and thus stand related to the fulfilments 
of the divine prophecies. 

For the next four months the people of the United 
States will be in a fervor of excitement such as has 
not been known for more than thirty years. The "Gold 
and Silver question" will, we believe, prove to be 
almost as important a question as was the "Slavery 
question" in 1860: and the action in the United 
States will affect all the world. It may mean another 
"spasm" or "travail pang." But we still 
hold that God's saints are a separate and peculiar people, 
distinct from the world and its parties and factions; and 
accordingly urge all to increase their watchfulness, 
zeal and prayer for our Kingdom, which alone will 
meet the needs of the "groaning creation." Our Kingdom, 
for which we labor and wait and work, is the one 
for which also we pray, daily— "Thy Kingdom come— 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
Since none of earth's kingdoms are ours we should be 
separate from all;— "Kept for the Master's use." Whoever 
enters politics will surely find that the time, influence 
and talent pledged to the Lord's service will be 
drawn into political channels. "Ye cannot serve God 
and Mammon." "Ye are not of this world, even as I 
am not of this world." "I have chosen you out of the 
world and ordained you that you should go and bring 
forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain." These 
our Master's words, and his caution that we watch and 
pray lest we enter into temptation, and the assurance 
that we are now in a time of special testing, should 
put us on guard, so that the Apostle's words may be 
true of us; "He that is begotten of God keepeth himself, 
and that wicked one toucheth him not."— 1 John 5:18; 
Jas. 1:18. 



Under the caption "Religious Anarchy" the Philadelphia 
Press proceeds to advocate compulsory Christian 
Union. Its arguments illustrate the Apostle's 
statement that "the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the spirit of God, neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned." Unconsecrated 
believers (and hence natural men— not "new creatures") 
and unbelievers so largely preponderate both in pulpits 



and pews that the general sentiment will be more affected 
by the false than by the true view. To all except "the 
sanctified in Christ Jesus," "transformed by the renewing 
of their minds" and "taught of God" through his 
Word, truth is stranger than fiction. The Press says: 

"A regulated liberty is just as necessary and as 
possible, and no more perilous in the Church than in 
the State. Individualism simply will not work. Of 
course, if religion be conceived of simply as a device to 
save each isolated soul from future damnation, then 
the question falls. In that case each must be as solitary 
as though no other had ever lived. He sins by 
himself, he dies by himself, he is saved or damned by 
himself, as the case may be. But that is not religion 

R2004 : page 159 

from the Christian point of view. Our idea of religion 
is that it is a joint enterprise for the moral uplift of 
humanity, and that each person concerned in it saves 
himself incidentally and without knowing it. But no 
cooperation is possible without some relinquishment of 
personal freedom of action. It is not in point here and 
now to say much about where we conceive the seat of 
authority to be, or through what organs it should act. 
It is enough to hold up to reprehension that selfish, 

R2004 : page 160 

impotent, mercenary conception of salvation which is 
so firmly lodged in the common thought. No man liveth 
to himself in any sphere of life. This is preeminently 
true in the sphere of religion, which is intended to be 
the social bond among men. The opprobrium of the 
present ecclesiastical situation is its apparent anarchy. 
Men will not submit to discipline, and they ought to 
submit. Do not misunderstand me. I have no hankering 
for either the Inquisition or the Geneva Council 
of Elders or the Court of Arches. But then, these are 
only ancient bogies to frighten children with. Our 
peril is all from the opposite quarter. What the Church 
needs to day is not pious and independent people, but 
men who for Christ's sake and for humanity's sake 
are willing to cooperate with their fellow citizens in 
the household of faith. The creed of the Church may 
not be the form of expression which they would prefer; 
its discipline may be somewhat antique; its restraints 
may be somewhat irksome; but so long as it asks or 
prescribes nothing which is definitely contrary to right 
or truth it becomes the man who reveres God and who 
wishes well to men to forbear. 

Here the evil results of false doctrine come to the 
surface. This writer (like a growingly large class in 
and out of the churches) has given up as antiquated 
the theory of mankind's fall by Adam's disobedience 
and the redemption of all by Christ in order that all may 



come to an individual knowledge and trial for eternal 

life under the terms of the New Covenant. His idea 

is the evolution idea of salvation (?), that our race 

developed gradually from microbes or protoplasm 

into monkeys, and from monkeys into men, and 

is saving itself as a race by cultivating and civilizing 

itself. Hence his statement above, "Our 

idea of religion is that it is a moral uplift of humanity, 

and that each person concerned in it saves himself incidentally 

and without knowing it." This is the logical 

conclusion of evolution, and it appeals of course to 

the "natural" heart. 

If his premise as to the object and purpose of religion 
be accepted as correct, his conclusion that a union 
of Christians under some kind of a creed, "or any kind," 
so as to better accomplish this "moral uplift of humanity" 
would be logical. 

But as his premise is false so is also his conclusion. 
He rejects the Scriptural testimony respecting the mission 
of the true Church, and hence his groping darkness 
and the darkness of the many on this important subject. 
As we have frequently proven in these columns, the 
Scriptures declare that the object of God during this 
Gospel age is not "the moral uplift of humanity" (except 
as it may incidentally be effected), but the selection, 
trial and perfecting of a special Church or "royal 
priesthood" who, when all selected, shall be associated 
with their chief or High Priest (who redeemed them 
and the entire race) in the promised Kingdom of God. 

For this Kingdom we wait, for it in God's providence 
is to accomplish "the moral uplift of humanity" 
during the Millennial age which will soon be ushered in. 
For it, as instructed, we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 

However, faith in a ransom from an Adamic fall is 
fast fading from the minds of those who have never 
understood the subject and cared not enough to seek 
for the truth upon it; and thus "Christendom" is preparing 
for the union or "federation" which the Scriptures 
foreshow will be the final phase of "Christianity." 

True Christians are recognized by God (1) as individuals; 
(2) as individuals who having severally submitted 
their wills completely to the will of God are 
each under the direction or headship of Christ, and related 
to each other in and through his spirit and Word, 
and not by either physical or mental creeds or other 
bonds. Let us stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free indeed. Yet let us submit 
ourselves one to another and serve and love one another 
as members together of the Lord's body. Thus shall 
we realize the union and liberty combined; lost during 
the dark ages and not yet realized by any who are in 
sectarian bondage. 



A writer who sees matters more clearly writes as 
follows in The Christian World.— 

"Christianity, as it came from Christ, concerned 
itself with spirit, motive, conduct. The disciple was 
he who 'heareth my words and doeth them;' whose life 
answered to the great appeal, 'if ye love me, keep my 
commandments.' The Christianity of theology, on the 
other hand, puts the emphasis on something entirely 
different. It constructs a system of elaborate meta-physical 
propositions about the modes of the Divine existence 
and the relation to them of the Person of Christ, 
and then declares concerning them, 'this is the Catholic 
faith, which except a man believe faithfully he cannot 
be saved,' adding as a clincher 'which faith except 
every one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt 
he shall perish everlastingly.' 

"The mind which can accept creeds has no necessary 
relation to the Christian mind at all. A Constantine 
could do that and be a murderer of his wife and 
his son. A Catherine de Medici, in the name of the 
Catholic Creed, could order a Bartholomew massacre. 
An Empress, Catherine of Russia, could uphold the 
orthodox confession and rival Messalina in her 
debaucheries. 

"It is equally certain that the church confessions, 
powerless to produce the true Christian spirit and morality, 
are equally powerless to produce the true Christian 
conviction. When we are told we need to be convinced 
of Christ's right to command before we obey 
Him, we admit the plea. The true Protestant knows 
a better method. Hungry for the facts which bear upon 
his spiritual life, he will seek to give to each one of 
them its proper weight over his intellect and his heart. 
But the intellectual system which he builds out of them 
will ever be open to revision as new light comes. And 
the atrocity of using that provisionary system as an 
instrument for persecuting his neighbor will be one of 
which he will never be found guilty." 



R2004:page 161 

RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

-CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST.- 

THE privilege of prayer which God has provided 
for his people is one of the greatest boons imaginable. 
"Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of 
grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.) The mercy has 
been provided by God in the great sacrifice of Christ, 
sufficient to cover all "the sins that are past, through 
the forbearance of God;" but we must by faith approach 



the throne of grace in order to obtain this mercy. 

So, also, with all of our necessities as new creatures in 

Christ; grace to help for every time of need lies waiting 

for us to claim it— at the throne of grace. Although 

our Heavenly Father knoweth what we need, and has 

made so abundant a provision for us, yet he will be inquired 

of, solicited, by his people, for these mercies 

which he assures us he is far more pleased to give than 

are earthly parents to do good unto their children. 

God's appointment that his people should approach 
him in prayer is, therefore, not for the purpose of informing 
him of our needs, for these he knows far better 
than we do, but for our spiritual profit, that we may be 
kept in close touch with him, that we may continually 
realize his love and care and grace toward all who have 
come into the divine family through Christ and the 
New Covenant. For this reason, while sending rain 
and sunshine upon the world in general, God holds in 
his hand many favors, great and small, for "his 
people," which he will bestow only in answer to their 
faith and prayers. 

Prayer is not a privilege merely, but also a necessity; 
—commanded as indispensable to our Christian 
growth. (Rom. 12:9-13; 1 Thes. 5:17.) Whoever 
loses the desire to thank and worship and commune 
with the Father of mercies, may rest assured that he 
is losing the very spirit of sonship, and should promptly 
seek and remove the barrier— the world, the flesh or 
the devil. Every additional evidence of the Lord's 
confidence in us by the revealing to us of his 
character and plan, so far from diminishing our worship 
and prayers, should multiply them. If our hearts 
are good soil they will bring forth the more abundantly. 

THE MODEL PRAYER. 



All of our Lord's recorded prayers are beautiful 
in their simplicity, trustfulness and unselfishness; but 
the one usually termed "the Lord's prayer," given as 
an example of a proper prayer, is certainly in every 

R2005 :page 161 

way a model, which we do well to follow closely in all 
our petitions. -Luke 11:2-4; Matt. 6:9-13. 

(1) Its opening address is full of filial reverence 
and trust,— "Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed 
be thy name!" What could be more sweet and childlike! 
What could be more reverent than this bold approach, 
direct to the throne of the heavenly grace! 

(2) It does not proceed hastily to the lesser things 
of a personal character, but, recognizing that God 
takes knowledge of all of earth's affairs, and has a 
gracious and sufficient remedy already provided, the 



model prayer acknowledges this, and thus expresses 

faith and interest in God's plan as revealed in his 

Word, saying: "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 

on earth as it is done in heaven." Yes, indeed, it is 

not only fitting that all who approach God in prayer 

should previously have searched to know something of 

what he has revealed concerning his will and plan, but 

also that after learning of it they should thus confess 

faith in God, that his plan, when fully executed, will 

more than meet all the necessities of our case. This is 

not a petition that God would bring in his Kingdom 

before his appointed time, nor an expression of an impatient 

longing for it; but an expression of hope and 

trust and patient waiting for that which we know will 

more than meet all proper expectations, and fulfill all 

the promises of God's Word. It also signifies our allegiance 

to the Kingdom and its laws and spirit; and 

hence implies that so far as we are concerned, we will 

do all in our power to conform our lives to its precepts 

even now. 

(3) Then coming to personal desires, it requests 
only the necessities,— the "bread and water," which 
God assures us shall be sure to all who are truly his. 

It asks, "Give us this day our daily bread." The request 

is not for wealth, nor luxuries, nor overplus, 

nor dainties and delicacies. It is simply an acknowledgment 

of God as the great Provider, and of our reliance 

upon him and his promises, leaving quantity 

and quality and everything else to divine wisdom and 

love, to be ordered to our highest good. 

(4) Although our sins have been forgiven, and 

we have been received into the family of God as sons 
before we have any right to pray "Our Father," yet 
we are very humbly to feel that we stand as "sons" by 
grace in Christ, and not in merit of our own. We therefore 
appropriately acknowledge that we are trespassers, 
daily, who do not and cannot do the will of God perfectly, 
praying, "Forgive us our trespasses," our 
shortcomings. 

(5) Next we acknowledge a principle of God's 
justice, that mercy will be extended through Christ 
only in proportion as we realize the spirit of divine 

R2005 : page 162 

mercy, and are willing to exercise it toward others 
who come short of perfection in their dealings with us; 
hence we add, "as we forgive those who trespass against 
us." This is equivalent to a bargain with God, 
that we accept his terms of mercy, and will expect none, 
except as we ourselves exercise it toward others. What 
a thought! If fully appreciated, how it would influence 
all of God's sons to be kind and generous toward 
each other and toward all men in thought as well as in 
word and deed.-See Matt. 5:24; 6:15. 

(6) "And lead us not into temptation;" or, rather, 



since chastisements and temptations (or trials) are 
necessary to our discipline and preparation for the 
Kingdom (James 1:2-12), we must understand 
this as the Emphatic Diaglott indeed renders it, 
"Abandon us not to trial." Since the trial of our 
faith worketh patience, experience and hope (1 Pet. 4:12; 
Rom. 5:3-5), and is needful for our perfecting in holiness 
(1 Pet. 1:6,7), the Father will not hinder us from 
having temptations, even though he himself tempteth 
no man. (Jas. 1:13.) A man is tempted when he is 
led astray and enticed by his own selfish, fallen desires; 
he sins when he yields to those desires. (James 1:14.) 
But in the hour of trial, temptation, who could come off 
conqueror without the promised "grace sufficient for 
every time of need" which will succor us and not permit 
us to be tempted above what we are able to bear, 
but will with the temptation provide also a way of 
escape?— 1 Cor. 10:13. 

(7) "But deliver us from evil," or, as some prefer 
it, Deliver us from the Evil One.* The great Adversary 
is as much on the alert to entrap us through the 
weaknesses of the flesh, as our Lord is ready to deliver 
us and give us victory. We are not sufficient of ourselves 
for such a contest against the powers of darkness, and 
hence have need frequently of this petition to the throne 
of grace, for as the Apostle declares, "our sufficiency 
is of God."— 2 Cor. 3:5. 

ASK IN FAITH, NOTHING DOUBTING. 



Our prayers are not to be "vain repetitions," 
formal requests for what we do not expect. We are to 
"ask in faith, nothing wavering." (James 1:6.) And 
whatsoever things ye ask "believe that ye [shall] receive 
them," for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, hypocrisy. 
-Mark 11:11,24; Rom. 14:23. 

The child of God must therefore be a close student 
of his Father's Word; because he is expected to ask 
that he may receive, that his joy may be full; and he 
is cautioned to ask only for such things as his Father 
has expressed a willingness to grant; and he must ask 
in faith or not at all. 

There can be no doubt that in this matter of prayer, 
as in other matters, our Heavenly Father designs to 
cultivate faith in his people. He tells us that "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God;" and that 
"This is the victory that overcometh the world, even 
your faith." Hence, only those who exercise faith, 
and ask in prayer for the promised favors, are really 
ready to receive them according to God's judgment 
and arrangement. This being the case, it should be 
the prayer of God's people to-day, as amongst the 
Apostles, "Lord! increase our faith." And thus praying, 
and laboring to this end, each would be more and 



more helped in overcoming the world and its faithless 
influences. 

True faith is not credulity. It is critical, and believes 
only upon good evidence. It criticizes closely 
and distinguishes clearly between the teachings of men 
and the substantiated Word of God. But, having found 
the Word of God, it trusts it implicitly, knowing that 
its Author cannot lie; and that all his purposes and 
promises will be accomplished. 

True faith, then, makes sure of its ground by giving 
careful heed to the Lord's Word; and then, asking 
according to that Word, it has confidence in the results, 
and waits and prays and watches, perseveringly and 
patiently. "Watch and pray," and "believe that ye shall 
receive," were our Lord's frequent injunctions. He 
spake a parable about an unjust judge who was moved 
by the importunities of a poor widow to do her justice; 
and then inquired whether God, the true judge, would 
not in due time hear his elect Church, and avenge their 
cause justly, though he wait a long time,— until his 
own "due time." And we are told that he uttered 
this parable to the purport that God's people ought to 
pray continuously, and "not to faint [yield]."— 
Luke 18:1. 

Whatever might be our natural inclinations with 
reference to definiteness and persistency in prayer, we 
must take our instructions from the Scriptures; and, 
overcoming our natural predilections, we must as "little 
children" and as "dear children" conform our views 
and conduct to the instruction which is from above. 
Let us all, therefore, remember the words, "Ask [in 
my name] and ye shall receive, that your joy may be 
full." (John 16:24.) The Heavenly Father has multiplied 
mercies, blessings and providences in store for 
his obedient and faithful children who will ask for them. 

True, some of these proper and authorized and 
much desired requests are long delayed;— for instance, 
the Church for more than eighteen centuries has 
prayed, "Thy Kingdom come! Thy will be done on 



*The remaining sentence with which this prayer is usually closed 
is spurious— not found in the ancient Greek MSS. It would appear to 
have been added at the time when an earthly exaltation of the Church 
had led some to believe that the Papal glory was the glory of God's 
Kingdom. 

R2005 : page 163 

earth, as it is done in heaven." God has heard, but 

has not answered yet. Nevertheless all who have thus 

prayed for and desired the Millennial Kingdom have 

been blessed by their faith in that Kingdom not seen 

as yet,— but evidently now very near. However, 

other requests— for daily food and for succor in temptation 



and deliverance from the Evil One,— have been 
promptly answered. 

In this connection notice specially that the privilege 
of prayer, or any other favor of God, is not granted 
for selfish purposes. A thing which might be properly 
desired and asked for in one case might be improper if 
asked for from some other motive. To desire and ask 
for something good in itself, in order that we might be 
glorified before our fellows, is a wrong request, because 
of a wrong motive. 

The desire for a good thing, simply for ease and 
convenience, is an improper, selfish motive. The 
Apostle refers to such cases, saying, "Ye ask, and receive 
not, because ye ask amiss, to consume it upon your 
desires,"— i.e., for vain-glorious purposes or other selfish 
reasons. (Jas. 4:3.) To ask for some good thing 
simply to make a test of it, thereby to establish our 
faith, is seemingly an improper request, for none but 
the faith-full are promised anything. 

Besides, God's plan is that we should walk by faith 
and not by sight. Hence, we not only should not ask 
anything unauthorized, but as we grow in spirituality 
our petitions will be chiefly for spiritual favors; and 
even in asking for these we should be particular not to 

R2006 : page 163 

specify how they are to come. And we should look for 
the answers to our prayers in natural rather than supernatural 
channels, since God's usual method is to use 
supernatural means only where the natural means are 
inadequate. 

The graces of the holy Spirit are specially stated 
to be open to our requests and corresponding efforts: 
Your Heavenly Father is more willing to give the holy 
Spirit to them that ask it, than earthly parents are to 
give good (earthly) gifts to their children.— Luke 11:13. 

"YE HAVE NOT, BECAUSE YE ASK NOT." 

—James 4:2.— 

The trouble with many is that they do not avail 
themselves of the great stock of divine grace set apart 
for the benefit of those who, abiding in Christ, and his 
word abiding in them, do ask, do seek and do find. 
Let no one suppose that all prayer must be selfish. 
Quite to the contrary, we have a wide field of prayer-liberty 
in full accord with the Lord's Word and will. 

Every trial of faith and patience is an occasion 
for prayer for the promised succor. Every failure to 
gain victory is an occasion for a prayer for forgiveness, 
and as well for divine blessing, that the lesson of our 
own weakness may be deeply impressed, so that in the 
next similar trial we may promptly apply for and lay 
hold upon the "grace to help" promised. Every victory 



over self is an occasion for prayer that we be not 

high minded and puffed up, but kept humble and watchful 

for the next attack from the great Adversary. 

Every service for the truth becomes an occasion for a 

prayer of thanks for the privilege of serving the Great 

King and mayhap to have suffered something for his 

cause; and a cause for supplication for further opportunities 

of service and grace to use them wisely. 

If you have trials and temptations which you are able 
to overcome, and which are working out in your character 
patience, experience, brotherly-kindness, sympathy 
and love, rejoice and offer the prayer of thanksgiving 
and acknowledgment of divine mercy and help. If 
your trials seem heavier than you can bear, and likely 
to crush you, take the matter to the great Burden-bearer, 
and ask his help in bearing whatever would do 
you good, and release from all that would not do you 
good, but which would injure you. If your heart is 
full of a desire to obey the Lord's injunction and "forget 
not the assembling," and you are unreasonably 
hindered in a way that you have tried to overcome but 
cannot, take the matter to the Lord in prayer, and watch 
and wait and strive according to your prayer, and you 
will soon see a manifestation of divine power on your 
behalf. If you see a true brother, a true "soldier" 
faltering and in danger, let your heart be so full of love 
for all of the Lord's "brethren" that you will not only 
run to his relief, but also supplicate the throne of the 
heavenly grace unceasingly, until you have regained 
him, or until in his wilfulness he has renounced the 
"narrow way" entirely. And should the fault be your 
own, your prayers and efforts will surely be blessed 
and overruled to your own profit. If you have no 
burning zeal to preach the good tidings of great joy, 
pray earnestly and faithfully and persistently for it, 
and strive for it, and you will soon have it. If you 
have a zeal and love for the gospel, and lack ability to 
present it, pray for the ability while you make full use 
of what you have. If you have the zeal and the ability 
and lack an opportunity, take it to the Lord in prayer 
as soon as you can, telling him that you are faithfully 
using all the opportunities you have. Then watch for 
more opportunities without slacking your hand to use 
the very humblest and smallest within your reach. 

Have you a quarrelsome disposition, or other bad 
habits, which you realize are a burden to your home 
and family, and to your brethren in the Lord's household? 
Take it to the Lord in prayer, asking grace and 
help to overcome, and meantime using your best diligence 
and effort in harmony with your prayer. 

Do you lack wisdom, so that your efforts to serve 

R2006 : page 164 

the Lord and the truth are usually failures? Take it 
to the Lord in prayer, remembering the promise, "If 



any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth 
to all liberally and upbraideth not."— James 1:5. 

Have you business complications brought about by 
your lack of judgment, or the dishonesty of others, or your 
generosity to the poor, etc.? And do these perplex you 
and hinder your progress in spiritual matters, and thus 
threaten your welfare as a "new creature?" This 
surely is a proper matter to lay before the Lord at the 
throne of the heavenly grace. And although it would 
not be right for you to attempt to dictate how your relief 
shall come, and you should not expect the Lord 
to work a miracle to prosper your imprudent venture, 
yet you can ask his wisdom to guide and overrule in 
the results, better than your wisdom could do it. 

Here is a wide range of subjects (and it might be 
widely expanded) upon which we may go to the throne 
boldly in the name of Jesus and ask and receive, seek 
and find, God's grace sufficient. But the range of subjects 
upon which we may not approach God in prayer 
is also large. We may not ask anything to minister 
to pride or selfishness or ambition, nor anything which 
would injure another; nor anything which would conflict 
with the Lord's plan as revealed in his Word. 
Oh! how many "ask and receive not, because they ask 
amiss," that they may consume the desired favor upon 
their earthly desires. 

THE PRAYERS OF CHRIST UNSELFISH. 



Our Lord's prayers, like all his acts and teachings, 
are models of unselfishness. Therefore, before we ask 
anything of the Father, one question should be carefully 
considered; viz.— Why do I want this? If the petitioner 
is consecrated and desires the healing of any that are sick, 
it should not be for his own glory, nor for his own comfort, 
nor in any manner for himself; for such requests are 
selfish and out of harmony with his covenant of sacrifice 
—"even unto death." Remember the course of 
our Lord and the apostles. Our Lord used divine 
power in feeding the multitude because of their necessity, 
and to glorify the Father; but when he himself 
was forty days without food he would not use the same 
power to feed himself, by commanding the stones to 
become bread, because this would have been contrary 
to his mission; for he came not to serve himself but 
others: not to preserve his own life, but to sacrifice it, 
to lay it down in the service of others. He created 
food for the multitudes, but not for himself or the disciples, 
though he referred to the miracle as an evidence 
that if ever necessary the same power would create bread 
for them. But it seems to have been the Father's plan 
to provide for his people by natural means, for there is 
no record of necessity for such a miracle on their behalf. 
Doubtless the Lord and his disciples partook of 



the bread and fish after they were made, and probably 
of the remaining fragments, but note that the object 
of their creation was the relief of the multitude and not 
their own refreshment. (Matt. 15:32; 16:5-12.) He 
healed the lame and the palsied miraculously when it 
would glorify God, but when he himself was weary, he 
"sat on the well" to rest, or used other natural means. 
Though he prayed often to the Father, and knew that he 
was heard always, and although sometimes heavy and 
sorrowful, as in Gethsemane, yet his prayers were requests 
for grace and strength to do the Father's will, 
and to finish the work he had come to do. And though 
he tells us that by asking he could have had "twelve 
legions of angels" to protect his person and his life, 
yet he would not ask— preferring to have the Father's 
will accomplished, which he had come to perform; 
namely, to give himself a "ransom for all." So 
notable was this a characteristic of his, that even his 
enemies noticed it, and said, "He saved others [from 
sickness, etc.], himself he cannot save." They could 
not appreciate the self-sacrifice which he was performing. 
And so, too, we may reasonably expect that 
many nominal Christians to-day will not understand 
the same motives and conduct in those who prefer to 
share in Christ's sufferings, to join with him in sacrifice, 
in order that they may share also in his coming 
glorious work of blessing and restoring "that which 
was lost." 

APOSTOLIC GIFTS USED UNSELFISHLY. 



Notice also the Apostles. They, too, had the gift 
of healing as well as privilege of prayer, but they did 
not use these selfishly. In all the records we find 
no instance of the exercise of the gift of healing on behalf 
of any of the apostles or any of the church; nor 
have we any record of prayer for health, or other 
earthly luxuries, being offered by any of them for 
themselves or each other, except in one case— that of 
Paul (2 Cor. 12:7-9), and his request was not granted; 
but he was told that instead he should have a sufficiency 
of grace to compensate and enable him to bear 
it patiently. This should command the attention of all. 

Although Paul's request for himself was refused- 
God seeing that his affliction of weak eyes could be 
made to work to divine glory and his own advantage 
—yet his gift to heal others was marvelous: "And 
God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, so 
that from his body were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs 
or aprons, and the diseases departed from 
them." (Acts 19:12.) Mark also the fact that though 
there is no account of the healing of the sick among 
the early disciples, it was not because they were never 



R2007 : page 164 

sick, for several instances of sickness are recorded. Paul 

R2007 : page 165 

writes to Timothy, "Trophimus have I left at Miletum 

sick;" and again he writes to Timothy, who was evidently 

often troubled with indigestion or dyspepsia, 

to use wine as a medicine; saying, "Use no longer 

water [exclusively], but take a little wine for thy 

stomach's sake, and for thine often infirmities." (1 Tim. 5:23.) 

In neither of these cases did Paul send handkerchiefs 

or aprons from his person, nor did he mention 

either praying for their recovery, or advise them 

so to pray. Evidently these cases should teach us that 

the gifts of healing, and prayer for the recovery of the 

sick were used, not upon the saints, but rather through 

them upon others, for the purpose of calling attention 

to the apostles and their gospel as being approved by 

God. 

A special reason why the saints cannot properly 
ask for physical health and earthly luxuries, we have 
already intimated is, that they, like their Lord, have 
consecrated themselves, and pledged to God the exchange 
of all earthly favors and privileges for the 
heavenly favors and glories to come;— a foretaste 
of which they now enjoy through the exceeding great 
and heavenly promises which cheer and refresh and 
comfort and bless more than earthly blessings could. 
Who, that understands the matter, would renounce his 
heirship in the future heavenly glories, together with 
present hopes and spiritual joys or reexchange them, 
if he could, for future earthly restitution, and present 
occasional foretastes of it? 

THREE CAUSES OF SICKNESS. 



But some will inquire, If it is not proper for the 
consecrated to pray for the healing of themselves, what 
does the Apostle James mean when he says, "The 
prayer of faith shall save the sick?" 

Accidents may and do occur so far as the world is 
concerned, but the saints are God's peculiar care; 
nothing can come upon them except as specially permitted. 
While God could take all the world under 
such special supervision, he pleases rather to let them 
be subject to the ordinary vicissitudes of the present 
condemned state— accidents, sickness, etc. Only the 
church (the consecrated) is comforted with the assurances 
of special care: "Your Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things," and "Like as a father 
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear 
him," those that respect and love him, those consecrated 



to his service. Of such it is written, "All the steps of 
the righteous are ordered of the Lord;" and "the 
very hairs of your head are all numbered."— 
Matt. 10:30; 6:31-34. 

While therefore sickness may in a general way be 
considered, at least indirectly, the work of Satan who 
deceived mankind into sin, and hence into sickness and 
death, yet in view of what we see of God's special care 
of the saints, we know that, in their case at least, sickness 
could not come without the Lord's special permission; 
and hence it should be regarded in their case 
as from him, and not directly from Satan, who could 
have no power over us except it were given him of the 
Father. 

We accordingly classify the causes of afflictions, including 
sickness, as follows,— but only as applicable to 
the consecrated church. First,— Those which have been 
either produced or aggravated by our activity in the 
Lord's service. Second,— Inherited weaknesses and 
those brought on ourselves by violations of the laws of 
nature previous to our entrance into the family of God 
as sons. Third,— Such as come upon us as discipline 
or chastisement from the Lord for sins or wanderings 
or coldness, or for the sin of failing to fulfill 
our covenant of sacrifice; or as needed discipline to 
prevent these. 

FIRST CLASS SUFFERINGS. 



Of the first class were the sufferings of Christ— 
his weariness, weakness, bloody sweat, ignominious 
buffetings, and all the reproaches and sneers, and bitter 
words, to which he meekly and quietly submitted until 
the sufferings of Calvary terminated his human existence. 
Of this first class were also the wounds of Paul 
and Silas, when scourged for preaching Christ, when 
stoned, beaten and imprisoned, and when in perils by 
sea and by land, among the Jews and among false 
brethren. Of this class was also the dyspepsia of Timothy, 
who, probably not naturally strong, studied and 
labored for the Lord, and in the interest of the church; 
and such we are distinctly told was the cause of the 
sickness of Epaphroditus, of whose sickness Paul writes, 
saying, "Receive him therefore in the Lord with all 
gladness; and hold such in reputation: because for the 
work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding 
[sparing] his life, to supply your deficiency."— 
Phil. 2:29,30. 

Yes, indeed, these and all such sicknesses and scars 
and wounds are honorable marks of distinction, which 
each soldier of the cross should be ambitious to bear, 
as Paul said referring to injuries endured in the service 
of the truth, "I bear about in my body the marks of 
the Lord Jesus." These he had received, not in money-seeking 



or fame-seeking, nor in self-indulgence, nor in 

quarrelling and disputing about the loss and dross of 

earth, but in the good fight of faith; in contending 

earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, 

against error amongst Jewish friends, and against philosophies 

and sciences falsely so called. He endured 

his wounds and tribulations in telling the glad tidings 

of the gospel of Christ of which he was not ashamed, 

R2007 : page 166 

and holding up the cross of Christ— to the Jews a 
stumbling block and to the Greeks foolishness, but to us 
who believe the power of God and the wisdom of God. 

All the "overcomers," all the faithful in Christ 
Jesus, are likely to have some such scars as proofs of 
their faithful endurance. There is no escape in this 
war. It is war to the death with all as well as with 
our Head and Captain, and the first loyal soldiers in our 
army. And it is in this view that Rev. 20:4 represents 
all those who shall be accounted worthy of the first 
resurrection as being "beheaded." (The beheading 
is symbolic; for neither our Lord nor the apostles were 
literally beheaded. It signifies that all must suffer 
earthly disadvantages, and lay down their lives in the 
defence and service of the truth, if they shall be worthy 
to share Christ's glory.) All suffering for righteousness' 
sake is suffering for the truth. Our daily lives 
are to be "living epistles known and read of all men;" 
and if we suffer because we refuse to be conformed to 
this world, or because we give the testimony of our 
lives against sin and for holiness, we suffer for the 
truth's sake. If your talents and opportunities permit 
no more active service for the truth than such godly 
living and suffering therefor, rejoice! and reckon that 
yours are among the first class sufferings, and let patience 
do her perfect work of moulding your character 
by this means to our Lord's likeness. 

The Apostle tells us also of a "fellowship of suffering" 
which may be experienced through mental 
sympathy. Those who cannot suffer personally and 
physically for the truth can sympathize with those who 
have such sufferings and can thus become "partakers," 
sustaining, encouraging and upholding those who are 
in the "great fight of affliction" for the Lord's cause, 
by their words, faith and prayers. Notice the promise 
to such in the Apostle's words in Heb. 6:10. 

Sickness and discomfort of any sort, incurred by 
our energy in the service of the truth, are permitted 
by our Father as evidences of our fidelity and love; 
because if not liable to such tribulations, or if relieved 
of them instantly by a miracle, the Lord's service would 
cost us no sacrifice and the test of our willingness to 
endure for the truth's sake would be wanting. As it 
is, however, every ache and pain or wound of person 
or of feelings, and beheading socially or literally for 



the truth's sake, becomes a witness of the spirit, testifying 
to our faithfulness. And in all such tribulations 
we should rejoice greatly— as say our Lord and the 
Apostle Peter.-Luke 6:22,23; 1 Pet. 4:13-16. 

SECOND CLASS SUFFERINGS. 



Of the second class of sickness and afflictions are 
poverty, constitutional weaknesses, etc., which, like 
Paul's sore eyes, the Heavenly Father sees will be 
really advantageous to us. For he doubtless often sees 
better than we how weak we are, and how a little 
adversity is necessary, as ballast, to keep our poorly balanced 
little vessels from capsizing. These weaknesses 
God sees best to leave us under, but assures us, through 
Paul, of "grace sufficient" to counterbalance such 
weaknesses. A realization of such care for our real 
interests, while humiliating, in that it forces conviction 
of our weakness, is refreshing and inspiring, in 
that it proves our Father's love and care. 

THIRD CLASS SUFFERINGS. 



The third class includes chiefly such afflictions as 
God visits upon his children as special chastisements 
for special transgressions. These are mentioned in 
Heb. 12:5-11. "Son, despise not thou the discipline 
of the Lord, nor faint when thou art reproved by him; 
for whom the Lord loveth he disciplineth, and scourgeth 
every son whom he receiveth. If ye endure discipline, 
God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he 
whom the father disciplineth not? But if ye be without 
discipline whereof all are partakers, then are ye 
spurious and not [real] sons. ...Now, no discipline 
for the present seemeth joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, 
it yieldeth the peaceable fruits of righteousness 
unto them which are [properly] exercised [or trained] 
thereby." This description, it will be observed, covers 
not merely the reproofs or rebukes of the Lord 
(verse 5), of the unfaithful and wanderers and transgressors, 

R2008 : page 166 

but also the disciplinary trials which come to 
us in well doing, and are permitted for the developing 
and strengthening of character;— hence both second and 
third class sufferings. 

It is only the rebukes and reproofs of the Lord for 
sin and unfaithfulness that we are examining in this 
third class of afflictions. We remark, too, that probably 
every son, except the one perfect one, our Lord 
Jesus, has at times needed and received rebukes by afflictions, 



for unfaithfulness. And it is well that we 
should learn to recognize these rebukes and to wisely 
apply their lessons. Rightly dividing, we shall neither 
err with some in crediting every affliction to the devil 
—receiving none as rebukes from our Father, nor will 
we err on the other hand and suppose every calamity and 
accident which occurs to the world in general and 
to the nominal church to be a divine rebuke. We 
should see clearly that only the consecrated "sons" are 
under God's special supervision, which includes rebukes 
by the Lord for sins and shortcomings, as well as afflictions 
in well-doing, permitted to test and perfect us. 
If therefore the saints experience serious afflictions, 
they should at once examine themselves conscientiously 
before God, to see whether their afflictions arise in any 
sense from faithfulness to the Lord and the truth. If 

R2008 : page 167 

they find that they do, they should rejoice in them, 

and wait patiently for recovery, which without our asking 

sometimes comes speedily; praying meantime 

with thanksgiving for blessings enjoyed and with 

supplications for further usefulness in the Lord's 

due time. 

The Apostle Peter mentions some who suffered, 
not for righteousness' sake, but as evil-doers and as 
busy-bodies in other men's matters. Such, as he shows, 
have no right to rejoice in such sufferings, but contrariwise 
to be ashamed,— to lay the lesson to heart and by 
God's grace reform their methods. 

While some, humble minded, do not readily recognize 
any sufferings as endured for the Lord's sake, and 
need to be encouraged along this line, others who do 
little and suffer little from any cause, imagine themselves 
martyrs for the truth. Let us avoid both extremes 
and think of ourselves soberly, underestimating 
rather than overestimating our little services and 
sacrifices. 

But if we see no evidence that our afflictions have 
resulted either directly or indirectly from our zeal in 
the Lord's service, we should at once seek for a cause 
of the afflictions as a rebuke from the Lord, remembering 
that nothing could happen to us aside from our 
Father's permission, and that he never permits them 
except for a wise purpose. 

Of the rebuking afflictions Paul wrote to the 
church at Corinth. (1 Cor. 11:21,22,27,29,30-34.) 
After recounting how careless and unappreciative of 
their covenant many of them were, failing to recognize 
their proper participation with Christ, to be broken 
with him and share his cup of suffering for the truth's 
sake, he says: "For this cause many are weak and 
sickly among you, and many sleep." This may refer 
to spiritual lethargy and sickness only; but not improbably 
also to the physical. 



The general object of many such afflictions is our 
discipline and reformation; and happy is the son who 
shall speedily note a rebuke of the Father, and repent 
and come back quickly into full harmony; and who, 
exercised thereby, shall seldom need the rebuking rod 
of affliction. The Apostle refers to this also (1 Cor. 1 1:31-34), 
saying, "If we would judge ourselves we 
should not be judged [by the Lord]." If we would critically 
watch ourselves and correct our own faults, disciplining 
ourselves, we should not need to be taken in 
hand and disciplined by afflictions. "But when we 
are judged by the Lord we are corrected, [in order] that 
we should not be condemned with the world." The 
consecrated are tried now, in order that they may 
not need any further trial in the future, during the 
Millennial age, when the world shall be on trial. 

"Is any among you suffering [afflicted], let him 
pray," says the Apostle (James 5:13). This counsel 
will apply to all the trials and afflictions of God's 
people, mental and physical, especially such as are of 
the first class or the second class. Such sufferers may 
take all their troubles of every kind to the Lord direct, 
and be assured of his sympathy and grace to help and 
sustain. Such need no elders to pray for the forgiveness 
of their sins, as in the following verses (14,15), 
where, evidently, the third class afflictions are referred 
to,— sicknesses the result of rebukes from God 
for sins, and not sicknesses of the class first described, 
in which we may rejoice. James says: "Is any sick 
among you? Let him call for the elders of the Church, 
and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in 
the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall 
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and 
though he have committed sins they shall be forgiven 
him. Therefore confess your sins one to another, and 
pray one for another, that ye may be healed."* The 
prayer, as we understand it, should be for the forgiveness 
of the sins of which the sickness is a punishment or 
rebuke, rather than for release from the deserved punishment. 
But if the sickness was a judgment or discipline 
for sin, we should expect that when the sin had 
been confessed and truly repented of, the Lord would 
remove the chastisement and raise up the penitent son 
from the affliction, either partially or wholly.— Compare 
Matt. 9:2-6; John 5:14; and 1 John 5:16. 

But let us remember that this statement does not 
refer to the various small aches and annoyances to 
which we, in common with the world in general, are 
subject; and which serve us a good purpose in the development 
of patience and sympathy for others. We 
know this, first of all, by the calling in of the elders of 
the Church [the senior, or chief, or official members] 
to pray over and anoint the sick with oil: because 
such extreme measures would be quite improper for a 
slight ailment. We know it secondly by the Greek 
word used for sick in verse 14, which has the significance 



of helpless or impotent. 

OUR PRESENT STANDPOINT. 



We see, then, that promiscuous praying for health 
during the Gospel age would have been improper, and 
that only by means of the gift of healing were the early 
cures of the age performed; that it ceased with the 
death of the apostles after accomplishing its object; 
and that the proper prayers relating to sickness, on the 
part of the saints, have been those offered for the forgiveness 
of sins— as a result of which healing followed. 
But we see, too, that as the Millennial age is dawning— 
lapping upon the Gospel age which is closing— we 



*01d Greek MSS. read therefore and sins. 

R2008 : page 168 

should expect that healing and general restitution 
would begin to be manifested, much as we do see it. 
And this leads us to inquire,— In the light of the foregoing 
examination of the Bible teachings and in the 
light of our present location in the dawn of the 
Millennium, 

FOR WHOM MAY WE NOW PRAY? 



We answer, the saints cannot properly pray for 
their own health now, any more than could their 
Master. They cannot properly ask the restitution privileges 
which they have consecrated, nor can they ask 
that their sacrifices be nullified by having all the cost 
of weariness, exhaustion, stripes or sickness miraculously 
removed. But when they realize their afflictions 
to be punishments for sins, they can still feel at 
liberty to confess their sins one to another, and pray to 
God for forgiveness, and thus they may, as a result, 
be healed. 

The saints who abide in Christ, and in whom his 
Word abides, may pray for others than themselves, 
especially in view of the fact that we are now in the 
beginning of the Times of Restitution; namely, in 
cases where they are sure their object is not self-exaltation; 
where their desires for the recovery of the sick 
are not selfish; where they have reason to believe that 
the restored health would be consecrated to good works 
and the glory of God. In such cases we may upon request 
pray for the recovery of the afflicted or imbecile 
not of the consecrated little flock— the sacrificers, the 



Royal Priesthood. Yet even in such cases, though our 
faith must necessarily be strong, because confident of 
asking from right motives, and at a time when the 
Lord is pleased to grant a beginning of restitution 
blessings, we should always say, as the Master did in 
his prayers,— "Nevertheless, not my will, but thine 
be done." 

However, it is not time yet to expect general healing 
and full restitution work, as that evidently will not be 
due until the entire Priesthood shall have finished sacrificing 
and entered with their Head and Chief Priest 
Jesus, into the glories and perfections of the heavenly 
state or condition, typified by the Most Holy of the 
Temple and Tabernacle. 

HE MUST INCREASE, BUT I MUST DECREASE. 



At first sight it might appear that as the gifts at 
the beginning of the age were exercised through the 
consecrated, so the healings to be expected in the Millennial 
dawn would be manifested mostly in answer to 
the prayers of the consecrated. But not so, we believe, 
will it be found; this would bring the saints into too 
great prominence, whereas, like John the Baptist at 
the first advent, we must expect to decrease here, while 
the Church Triumphant, on the other side the vail, 
will be on the increase. Our present relationship to 
the glorified Church— pointing out the nearness of the 
reign of glory— answers closely in correspondence to 
the work of John the Baptizer at the first advent. 
John proclaimed, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, 
and added, "There standeth one among you whom ye 
know not. He must increase, but I must decrease." 
So, much the same, is our message; and while the 

R2009 : page 168 

Church on the earthly plane will decrease, the glorified 
Church on the heavenly plane will be increasing 
in power and influence during the time of trouble coming, 
while the John class will doubtless be put under 
restraints, as John was cast into prison by Herod. 

In harmony with what we should thus expect, various 
methods of healing meet with some success, and indeed 
we have heard of more than one case of healing 
where no cure was attempted, or even thought of, by 
either the sick or the friends. One case was that of a 
sick girl, at whose bedside her friends had gathered, 
waiting for her to die; she immediately recovered, got 
up and went about as ever. The only explanation she 
could give was that she had a dream in which a man 
laid his hand upon her head, and she felt a shock like 
electricity pass down her spine. And this young 
woman did not even profess to be a Christian. 



By various means the Lord would gradually prepare 
the world for restitution, so that when it comes 
the new order of things will still leave room for the exercise 
of faith toward God; for the proud and scientific 
to explain from natural causes, while others will be 
led thereby to recognize such things as the beginning 
of restitution. And since the overcomers have a great 
work to do in opposing error and instilling truth, and 
since, if they were much engaged in praying for the 
sick, it would detract from their real and important 
work of healing the spiritually sick and lame and blind, 
we see great reasons why we should expect these manifestations 
of restitution both in and through others than 
the saints. 

SHOULD THE CONSECRATED USE MEDICINES? 



This question naturally suggests itself. We are 
neither commanded nor forbidden to use medicines. In 
our consecration we gave up human advantages coming 
to us as to all believers through Christ in exchange for 
the spiritual advantages offered us. Hence all restitution 
blessings and privileges we are debarred from 
asking; although God, for his own wise ends, 
sometimes grants his "new creatures" special favors 
and manifestations of an earthly sort in their hours of 
need; even though they do not ask for them.— See 

R2009 : page 169 

Matt. 26:53,54; Acts 12:6-11; 14:19,20; Phil. 2:27. 

It should be noticed, however, that (aside from 
Christ's work of redemption and restitution) condemned 
men are privileged to use such natural means 
as they can command, in food and medicines, for the 
relief of their ailments and the sustenance, as long as 
they may be able, of their condemned and dying bodies. 
And these privileges consequently the saints retain and 
possess, even after having exchanged the earthly advantages 
through Christ, for the heavenly 
advantages. 

Nothing, then, in their covenant of full consecration, 
prevents the saints more than unbelievers from 
using natural means for their relief. We have the 
liberty to do so whenever our judgment indicates the 
expediency. And though we are not informed that 
our Lord used medicines, we should remember that he 
was perfect, and had only such pains and aches as he 
himself took from others. However, he certainly illustrated 
the principle of making use of natural means, 
not asking divine power for relief, by resting when 
weary instead of praying for supernatural restoration; 
and when hungry and thirsty he ate and drank instead 
of praying for strength and refreshment otherwise. So, 



too, it was with the apostles as far as we may know 
from the meagre scraps of history of their private affairs 
furnished us in Scripture. Paul tells us (2 Cor. 11:27,30) 
of his weariness and pains and hunger and 
thirst and cold and nakedness, and says he gloried in 
these marks of his faithfulness, but mentions not one 
word about praying for the removal of these by divine 
power; nor does he record one answer of such a prayer 
as a mark of favor with God. On the contrary, in the 
single instance he mentions of having prayed for physical 
restitution (the restoration of his sight), he does tell us 
that the Lord refused his request, telling him it was 
best for him so— the grace sufficient being in spiritual 
and not earthly favors above those of natural men.— 
2 Cor. 12:9. 

When Paul was thus needy at times, what did he 
do? Did he pray God to feed and clothe him? 
No; he well knew that God had promised that no good, 
needful thing should be withheld, so long as he was 
his servant. He did not ask God to create money in 
his pockets, nor to send some kind hearted person, not 
too lazy to work, with a basket of dainties for him to 
eat, while he studied or prayed? No ! that was not 
Paul's sort, else he would not have been selected as 
"a chosen vessel" to bear the Lord's truth. When 
he was hungry Paul neither went out and begged nor 
staid indoors to pray for the things needed, but went 
to work at his trade,— tent-making, teaching publicly 
and privately as opportunities offered; unwilling to 
ask aid even of the believers whom he served; though 
he well knew that they were negligently losing, both 
the privilege of giving to his support and the spread of 
the truth, and also losing the valuable instruction which 
he could have imparted during those hours necessarily 
devoted to secular labor. 

We remember, too, Paul's advice to Timothy regarding 
medicine— to take a little wine (as a medicine, 
not as a beverage) for his indigestion and "often infirmities." 
And this we find in perfect harmony 

with Paul's own course and that of our Lord, and therefore 
certainly a safe guide to us respecting our Father's 
will. 

But, says one, even if it be right to use simple 
remedies, such as may come under our observations- 
would it be right to spend the Lord's money (as all the 
money which the consecrated have is the Lord's) upon 
physicians? We answer that our Lord and the disciples 
spent consecrated money for bread, which is the 
medicine needed when hungry. And we presume 
Timothy, following Paul's counsel, spent some consecrated 
money for the medicinal wine. Our Lord and 
the apostles did not commend medicines and physicians, 
and doubtless the art was so crude as to be unworthy 
of commendation; yet they were not condemned, and 
it was acknowledged that the sick need a physician. 
(Matt. 9:12.) But in all this we would not be understood 



as advocating drags and doses;— moderation 
should be used in all that we do, that whether we eat 
or drink or take medicine or whatever, all may be done 
with reason and to the glory of God. Probably as 
many die of too much as of too little medicine. We 
should not fill ourselves with medicine nor with wine 
nor be gluttonous with food; but be temperate in all 
things. 

We cannot for a moment concede as the superiors 
or equals of our Lord and Paul, in faith or divine favor, 
some who in our day claim to live by faith, "working 
not at all;" who do little to weary or pain themselves, 
and who rejoice that they have no such experiences as 
Paul had with hunger and cold, and thirst, and nakedness, 
as marks of special faith and holiness and divine 
favor. We believe that many such are sincere children 
of God, deceived on this question by following their 
own feelings and inclinations rather than carefully 
studying the perfect examples of God's will in this 
matter, furnished in Scripture.— See 
2 Thes. 3:8-10,11-15. 

In view of the Scripture teaching, we must therefore 
advise the consecrated to walk in the footsteps 
of our Lord Jesus and those who followed him most 
closely; ignoring in this as in other things their own 
preferences as to how they would like to think about it, 
and how they would like to do and have God do in such 
matters. Let us fully submit our wills and methods 

R2009 : page 170 

to God's plan and arrangement as expressed and illustrated 
in his Word. As "new creatures" we may ask 
freely and persistently for all spiritual blessings and 
graces, and unselfishly for all our necessities promised. 
Then, sure that such will come, we should seek for 
them and acknowledge them with thankfulness, by 
whatever agency or channel sent. 

But in earthly matters we must be very careful: 
let us ask for nothing beyond our actual needs, as God 
(not we) sees the necessity and expediency— thankful 
always for the "bread and water" promised, as well as 
for every additional comfort. Realizing always God's 
superior wisdom and boundless love for us, we should 
fear to take our interests in any degree out of his hand. 
Thus we may always live rejoicing, realizing that, 
whatever may befall us, all is working out for good to 
us. We may need an acquaintance with pain, or to 
come into perplexity and almost to want, in order to 
have needful experience or testing or chastisement. 
And we should learn to search for and appreciate the 
lesson or chastisement quickly, and prove ourselves apt 
pupils in the school of Christ. 

PRAYERS FOR OUR CHILDREN. 



Especially in the case of their children, consecrated 
parents may well feel that, now in the dawning of the 
Millennial age, they have special privileges in prayer; 
for of all classes these are most surely the heirs of 
restitution blessings. The children of all believers are 
justified through the faith of their parents up to the 
time they reach years of mental discretion. (1 Cor. 7:14.) 
Hence they are heirs of the earthly blessings, 
restitution, etc. And now that the Restitution 
Times are upon us, we should feel great confidence 
in asking health and strength and life for such. It 
would seem indeed that now the children of believers 
might live on down into the full sunlight of Millennial 
glory and blessing, when none will die except such as 
sin wilfully against that light and favor. Yet in all 
our requests we cannot ask otherwise than as the 
Master did, saying— Nevertheless not my will but thine 
be done. And it should be the aim and patient endeavor 
of each parent to bring his children as nearly as 
possible to the proper point of full consecration— the 
reasonable service of all. 

[TO BE CONTINUED IN OUR NEXT.] 



R2010 :page 170 

GOD'S PROMISES TO DAVID. 

-JULY 26.-2 Sam. 7:4-16.- 

Golden Text— "In thee, O Lord, do Iputmy trust."— Psa. 71:1. 

DAVID was now fairly settled and prosperous 
in his kingdom, and the nation was enjoying 
a season of rest and peace; the people were united, the 
Ark was in Jerusalem and the religious zeal of the nation 
was revived. For all these blessings David was 
grateful; and, desiring to give some tangible expression 
of his gratitude, he thought of the Ark of God, the 
symbol of the divine presence, dwelling in a movable 
tent or tabernacle while he himself dwelt in a house of 
cedar; and he therefore conceived the thought of utilizing 
the present seemingly favorable opportunity for 
erecting a house for the Lord where the symbol of his 
presence might abide continually. 

With this thought in mind, David consulted 
with the prophet Nathan, who encouraged him to carry 
out his noble purpose. Both men desired to render supreme 
honor and reverence to the Lord and thought 
the time to do so had come. In this, however, they 
were mistaken, as God showed Nathan that night, saying, 
"Go and tell my servant David," etc. 



God showed David that his time for the erection of 
the more permanent residence had not yet come, and 
that he had given no command to that effect yet, nor 
inquired, "Why build ye not me a house of cedar?" 
etc. (Vs. 7.) Although for a time the nation was enjoying 
a season of rest and peace, there was yet much to 
be done in the way both of conquest and of organization, 
which would of necessity interfere with the proposed 
work; besides which, the nation must not consider 
itself so firmly established in the land of promise, 
until first, according to the divine direction, they had 
taken full possession and subdued their enemies. When 
they had done this, they might consider themselves 
settled, and build for the Lord a more permanent 
residence. 

It was further shown that this work of preparation 
would require the entire period of David's reign; but 
the assurance was given to David that his purpose was 
appreciated and that, though God's time had not yet 
come, nor would it come in David's time, yet his son 
and successor should build the house and should enjoy 
a peaceful and prosperous reign, while David was permitted 
to prepare the way for it, both by gathering and 
preparing the materials for its construction, and also by 
subduing their enemies and ordering the affairs of the 
kingdom. This was the work to which David was appointed: 
he was necessarily a man of war, although a 
lover of peace. 

In this promise concerning the prosperous reign of 
David's son and heir to his throne, it is plain that there 
was more implied than was ever fulfilled in Solomon. 
True, the reign of Solomon was one of unprecedented 
prosperity and he did build the house of the Lord; but 
his kingdom did come to an end, the glory departed, 
the temple perished, whereas the promise to David was, 
"Thine house and thy kingdom shall be established 
forever before thee: thy throne shall be established 
forever."— Verse 16. 

The fact is that the promise or prophecy was of 
twofold application, referring only partially to Solomon 

R2010 :page 171 

and the temple which Solomon was to build, but ultimately 

to David's greater Son and Lord, our Lord Jesus 

Christ, whose kingdom is indeed an everlasting kingdom 

and of whose dominion there shall be no end, and 

also to that glorious spiritual temple, the gospel Church, 

exalted and glorified with her Head, toward which all 

the world shall worship during the Millennial reign. 

The reign of David, the man of war, prefigured the preparatory 

work of this Gospel age— the struggles of 

God's people against the oppositions of sin, the preparation 

of the living stones for the spiritual temple; 

while the reign of Solomon represented the glorious 

reign of Christ and the wealth and wisdom and peace and 



prosperity which shall characterize it. 

The purpose of David to build a house for the Lord 
which should surpass in magnificence the king's palace 
and every other structure, and thus be an expression 
on the part of the people of their supreme reverence 
for him and the symbol of his presence, and the Lord's 
sanction and subsequent execution of the generous purpose, 
are often referred to to-day in justification of the 
large outlay of the church's means in elegant church 
buildings and furnishments. But apparently the matter 
did not appear so to the apostles and the early 
Church; for they met from house to house and in upper 
rooms and erected no church buildings: they only 
sought some convenient place for simple accommodation. 
Nor do the sacred records give a single intimation 
that it is the duty of the church to provide in various 
localities elegant buildings with lofty steeples, chiming 
bells, grand organs, upholstered pews, stained 
windows, with elegant pulpit orators and trained 
choirs. 

Nor do the temple structure and furnishment 
afford any precedent in justification of these things to-day. 
The Jewish age was a typical age; its temple and 
all its appointments were types of the higher spiritual 
things to come; the typical Ark which rested in the typical 
temple was a symbol of the divine presence in the 
midst of his future spiritual Israel; and the typical 
shadows pass away when the realities come. 

It is very manifest, moreover, that the church 
buildings of to-day are more for pride and show, and 
to attract and hold the rich and influential, and to repel 
the poor, than to glorify God in any way. Let us not 
be deceived with the vain pretensions of earthly glory; 
but, shunning these things, let us remember that wherever 
two or three are met together in the Lord's name, 
that is the house of God, and there his glory is seen 
and felt. -John 4:23,24; Matt. 18:20. 



R2010 :page 171 

DAVID'S KINDNESS. 

-AUGUST 2.-2 Sam. 9:1-13.- 

Golden Text— "Be kindly affectioned one 
to another with brotherly love."— Rom. 12:10. 

IN considering the incident of this lesson we are reminded 

of the words of the Apostle James (5: 10) 

—"Take, my brethren, the prophets who have spoken 

in the name of the Lord, for an example." What examples 

they present— of faith, humility, meekness, 

obedience, patience, endurance, brotherly kindness, 

love. We call to mind Moses' devotion to God and his 



cause, his tireless zeal and loving ministry through long 
years of extreme trial; we mark also the obedient faith 
of Abraham, of Jacob, of Samuel, of David, and of all 
the noble list of ancient worthies who fought the good 
fight of faith with unabated energy to the end of their 
course. While we consider these worthy examples of 
loyalty and faithfulness to God and to his truth and 
righteousness, we remember that these characters were 
developed under only the moonlight of the law-dispensation; 
and, in this view of the matter, reason suggests 
what the Apostle Peter also calls attention to,— "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness?" (2 Pet. 3:11)— we who are the 
recipients of the much more abundant grace of this 
gospel dispensation? 

The kindness of David, to which attention is directed 
in this lesson, is another mark of a noble character. 
David was now well established and prosperous 
in his kingdom. The way to it since his anointing had 
been a rough and stormy one; and in one of the seasons 
of severest trial the remarkable friendship between himself 
and Jonathan, Saul's son, was thoroughly proved 
and strongly cemented. And while Jonathan freely 
submitted to the will of God which intercepted his own 
succession to the throne of Israel and gave it to David, 
he desired and received of David the assurance that 
when he should be thus established in his kingdom he 
should always show kindness to him and his posterity. 
See 1 Sam. 20:14-17. 

When the days of his prosperity came at length, 
years after Jonathan had gone to his rest, David, remembering 
his covenant, began to inquire if there were 
yet any left of the house of Saul to whom he might 
show the kindness of God. He found but one, the only 
surviving son of his friend Jonathan, and upon him 
he lavished the affection and kindness which it would 
have been his pleasure to bestow upon Jonathan himself, 
had he survived. Gratefully he remembered the 
love of his friend, and lovingly he endeavored to requite 
it to the extent of his ability. 

There is really no more worthy trait to adorn a 
righteous character than that of gratitude. It is gratitude 
that returns to God that filial affection which is 
due from the creature to the Creator. It is gratitude 
that encourages and sweetens the cup of loyal devotion 
between friend and friend. It is always the due reward 
of loving service and especially of self-sacrificing service, 
though it is not always the reward rendered. The 
spirit of the world is, alas! so far removed from this 
that even loving and self-sacrificing service is more frequently 
rewarded with cold, thankless indifference, and 
not seldom with reproachfulness or persecution. Those 
therefore who will live godly and cultivate the graces 
of a godly character must not be disappointed in failing 
of their reward here, and in meeting the rebuffs that 
are sure to come to them in the line of duty. Let them 



duly appreciate their opportunity of proving their devotion 

R2011 :page 171 

to righteousness and truth by taking patiently 

and bearing with humble fortitude whatever of reproach 

R2011 :page 172 

or ingratitude may be the present reward, content to 
await God's time and God's way for giving to righteousness 
its due reward. Such overcomers who count not their 
lives dear unto them are of the David (beloved) class. 

The golden text of this lesson needs no comment 
except the exhortation that we should each more and 
more endeavor to put it in practice, and to see that with 
each passing year we are able to note some degree of 
advancement in this element of godlikeness, not 
overlooking that sure proof of brotherly love mentioned 
in the last clause— "in honor preferring one another;" 
remembering also the similar counsel of the same apostle 
on another occasion— "In lowliness of mind let each 
esteem others better than themselves." (Phil. 2:3.) 
If we merely say that we love one another and yet pursue 
a steady course of self-seeking, wherein is the love 
manifest? Let us not love in word only, but in deed 
and in truth.— 1 John 3:18. 



R2011 :page 172 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I had a very enjoyable meeting with 
the brethren at Rapid City, including Brother Zink. At Shoal Lake I 
had one public meeting, when I gave a two hours' explanation of the chart. 

I was specially pleased with the brethren at Shoal Lake on account 
of the plain improvement in their characters. Once before I mentioned 
to you a noted infidel of a most blasphemous character who had come 
into the truth. It was just grand to see the gentleness and humbleness 
which have taken possession of this former blasphemer. Whilst I heard 
him talk, I felt all the time like shouting, "Hallelujah! what a Savior!" 

Your Brother in the Lord, W. HOPE HAY. 



Massachusetts. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Enclosed I send my report. I have closed 
my labor here, and return home to-morrow. 

Perhaps it would be interesting to see how I sum up my work. 
I have been here just 16 weeks. Population of the district worked is 
about 50,000. I rented a furnished room for $1.00 per week— a small 



hall room, in front, up two flights, in center of city, two electric lights 
from the street shine into my one window, a very pleasant room. 

Cash on hand, $7.30 Expenses, $32.27 

289 books sold, 116.60 

Sent home, 20.00 

Total Receipts, 123.90 Paid for books, 49.16 

Outlay, 101.43 



Balance on hand, $22.47 Total outlay, $101.43 

Besides the above $22.47 in cash, I have on hand 6 cloth, 22 leatherette 
and 44 paper bound DAWNS. 

Already, as a fruit of my labor, two have come out quite clear and 
are engaged in preaching the gospel whenever they have the opportunity, 
besides which a number are reading with interest. 

Let us pray that more laborers may be sent into the vineyard. 
Yours truly, GEO. KELLOGG. 

[The above letter gives some idea of the self-denial practised by 
some of the colporteurs, in order that they may thrust in the sickle of 
truth ere the harvest is past; and our Brother has been well rewarded 
for his labor, for the peace of God has kept his heart and mind, and he 
found many ready to listen to the glad tidings. In addition to the regular 
colporteur work, he has done considerable "weeding" to remove 
prejudice and induce candid study, and has also "watered" the seed 
which gave evidence of having taken root. 

We are sure all the friends of the truth will join his prayer and ours 
for more laborers. "He that reapeth receiveth wages [even in the present 
time— joy, peace, and the pleasure of seeing the joy of others], and 
gathereth fruit unto eternal life." Let us all be faithful and zealous in 
doing what our hands find to do. EDITOR.] 



Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I notice what you say in a late TOWER 
concerning our Lord's words to the thief, "Verily, I say to you to-day, 
thou shalt be with me in paradise," and in addition suggest the following: 

Grammatically, "to-day" is an adverb of time; and the question arises, 
Does it qualify the verb preceding or succeeding it? i.e., Is it "say 
to-day" or "shalt be to-day?" In this and all kindred cases we must be 
guided by the sense or context. Now we have several parallel grammatical 
constructions to this. 

Note Deut. 8:19. "I testify against you this day that ye shall 
surely perish." Mark that the translators did not punctuate this at all. 
Why did they punctuate Luke's passage? The context here shows the adverb 
of time, "this day," to qualify the preceding verb, "testify;" i.e., 
the testimony is given this day, and not they would perish this day; for 
they were to go on trial as to their walk, etc. 

Deut. 15:15 is another fitting example of qualifying a preceding 
verb. Also Deut. 30:16— "In that I command thee this day to love 
the Lord thy God," etc. And why did not the translators punctuate this 
as well as the passage in Luke? Does it not seem as if the translators 
expressed a preconceived idea by their use of the comma? Would it 
not have been better unpunctuated, as they left the other passages? 



In evidence that the translators had a preconceived idea about our 
Lord's words to the thief and that it was not because they lacked grammatical 
knowledge on this point of an adverb qualifying a verb preceding 
it, see Acts 26:29— "And Paul said, I would to God, that not only 
thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost," etc. The 
Apostle surely did not mean, I wish you were like me for this one day, 
but I wish that all who hear me this day were like me, Christians, consecrated 
even unto death. 

Then our Lord said to the Jews, and later to his disciples, "Where 
I go ye cannot come." Then why should it be thought that he would 
take the thief with him? 

I would like your opinion on Jno. 5:39— "Search the Scriptures." 
I do not understand this to be a command. The context to me seems 
to convey this idea: Jesus referred to a few witnesses regarding himself— 
verse 31, his own testimony, a true one; verse 32, "another" true one; 
verse 33, you sent to John, and he also testified of me; verse 36, greater 
than John's testimony, the works; verse 37, the Father also, but, of 
course, you have never heard his voice nor seen his form, but that would 
not matter if you only had his word remaining in you. Why, see here, 
you search the Scriptures because you think by them to obtain everlasting 
life and these very Scriptures you are searching also testify of me. 
Thus our Lord's words were more of reproach than command or 
invitation. Yours in our Redeemer, F. B. UTLEY. 

[We agree that the last suggestion was probably the intent of our 
Lord's utterance; but it is undoubtedly the duty as well as well as the 
privilege of the sons of God to search and study their Father's Word,— that 
they may know all that he would reveal to them. The entire suggestion 
above is good and interesting. EDITOR] 



page 173 
VOL. XVII. AUGUST 1, 1896. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 174 

The Inspiration and Authority of 

Holy Scripture 175 

Poem: O Heart, Be Strong! 177 

Restitution, Faith Cures (Continued) 177 

"Mind Healing" and "Christian 

Science" 177 

Keep the Mind Pure 180 

Bible Study: David's Victories 181 

Bible Study: David's Confession 

and Forgiveness 182 

page 174 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



A VERY SPECIAL OFFER ON "TEACHERS' BIBLES." 



The agents for the Bagster Bible propose that hereafter they will 
publish them in the United States. With this in view they have sold us 
a large lot of their English publication at very low prices. We offer our 
subscribers the advantage;— new subscribers may have the same privilege. 

We can supply you the Comprehensive Teacher's Bible, size 13 x 
9-1/2 in. when open, with concordance, index, Bible atlas, etc., etc. 
This is the No. 83 15 (Minion type), the retail list price of which was 
$3.30, and which in our price list was $1.90. We can now offer it for 
$1.25, plus 22 cents postage. (French Seal, round corners, divinity 
circuit, red under gilt edges.) 

We have another specialty, still better, as far as binding is concerned. 



It is an American "Oxford" Teachers' Bible, complete in every respect. 
It has an additional feature not possessed by the English Oxford; namely, 
in it the proper names are syllabled and accented, much to the readers' 
convenience. Its list retail price is $4.00. We can supply it, by special 
arrangement of a large purchase, at $1.75, postage 25 cents. This Bible 
has much larger type than usual for its size (13 x 9-1/2 in. when open). 
The type is known as Bourgeois. The binding is Imperial Seal— divinity 
circuit, linen lined, round corners, red under gold edges. The 
leather of this would probably be more durable than that of the Bagster 
mentioned above. With Patent Index, 50 cents more. 



R2012:page 175 

THE INSPIRATION AND AUTHORITY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.* 



"THE Inspiration of Holy Scripture, and therefore 
its Divine authorship and authority, lies at the 
root and foundation of true Christianity— not only in 
its relation to infidelity, but also in its relation to the 
Romish controversy. 

"It was the one great question which underlay all 
others at the Reformation. For, what was the Reformation 
in its essence? Was it not just the abandonment 
of human authority for Divine authority? Was 
it not all contained in this— the giving up of the authority 
of the church for the authority of the Word of God? 

"Hence, the Reformers, on the one hand, diligently 
translated, established and disseminated the Scripture; 
while Rome, on the other hand, has always been 
the enemy of the Scripture, hiding it from the people 
for centuries, using the tortures of the Inquisition to 
crush it out, afterwards by authorizing a Bible of her 
own (the Latin Vulgate), and finally making and sending 
forth her own translations of it, in the form of what 
are known as Roman Catholic, or Vulgate, versions. 
In the preface to her English version of the Vulgate, 
known as the Douay Bible, she distinctly declares what 
her object was in making these various translations. 
It was not that Rome had changed, not because she had 
repented of her sin in hiding the Bible; or of her crime 
in crushing it, by torturing its readers; but because 
it has ever been her policy to adapt herself to circumstances. 
The policy which to-day leads her to publish 
cheap editions of it in some countries, is the same policy 
by which she burns them in others. 

"These are her own words from the preface to the 
English translation of the Latin Vulgate:— 

'"We do not publish [this translation] upon the 
erroneous opinion of necessity that the Holy Scriptures 
should always be in our mother tongue, or that they 
ought, or were ordained by God, to be read indifferently 
of all. ...Not for these or any such like causes 



do we translate this book, but upon special consideration 
of the present time, state, and condition of our 
country; unto which divers things are either necessarie 
or profitable, or medicinable now, that otherwise the 
peace of the church were neither much requisite, nor 
perchance wholly intolerable. Now since Luther's revolt 
also, divers learned Catholics, for the more speedy 
abolishing of a number of false and impious translations 
put forth by sundry sects, and for the better preservation 
and reclaime of many good souls endangered 
thereby, have published the Bible in the several languages 
of almost all the principal provinces of the Latin 
Church, no other bookes in the world being so pernicious 
as heretical translations of the Scripture, poisoning 
people under colour of Divine authoritie; and not 
many other remedies being more soveraine against the 
same (if it be used in order, discretion, and humilitie) 
than the true, faithful, and sincere interpretation opposed 
thereunto.' 

"This vast divergence as to 'poison' and 'antidote' 
gave rise, in due course, to two great questions— viz., 
The CANON of Scripture, and the INSPIRATION of 
Scripture. 

"If Rome's Text (the Papal Latin Vulgate) be the true 
one, then the Protestant Canon is wrong; and if her Versions 
of it be correct, then Inspiration is done away with. 

"Inspiration is therefore essentially a Protestant 
question— one which must be met and fought on the 
highest grounds. 

"The teachings of Luther, Erasmus, and other 
Reformers, on Inspiration were met by the Jesuits at 
the very outset. In 1586, Leonard Less and John Hamel, 
of the University of Louvain, put forth three propositions:— 
(1) That it is not necessary that each word 
should be inspired. (2) It is not necessary that each 
truth or doctrine should be inspired by the Holy Spirit 
in the writers. (3) Any book (e.g., 2 Maccabees) 
written by human industry without the assistance of 
the Holy Spirit (if the Holy Spirit afterwards testifies 



*A Paper read at the "National Protestant Congress," in London, 
by Rev. E. R. BALLINGER. 

R2012:page 176 

that there is nothing false in it), it becomes Holy 
Scripture. 

"Here we see the Satanic hand working by those 
Jesuits, and we see it working down to this present 
day, in all the varied attacks on inspiration. 

"These three propositions were submitted by the 
Archbishop of Cambray and Mechlin to the Universities 
of Douai and Louvain. Being condemned by these, 
the Jesuits appealed to the Sorbonne and also to the 



Universities of Treves and Mayence. They also forwarded 
a copy to the General of their Order, at Rome. 

"The dispute was terminated by an 'Apostolic 
Brief,' dated April 15th, 1588, in which Pope Sixtus V. 
enjoined silence on all parties until the affair should be 
decided by the Holy See! 

"That is just where the matter remains till to-day! 

"Rome has never broken the silence which she enjoined, 
and this great question, so far as she is concerned, 
rests exactly where she left it in 1588. 

"But the Reformers did not keep silence. The 
celebrated Dr. William Whitaker, the Regius Professor 
of Divinity, and Master of St. John's College, Cambridge, 
publicly lectured on this important subject, and 
in that same year (1588) published his famous work on 
The Disputation of Holy Scripture. He introduces the 
subject in the following weighty words:— 

'"If ever any heretics have impiously outraged 
the Holy Scripture of God, we may justly rank the papists 
of our time with this class of men who pervert 
things the most sacred. For, not to mention how insultingly 
most of them speak, and how meanly they 
think of the Scriptures,. ..there are especially 
six opinions concerning Scripture which they now hold 
and obstinately defend that are eminently absurd, heretical, 
and sacrilegious.' 

THE SIX POINTS CONCERNING ROME AND THE BIBLE. 



"1. The first concerns the CANON— i.e., the number 
of the canonical and truly inspired books of Scripture 
which is affected by Rome's addition of the Apocryphal 
and other spurious books. 

"2. The second concerns the ORIGINAL TEXT, by 
which the Hebrew and Greek are put aside in favor of 
the Latin Vulgate, which was authorized by the Council 
of Trent in 1542. ...Thus Rome exchanged 
gold for brass, preferred the work of man to the work 
of God, and chose a polluted cistern to the pure water 
of life.*... 

"3. The third concerns the AUTHORITY of the 
Scripture, by making it to depend on the authority of 
the Church, saying that the Scripture is no Scripture 
to us if the church did not give it its authority. What 
the word 'Church' exactly means in this connection 
has never yet been defined. The Church of England, 
on the contrary, has declared (Art. xx.) that 'the 
Church is the witness and keeper of Holy Writ'— not 
its gaoler or its authority. 

"4. The fourth concerns INTERPRETATION of the 
Scriptures. Rome complains of the incredible obscurity 
of the Scriptures, not for the purpose of rousing 
men to diligence in studying them, but to bring the 
Scriptures into hatred and contempt. She refers to 



2 Pet. 1:20, and says that as the Scripture did not come 

from man but from God, therefore it is too obscure and 

too dangerous to be read by private individuals. 

True, the Scripture did come from God, but the previous 

verse (19) says it is a light in a dark place to 

which we do well to take heed! How many so-called 

Protestants fall into Rome's snare and read these words 

as though they were written 'prophecy is a dark place 

which we do well to avoid!' But notice that PETER 

is the apostle whom God has chosen to speak most clearly 

on these two great points: (1) concerning the inspiration 

and importance of the written Word (1 Pet. 1:10,11,23,25; 

2:2; 2 Pet. 1:19-21), and (2) concerning 

Christ as the Rock, the one and only foundation 

of his people's salvation.— 1 Pet. 2:4-8; 

Acts 4:1 1,12. 

"5. The fifth concerns the Scripture as the final 
APPEAL on all matters of controversy. Rome refuses 
to have controversies decided by the Scripture. Instead 
of saying, 'To the law and to the testimony,' 
she says, To the Pope and the Church.' She will 
have only one court of appeal, and that is at Rome. 

"6. The sixth concerns TRADITION, by which 
the Word of God is made of none effect. Rome declares 
that the Scriptures are incomplete without the 
innumerable unwritten traditions of the church, of 
which she is the sole depositary. 

"These are the six 'monstrous errors of the papists,' 
as Dr. Whitaker calls them. He so ably refuted 
them from the Scripture, the Fathers, the Schoolmen' 
and classic Romish authors, that even his great 
adversary, Bellarmine, procured a portrait of him, which 
he kept in his study, as an enemy for whom he had the 
profoundest respect and admiration. 

"These six points embrace and cover the ground 
of the whole controversy. They were the battlefield 
of the Reformation, and the Protestant victory is summed 
up in the words of Article VI. of the Church of 
England,— 

'"Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary 
to salvation; so that whatsoever is not read therein, 
nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any 
man, that it should be believed as an article of the 



*We cannot agree to this criticism as a whole. Our English 
common version Bible is translated from the Latin Vulgate and holds 
its own very well when compared with the oldest Greek and Hebrew 
MSS., recently found. It deserves our respect; if for no other reason, 
because God has been pleased to use it, in sending his gospel message 
over the world. But the originals are what we desire, or translations 
as near to them and their purity as we can obtain. 

R2013 :page 176 



Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation.' 

"Any one of these six points is vital to the whole 
of Reformation Truth. 

"Thus the attitude of Rome towards the Bible is 
clear. As to any theory of Inspiration she is dumb, 
and has herself preserved the silence she has enjoined 
on others. As to the Bible itself, there is nothing she 
so abominates, and nothing that she so fears. She will 
burn it or translate it, authorize it or forbid it, destroy 
it or print it, condemn it or praise it, as it may suit her 
purpose. She may vary her treatment of it, but whatever 
form that treatment may take, its aim, object, 
and end is always one and the same— to make it of 
none effect!" 



The thoughtful reader will be struck with the fact 
that very many educated persons, called "Protestants," 

R2013 :page 177 

are rapidly taking the same view of the Scriptures here 
attributed to Papacy. The "Protestant" higher critics 
deny the inspiration of the Scriptures except in the same 
sense that they themselves claim to be inspired— namely, 
by intelligence from education and not by a plenary inspiration 
by God's holy spirit exerted phenomenally. 

Protestants of all sects and parties state their faiths, 
but how few admit that "whatsoever is not read therein, 
or may be proved thereby, is not to be required of 
any man, that it should be believed as an article of 
faith, or thought requisite or necessary to salvation." 
Protestants have left or are leaving the Scriptures as 
the "divine authority," just as Romanists did in the 
dark ages. They too are now inclined to ask, What 
does our church teach? rather than What do the Scriptures 
teach? 



O HEART, BE STRONG! 



O heart, be strong, in God be strong; 
Lift up thy cry, lift up thy song; 
Pour out thy heavenly message sweet, 
Oh, bear it forth on beauteous feet; 
Cry the glad news from mountain height, 
Flash through the gloom thy flaming light, 
And to a listening world proclaim 
The saving power of Jesus' name. 

O heart, be strong, in God be strong, 
Thy suffering time will not be long; 



Sow on a little while in tears, 
Thy harvest is for endless years; 
Weep through the night, but soon the day 
Shall chase all grief and gloom away; 
And thou with songs of joy shalt come 
And enter thine eternal home. 

O heart, be strong, for on the throne 
God's only well beloved Son 
Sways the strong scepter of his might, 
And vanquishes the hosts of night. 
Lo, I am with you to the end, 
An ever present, mighty friend- 
All power is given into my hand, 
Go, and obey my high command. 

O heart, be strong, though countless foes 
Thy march resist, thy work oppose; 
Salvation's Captain fights for thee, 
He shall thy shield and buckler be; 
He shall lift up and shield thy head, 
While thou shalt on the serpent tread; 
And more than conqueror thou shalt be, 
Through Christ who gives the victory. 
— H.L. Hastings. 



R2013 :page 177 

RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

-(CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST.)- 

"MIND HEALING" AND "CHRISTIAN SCIENCE." 



That the power of the mind over the body is great 
no person of experience will dispute. Every intelligent 
physician knows that in about one-half of his cases he 
needs to treat the mind as much as the body of his 
patient, and that in such cases to hold the confidence 
of his patient is very necessary. Who has not heard 
of the conscientious physician who in many cases administered 
bread-pills with strict orders as to proper 
food, drink and clothing, and thus had great success? 

Every wise general has recognized the necessity 
of having the minds of his soldiers cheerfully employed, 
as promotive of general health. To this end sentimental 
music is prohibited in the army in time of war, and 
cheery and martial airs are commanded. 

It has long been observed that where an infectious 
disease breaks out and becomes pestilential, those most 
afraid of it, whose minds dwell on the disease and dread 



it most, are the most subject to it, and most likely to 

have it in a violent form. The story has been often 

told of the college professor whose class in a joke experimented 

upon him, and put him into bed sick for 

several days, by some five of them meeting him at various 

places on his way from home to the school and 

each succeeding one emphasizing more than the former 

that he looked unwell, in fact sick, and should return 

home at once. 

It is a well known fact that French scientists 
were some years ago granted several prisoners condemned 
to death, to experiment with as they chose. 
One was placed in a cell in which a man had just died 
from cholera, but was not told of the fact and was well 
the next day; another was placed in a clean cell, but 
told that the death from cholera had been in that cell 
and that he would surely take the disease; and he did 
take it, and died. Another of their experiments was, 
to bind and blindfold a prisoner and pass his hand and 
arm through a partition, telling him that scientists 
wanted to learn how long it would take to bleed to 
death from the cutting of one of the arteries of the arm. 
He prepared for the execution in this form and died in 
a few hours, though really the experiment was to learn 
how much effect fear would have, for the cut made in 

R2013 :page 178 

his arm was quite insignificant, and he lost only a few 
ounces of blood; the drip, drip, drip, which he could 
hear, and feel run down his arm, being a carefully arranged 
device of tepid water. He was mind-killed; he 
thought he had lost the blood, and exhaustion and 
death were the result. 

Who, that has observed, will not admit that to 
think about an ache or a pain will aggravate it? And 
if it will intensify pain to allow the mind to dwell 
upon it, is it not reasonable to believe that pain can be 
lessened, and a cure expedited, by an exercise of the 
brain power in an opposite direction? The secret of how 
the mind operates upon disease undoubtedly lies in the 
fact that the brain is not only the seat of all thought, but 
also of all feeling. It has communication with the entire 
person by its active messengers, the nerves. Consequently 
when a message of pain comes from wounded 
nerves, the brain has power either to soothe the 
wounded nerves and assist thus in allaying the pain, 
or, on the other hand, it has power, instead of healing, 
to spread a general alarm to the entire nervous system, 
and thus both to increase the pain and delay recovery. 
From that centre, the brain, all the nerves are directed 
and more or less controlled, as a factory is governed 
and directed from the manager's office. If we had no 
nerves, we could have no pain; and if we had the nerves 
even, and had no brain to which they could communicate 
their trouble, we could have no knowledge of pain. 



Hence we see that whether we shall suffer much pain 
depends not only upon the fineness, delicacy or sensitiveness 
of our nerves, but also upon the way in which 
our minds shall receive the appeals of our nerves— 
whether we magnify or minimize them. And yet, the 
full appreciation of the mental powers of human beings, 
and how best to make use of them, evidently belongs 
further along. In the full sunlight of the Millennial 
day this will doubtless be one of the prominent agencies 
of human restitution. 

But we should be on guard against a device of our 
enemy, who, taking advantage of this principle of restitution 
which must soon be far more widely recognized 
than at present, endeavors to use it as his balloon by 
which to lift into public notice doctrines and theories 
subversive of the doctrines of the Scriptures. We refer 
now, specially, to what is deceptively termed "Christian 
Science." This entire system seems to be as fraudulent 
and deceptive as its name, though we admit that 
some honest souls are possibly to be found among its 
advocates, having been deceived and misled by it. By 
reason of the gross misrepresentations of God's character 
and plans by so-called Orthodoxy, some, in groping 
for something better, have fallen into this snare of 
Satan, as others have been ensnared into Infidelity, 
Spiritism, Theosophy, etc. 

There is nothing Christian about "Christian Science." 
It is against Christ and against the truths which Christ 
and his apostles taught. It is emphatically anti-Christian 
in its tendencies. But it acknowledges Christ, 

R2014:page 178 

says one. Yes, we answer, so did the devils when they 
had an object in so doing. (Matt. 8:29; Acts 16:17; 
19:15.) Spiritists also acknowledge Christ, claiming 
that he was an eminent medium. And so these 
Christian Scientists use his name to deceive, if possible, 
the very elect, claiming that our Lord was one of them 
—a Christian Scientist who did very well all things 
considered, but who did not understand the Science so 
well as its present exponents, who are ladies, and whose 
finer sensibilities were requisite to a full appreciation 
of the unfathomable depths of this science. 

Candor compels us to remark that few Christian 
people recognize the meaning of the word Christian. 
It is not like the word Lutheran or Wesleyan: the secret 
force lies in the meaning of the Greek word Christ, 
which corresponds to the Hebrew word Messiah, and is 
a title rather than a name. It signifies, one Anointed 
by Jehovah as his agent, to accomplish the promised 
deliverance and blessing of mankind. All this was and 
is understood by the Jew as the import of the title Messiah, 
and should be recognized as the meaning of the 
corresponding word Christ by all true Christians. 

"Christian Science" expounders, however, very 



far from believing in or expecting any deliverance 
through our Lord Jesus, the Christ, see nothing from 
which to deliver mankind, except perhaps delusions of 
pain, etc. They deny entirely any atonement for sin, 
and in fact deny any original sin to make necessary a 
ransom-sacrifice, such as the Scriptures teach. And 
not only do they thus deny the Lord's work already 
accomplished, but they deny any future work to be done 
by him as the Millennial King. They deny that he did 
anything at his first advent except to teach their science, 
and that very imperfectly as compared with what 
they could have done,— especially as compared with 
what the self-styled "Rev." Mrs. Eddy, their Boston 
leader and teacher, would have done. 

But do not "Christian Scientists" claim to believe 
the Bible? some one suggests; and do they not quote 
from it frequently? Yes, certainly, that is a part of 
their garment of light, by which they deceive some of 
the children of the light. They quote Scripture much 
as Satan quoted it to our Lord in the temptation recorded 
in Matt. 4th chapter. But though they quote 
from the Bible, it is in an inconsistent manner and 
wholly out of its relation to the context, just as Satan 
did,— not to define God's plan, but to bolster up a theory 
which proves a snare to many not rooted and grounded 
in the truth. Such, not familiar with the general 
meaning of the passages quoted, too often do not take 

R2014:page 179 

the time to fully examine the context, but swallow the 
theory whole, presuming their teachers to be honest, 
and that the passages cited are correctly applied. 

So-called Orthodoxy (by the custom of its ministers 
to take texts from the Bible for all sorts of discourses, 
contrary to the meaning and intention of the 
writer) has laid the foundation for just such deceptions 
as these which are now shipwrecking the faith of so 
many. Indeed, we are distinctly shown that all but 
"the elect," a faithful few, will be misled by some of 
these various deceptive snares. But the "very elect," 
because fully consecrated to God, shall have light and 
help sufficient to prevent them from being deceived so 
as to fall into such errors. 

We are not criticizing Christian Science at length 
in this paper, for this we have already done in a former 
issue. We merely wish now to note that the truth on 
the subject of mental assistance to healing, presented 
above, already for many years recognized by all thinkers, 
though perhaps fully comprehended and appreciated, 
as yet, by none, is a very different thing from 
the claims of "Christian Scientists." The former is in 
perfect harmony with both reason and Scripture, while 
the latter violates both. 

In fact, we hold that the theories of these scientists (?) 
cannot have emanated from a sound brain, no 



matter how many sound minds may have been worked 
up to the point of belief in so unreasonable and unscientific 
a view of matters. We notice, too, that though 
they claim to believe that diseases and pains are not 
realities, but merely imaginations of the diseased minds, 
and curable by getting rid of such imaginations, yet 
when it comes to paying for this imaginary healing, 
imaginary dollars will not do. One might suppose that 
they would become so convinced of their theory that 
"All is mind, there is no matter; all is life, there is no 
death," etc., that they would consider hunger and thirst 
and weariness and money as mere imaginations, and 
disregard them; but not so: food, and dress, and rest, 
and especially money, are very real to them. For instance, 
a book to explain (?) their theory is only $3.00. 
And the services of those who, after hearing about 
twelve discourses, get a "diploma" to practice as "Christian 
Scientists," are never charged for in an imaginary 
manner, but at a good round figure in tangible money. 
All this is very different from the spirit and method of 
our Master, whose name they fraudulently adopt, to deceive 
and ensnare his followers. 

But does some one ask, What object could Satan 
have in getting up such a deception and delusion? We 
answer, It is one of the many efforts he is permitted to 
make now against the foundation of all true Christian 
faith-THE RANSOM. Of course "Christian Scientists" 
do not claim to deny the ransom; nor do any of the various 
no-ransom theories so claim. It is part of their deceptive 
policy to retain a form of sound words, while 
they are diligent and untiring in their efforts to subvert 
their real significance. And all errors seem to 
take this form, evidently inspired by the one great deceiver, 
the arch-enemy of the cross. They are all the 
more dangerous and deceptive because they do not 
deny the Bible openly, but underhandedly. They deny 
original sin and its penalty, and ignore the work of 
Christ as Redeemer. They do not, of course, deny that 
he died, but they do deny that he "gave himself a ransom 
[a corresponding price] for all;" for they deny 
that any price was required or paid. The following 
quotation from one of their prominent writers shows 
that they ignore Christ's redemptive work entirely, and 
substitute a principle of good as their deity. The 
writer says:— 

"We are growing into that state where human 
possibilities and powers expand to their ultimate limits, 
and are pushing on toward the divine development 
as sons and daughters of God." 

In this manner Satan would deceive the world into 
the belief that the restitution privileges and blessings, 
which he can not delay, are not results of God's 
time and order, nor brought about by our Lord's redemptive 
work at Calvary, and his second coming in 
power as the promised "Seed" to bless all the families 
of the earth, and to restore all things, as spoken by the 



mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began. 

(Acts 3:19-21.) He would offset and hinder as much 

as possible the proper effect of the coming blessings 

(viz., to lead mankind to appreciate and love their Redeemer 

and Restorer), by forestalling the effect of the 

coming restitution to the full perfection of human powers, 

and attributing them to a mere natural, human, 

mental "development" and "growing." 

This deception, as to the cause and source of the 
coming restitution, leading the mind away from the 
great work of Christ, first as Redeemer, and finally as 
Life-giver or Restorer, will be all the greater, because 
Satan thus adroitly mingles truth with error— a truth, 
too, more forcible far than the world and "Christian 
Scientists" generally conceive. The Millennial restitution 
will come about as a gradual development, expanding 
every good human quality to its ultimate limits 
(full restitution to all that was lost); and doubtless 
this will be accomplished very largely through the 
channel of faith and mental healing, guided by the 
Great Physician and his glorified Bride. 

The fact that Satan, the prince of death and sickness 
(Compare Heb. 2:14 and Luke 13:16), has adopted 
"mind cures" to draw the attention of the world 
and to keep them blinded (2 Cor. 4:4) proves that our 
great foe is put to straits to continue his hold upon 

R2014:page 180 

mankind; for, as our Lord intimated, when Satan begins 
to cast out Satan, it is a sign that his kingdom is 
nearing its end and will soon fall. This agrees with 
what we know from other sources,— that Satan's triumph 
is limited; that he will soon be bound for a 
thousand years, that he may deceive the nations no more. 

KEEP THE MIND PURE. 

PROV. 4:23-27. 

Few recognize the influence of the mind over 
the body. God has so organized our beings that pure, 
noble, holy thoughts in general have not only an elevating 
and ennobling effect upon the mental and moral 
constitution, but an invigorating influence upon the 
physical system. And, on the contrary, every unclean, 
ignoble, unchaste, unholy thought (as well as act) has 
a direct effect not only toward debasement of mind and 
morals, but toward the germination of seeds of disease 
already in the constitution of all the fallen race. 

If this were more widely known and more fully 
recognized, it would be a great blessing to very many, 
and would tend to prevent much sickness among both 
young and old, and would sometimes explain why those 
whose hands and brains are busiest are often the most 
healthy and happy. "Keep thy heart [mind, will]; for out 



of it are the issues of life." These words should be deeply 
graved upon the tablet of memory by every person. 
They are words of wisdom. Their full import may not 
be recognized by many in the present time, but surely 
all must sooner or later learn it; for compliance with 
this rule is to be the arrangement by and under 
which, during Christ's Millennial reign, the world 
will be blessed. 

Mankind will be brought to a knowledge of the 
truth, and to an opportunity for restitution to full perfection 
by the great Redeemer, but in such a manner 

R2015 :page 180 

as to require them to strive against sin and impurity, 
and to strive for righteousness and perfection, which in 
response to their prayers and efforts the Life-giver will 
supply freely, having redeemed them from the Adamic 
condemnation for this very purpose of restoring the 
obedient to all that was lost in Adam's fall. 

It is a mistake to suppose, as many seem to do, that 
because our Lord Jesus paid the full price of our redemption 
from sin and death, therefore all the redeemed 
ones must be freed forever from condemnation and sin, 
as soon as the "times of Restitution" begin. On the 
contrary, when the world is awakened from the tomb 
it will be still under condemnation as sinners and unworthy 
of eternal life, and subject to the bondage of 
corruption (death). Its first step will be to learn of 
God's gracious provision in the ransom, by which, 
through Christ, they may escape sin and its penalty 
(corruption) and obtain the gift of life. That knowledge 
will develop either obedience and consecration to Christ 
and lead to its reward of gradual restitution to human 
perfection, or it will lead to a personal and wilful rejection 
of God's grace and the merging of their sentence 
from Adamic death to Second death. Our Lord's sacrifice 
atoned for and is applicable to only the sin of Adam 
and its wide spread results. Hence it covers only those 
sins which result from weaknesses within ourselves and 
evil and temptation surrounding us, which our hearts 
(wills) do not consent to nor approve when we come to 
know the right and wrong in God's sight. 

As soon as we come to a clear apprehension of our 
provided redemption, and into harmony with its conditions, 
we may consider ourselves "saved" from the 
Adamic condemnation and restored to divine favor, 
though the time for actual restoration to the blessings 
secured is at the close of the Gospel age. This is true 
of the elect Church now, and will be true of the world 
in the next age. The actual attainment of the privileges 
and blessings of restitution provided for all by 
God, through our Redeemer, and to be freely offered 
(in the coming age) to all, will not be attained except 
by the desire and effort of the human will; just as the 
saints of this age must watch and strive and pray, to 



win the prize of the new nature now offered. 

As soon as we know and accept of Christ's redemption 
work, we may reckon ourselves free from all condemnation 
on Adam's account, or traceable to his failure; 
and then, at that moment of knowledge, the individual 
trial of each human being begins; and by his 
efforts as well as his prayers he shows his desire for a life 
of holiness and purity and fellowship with God. And 
to such the Lord is pleased to extend his favor and 
every needed aid, bringing them ultimately to full perfection 
and to the enjoyment of all the privileges lost 
by wilful sin in Eden. And every sin and impurity, 
every unholiness, every dishonesty of thought or act 
will react upon the evil-doer, bringing with it a heavy 
toll of interest; and, if persisted in, it will prove such 
a one unworthy of the everlasting life of holiness and 
purity. This, the only everlasting life which God has 
offered or will grant, will be given only to those who, 
when brought to a full knowledge of all the facts, shall 
so desire a life of holiness as to strive against sin and 
impurity in every form. 

And while this principle will apply specially to 
mankind during the Millennium, it is also a principle 
with the saints in the present time. Purity, chastity, 
holiness of heart (of mind), belong to our consecration, 
—to be copies of God's dear Son, our Lord, who was 
holy, harmless, unde filed. Wherefore:— 

"Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it 
are the issues of life." (Prov. 4:23.) "Blessed are 
the pure in heart; for they shall see God.— Matt. 5:8. 

"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things 
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever 
things are of good report,... think on these things." 
-Phil. 4:8. 

[TO BE CONTINUED.] 



R2015 :page 181 

DAVID'S VICTORIES. 

-AUGUST 9.-2 SAM. 10:8-19.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord is my light and my 
salvation; whom shall I fear?"— Psa. 27:1. 

WHILE it is true that David's reign was largely 
a succession of wars, with only occasional 
intermissions of peace, it should be noticed that these 
wars were not aggressive wars, or wars for conquest, 
but that they were always defensive. While David's 
policy toward the surrounding nations was wise and 
kind, they were not so disposed toward Israel. They 



were jealous of Israel's growing power and prosperity, 
and thus prompted, they made the attacks which David 
must of necessity repel as a loyal and patriotic servant 
of the Lord's people. The disposition of those nations 
was to exterminate or drive out the Lord's chosen 
people, and therefore the only righteous course for 
David to pursue was to fight. 

While it is written, "Blessed are the peacemakers; 
for they shall be called the children of God," it is also 
written, "Blessed be the Lord, my strength, which 
teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight." 
The suggestion is plainly that there is such a thing as 
an ignoble peace,— a peace which comes from indifference 
to the principles of righteousness and truth, a 
peace dearly bought and ignobly maintained. But, on 
the other hand, it should be remembered that no battle 
is a righteous battle except when the Lord gives 
strength and teaches our hands to war and our fingers 
to fight, when the battle is the Lord's battle, for the 
maintenance of his honor, the establishment of the principles 
of his righteousness and the protection of his 
cause and his people. Under the typical Jewish dispensation 
this was done, properly, with carnal weapons; 
but under the dispensation of the spirit of God we are 
instructed that "the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, 
but [nevertheless, they are] mighty to the pulling 
down of strongholds." (2 Cor. 10:4.) And happy is 
the man who can always realize that the Lord's strength 
and skill are given to him while, with heroic Christian 
fortitude as a good soldier of the cross, he goes forth to 
fight the good fight of faith against the powers of darkness 
strongly intrenched on every side. Thus, indeed, 
he may win the reward promised to the overcoming 
soldiers of the cross (Rev. 2:7,11,17,26,28; 3:5,12,21), 
and also the blessing that is sure to the peacemaker; 
for the glorious peace that is won by the good 
fight of faith is a blessed peace, a peace resting on the 
sure foundations of the eternal principles of right. But 
beware, O Christian, that you never go to the battle 
without the assurance that the battle is the Lord's. 
Like David's, let your inquiry be, Lord, shall I go up to 
the battle? (1 Sam. 23:2,4; 30:7,8; 2 Sam. 5:18,19,22,23), 
and then, like him, wait for the answer in 
the assurance that the battle is the Lord's. 

To all who are thus in the conflict, nobly contending 
—by their words, their actions and their general conduct 
—for truth and righteousness, against all who oppose 
themselves, we would say in the words of Joab to 
the hosts of Israel, "Be of good courage, and let us play 
the men for our people and for the cities of our God: 
and the Lord do that which seemeth him good." (Verse 12.) 
If the battle is the Lord's, it is sure to be victorious. 
"Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." 

While the wars of David were not undertaken for 
conquest or plunder, but in defense of God's people, 
they nevertheless resulted in the enlargement of their 



territory, so that now, for the first time, was fulfilled 
the promise made to Abraham (Gen. 15:18), that his 
seed should possess the land from the river of Egypt to 
the Euphrates. The spoils taken from their enemies were 
also very great. There were shields of gold and vessels of 
silver, gold and copper. These were dedicated to the Lord, 
and reserved for the temple that Solomon was to build. 

While noting the justice of the wars of David and 
the spirit of religious zeal in which he undertook them, 
his reverence for God and his high sense of justice were 
usually very marked in even the little things of his life. 
For instance, when he was hidden in the cave of Adullum, 
with the enemies, the Philistines, encamped near 
by, and he thirsted greatly for water, so that three of 
his captains at the risk of their lives broke through the 
ranks of the Philistines and procured water for the king, 
David refused to drink it, saying, "God forbid it me: 
...Shall I drink the blood of these men that have 
put their lives in jeopardy." Such water he considered 
too costly to drink, so he poured it upon the ground as 
an offering to God. (2 Sam. 23:13-17; 1 Chron. 11:15-19.) 
Few indeed among the kings of earth would 
consider any sacrifice of their fellow-men too costly to be 
bestowed on them. They feel that they are the lords 
of creation, and proudly claim, as their right, the luxuries 
purchased at the sacrifice of the rights and privileges 
of their fellow-men whom they regard as inferior 
beings and only made to serve them. But it was not 
so with David, whose sober estimate of himself was that 
he was only a brother to every other man, and that to 
God only was supreme reverence and honor due. 

Another instance of David's lively sense of justice 
is that recorded in 1 Sam. 30:21-25, where David made 
an ordinance for Israel to the effect that those who in 
time of battle remained behind on account of physical 
weakness, or to guard the stuff, or the home, should 
share equally the spoils with those who went to the 

R2016 :page 181 

battle. The account is very explicit on this point. We 
read, "Then answered all the wicked men, the men of 
Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because 
they went not with us, we will not give them ought of 
the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his 
wife and children, that they may lead them away and 
depart. Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, 
with that which the Lord hath given us;... 
for who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as 
his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his 
part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike. 
And it was so from that day forward, that he made it 
a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day." 

This ordinance in Israel is the statement of a principle 
which has many applications. The wife, for instance, 
who cares for the home, should have an equal 



share with the husband, who, being relieved from such 
cares, has his time free to earn the money. They are 
rightfully "heirs together of the grace of life," as well 
as of the burdens of life. 

R2016 :page 182 

The golden text of this lesson suggests the proper 
frame of mind for all the Lord's people who are now 
fighting the good fight of faith. Though the situation may 
look dark and dangerous, and though foes may multiply 
and perplexities increase, it bids them fear not— "The 
Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? 
the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be 
afraid?" David said, "I had fainted, unless I had believed 
to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the 
living. Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and he 
shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord." 
-Psa. 27:1-14. 



R2016 :page 182 

DAVID'S CONFESSION AND FORGIVENESS. 

-AUGUST 16.-Psa. 32:1-11.- 

Golden Text— "Create in me a clean heart, O God; 
and renew a right spirit within me."— Psa. 51:10. 

IT is with a good degree of satisfaction that we write 
as the heading of this lesson, David's confession 
and forgiveness, when we consider that, had not the 
good that was in the man reasserted itself, we might 
have had to write, "David's unrepented fall and its 
fearful recompense." Thus far, in considering this notable 
character in Jewish history, we have been calling 
attention to those noble traits which marked him as a 
righteous, just, godly man— a man of high attainments, 
both morally and intellectually, and one whom God was 
pleased to honor and bless and to make a chosen instrument 
in his service. 

But with all his attainments, with all his wisdom, 
and skill, and sound judgment, and with all his humility 
and godly reverence, the poor fallen nature of even 
this great and good man succumbed to the temptations 
of abundant prosperity. It is hard to account for the 
fall of such a good man and of a character so strong in 
many respects as that of David; but one writer, we 
think, reasons on it very correctly, saying,— "In some 
natures, especially strong natures, both the old man 
and the new possess unusual vehemence; the rebellious 
energizings of the old are held in check by the still 
more resolute vigor of the new; but if it so happen that 
the opposition of the new man to the old is relaxed or 



abated, then the outbreak of corruption will be on a 
fearful scale." 

Evidently this fall of David into gross sin was not 
altogether sudden. There had been missteps leading 
up to it; and the process being gradual and each wrong 
thing searing the conscience more and more, the climax 
was reached almost imperceptibly, so that two, even of 
the basest crimes, were at length committed, apparently 
without any compunctions of conscience; and the sin 
was concealed unrepented of, although it was yielding 
its bitter fruit of restless remorse (Psa. 32:3,4), until 
Nathan the prophet was sent to awaken and arouse the 
man to a deep sense of his guilt and of the necessity of 
immediate repentance, confession and reformation. 
David had become so intoxicated with the spirit which 
generally attends power, popularity and great success 
that he evidently did not recognize his gradual moral 
decline. As a king his word was supreme among the 
people; all Israel waited to do his bidding; the greatest 
men in the nation were at his service; success had 
everywhere attended his energies on the field of battle; 
his kingdom was extended and very prosperous; but in 
the midst of all this success and exaltation lurked temptations 
subtle and dangerous which should have been 
guarded against with scrupulous care, and perseveringly 
resisted. 

As the chief magistrate of the nation few indeed 
were bold enough to be true to the king as to a brother 
in pointing out his errors and dangers: on the other 
hand, the tendency was, as it always is toward those in 
power, rather to endorse and imitate, than to wisely, 
kindly and respectfully reprove, remembering the highest 
interests of such a one in preference to any desire 
for his favor at the expense of those interests. While 
we mark with pleasure the noble traits in David's character, 
we must deplore the steps of his decline. He 
got to looking upon the privileges claimed by other 
kings about him as his privileges also, in a measure at 
least, and, contrary to the divine law (See Lev. 18:1-4,18 
margin; Deut. 17:14,17-20), he multiplied wives 
to himself. Then in his war with the Ammonites he 
resorted to unnecessary cruelty, not alone contented to 
conquer, but desiring thus ignobly to triumph over his 
foes. (Compare 1 Chron. 20:1-3; 2 Sam. 11.) Then 
his numbering of the people, contrary to the law of God 
and the counsel of his wisest men and the religious 
sense of the nation (See 1 Chron. 21:1), showed that 
a decline of piety was leading him to doubt the divine 
favor, and consequently to put his trust in numbers 
and equipments for defence, etc. (Jer. 17:5), rather 
than in God, whose favor and help could be experienced 
only while he continued to walk in the paths of 
righteousness. 

It was in the midst of this season of outward prosperity, 
yet decline of inward piety, that David succumbed 
to temptation and to the dreadful crime he 



committed against God and man. (2 Sam. 11:1-27.) 
Poor, fallen human nature! how weak it is, and how 
prone to sin, even at its best state! Truly, there is no 
safety from the power of sin except in a close and constant 
walk with God, and a resolute purpose to continually 
avoid and resist the intoxicating influences of the 
spirit of the world. To allow its pride or vain glory or 
desire for self-gratification to actuate us in any measure 
is to bring our moral perceptions to that extent under 
its stupefying influence. And when any one is intoxicated 
with the spirit of the world (which in large measure 
is the spirit of Satan), he will blindly do many things 
which in his sober senses he would shun and despise. 
So it was with David, a great and wise man, and, until 
this intoxication came upon him, a good man, and 
therefore beloved and highly honored of God, yet even 
he fell; and the previous height of his moral character 
makes all the more sad his decline and fall. 

Well indeed would it have been for David had he 
remembered the command of the Lord,— "And it shall 
be when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, 

R2016 :page 183 

that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book. 
...And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein 
all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the 
Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and 
these statutes to do them; that his heart be not lifted 
up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from 
the commandment to the right hand or to the left." 
(Deut. 17:18-20.) If in this matter even such a man 
as David failed, and therefore was overcome by the 
power of temptation, let every child of God take heed 
and profit by the lesson of his folly. The Word of God 
must be the daily companion, instructor and guide to 
every one who would be kept in the paths of righteousness, 
be he little or great. It is not enough that we 
read it, nor even that we study it, for the sake of mere 
information or for argument: it is given us to ponder 
and to feed upon, that its principles may be incorporated 
into our being, moulding our thoughts and guiding 
all our actions. This is what it is to have the word of 
the Lord dwelling in us as an energizing and moving 
power; and if we thus have fellowship with God through 
his Word and the privilege of prayer, we shall not be 
beguiled into sin, nor partake of the intoxicating spirit 
of the world. 

It has been suggested by some, by way of excuse 
for David, that a man's life should be judged as a whole, 
and not by the failures in it, the intimation being that 
if in such a view of his life the good predominates, then 
it should be considered a righteous life, or vice versa. 
And so, it is suggested, we should estimate the character 
of David and numerous others, among them the inquisitors 
of times past, who burned and tormented those 



who differed from them. Many of these, it is suggested, 
were good, but mistaken men. 

From this line of reasoning we are obliged to differ, 
because it is at variance with the judgment of God, as 
clearly expressed by the Prophet Ezekiel, as follows,— 
"When the righteous turneth away from his righteousness 
and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to 
all the abominations that the wicked man doeth,... 
all his righteousness that he hath done shall not be 
mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and 
in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.... 
But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he 
hath committed, and keep all my statutes [which implies 
also the pondering and study of them], and do 
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he 
shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, 
they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his 
righteousness that he hath done he shall live.... 
When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness 
and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them [unrepentant], 

R2017 :page 183 

for his iniquity that he hath done shall he 
die. Again when the wicked man turneth away from 
his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that 
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive."* 
-Ezek. 18:24,21,22,26-28. See also 2 Pet. 2:20-22. 

It would be a great mistake to presume that the 
blindness and spiritual stupor that result from intoxication 
with the spirit of the world constitute a proper 
excuse for the sins committed while in that state. God 
did not so judge in the case of David. The beginning 
of any sin is the first yielding to its intoxicating influence; 
and therefore we are faithfully warned to abstain 
from the very appearance of evil. (1 Thes. 5:22.) 
David's sin, like that of all other sinners, began in giving 
heed to the first suggestions of evil, and having 
done this the subsequent steps were easily taken.— 
Compare James 1:14,15. 

But, thank God, there is such a thing as repentance 
and remission of sins. And although David had 
sinned grievously, and God was very angry with him, 
yet in his wrath he remembered mercy, and sent Nathan 
the prophet to reprove him. It was doubtless a difficult 
task for Nathan to approach the king on such an 
errand, but he did not hesitate when the Lord commanded, 
nor did he go about the duty in any other way 
than that of straight-forward, yet respectful simplicity. 
He did not first endeavor to offset in David's mind his 
present evil course with a rehearsal of his past good 
deeds— of faith and valor and justice and humility, 
thereby intimating that the latter balanced the former, 
but, remembering that in God's reckoning all former 
good deeds would count for nothing unless present sins 
were repented of, he came straight to the point, and with 



skill he presented the case in a parable which David 
mistook for an actual case, and hastily pronounced the 
sentence of death upon the offender. He probably desired 
to show the man of God how zealous he would be 
for righteousness, little surmising that the prophet knew 
of his unrighteous course until, with heroic fortitude 
which waved every other consideration but the doing 
of the will of God, Nathan brought the lesson home to 
his conscience, saying, "Thou art the man.... 
Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the 
Lord to do evil in his sight? Thou hast killed Uriah, 
the Hittite, with the sword, and hast taken his wife to 
be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the 
children of Ammon. Now, therefore, the sword shall 
never depart from thine house. ...Thus saith the 
Lord, Behold I will raise up evil+ against thee out of 
thine own house."— 2 Sam. 12:7-12. 

It was a critical moment for David, and probably 
for a time silence reigned. What would he do? Would 
he proudly resist the power of the truth, thus calmly 
but kindly pressed home by his old and trusted friend, 
the humble man of God? Probably this was the first 
impulse of the pride engendered by his thus far successful 
career; but there was the truth so plainly set 
before him: how could he deny it? how could he excuse 
it, or in any sense or degree justify it? Even to his 
own mind there was evidently no excuse, no palliation. 
Conscience, which had been more or less restless and 
even at times remorseful, ever since the crime, was now 
thoroughly awakened, and a crisis was reached. There 
were but two courses before the king: one was repentance, 
confession and reformation; and the other was 
to plunge deeper into sin by angrily denouncing the 



*This eighteenth chapter of Ezekiel relates specially to the time when 
the Adamic transgression will be offset by the New Covenant as a result of 
the ransom, so that naught will remain against believers but their own 
misconduct. The same principle applies to some extent to those of this 
Gospel age who are justified by faith; and to the Israelites justified by 
the typical sacrifices. 

+Evil here is not used in the sense of sin, but as signifying trouble 
or calamity. This was a feature of God's covenant with Israel as a nation. 
Their obedience was to have earthly recognition and reward— 
their disobedience and sins were to receive earthly punishments. No 
such covenant was ever made with any other nation. See our 
issue of March 1, '95. 

R2017 :page 184 

prophet and wickedly misusing his power as a king to 
punish the man of God for presuming to reprove him, 
and then proudly declaring it to be the right of kings, 
as exceptional individuals, to do as they please, such 
being the generally acceded custom of kings in all the 



nations. Thus he would have been claiming that the 

customs of the world, instead of the law of God, were 

to him the standard of privilege. "What king," he 

might truly have said, "considers the rights of his fellow-men 

in preference to his own desires?" 

But we are glad that David did not take this latter 
evil course. On the contrary, he allowed his better 
nature to reassert itself; and David said unto Nathan, 
"I have sinned against the Lord." And Nathan said 
unto David, "The Lord also hath put away thy sin; 
thou shalt not die"— although in the judgment of the 
parable David had unconsciously condemned himself to 
death. How gracious is God, how ready to pardon 
when true repentance is manifest! "Howbeit," said 
Nathan, "because by this deed thou hast given great 
occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the 
child also that is born unto thee shall surely die." 
David in his contrition meekly accepted both the reproof 
and the penalties pronounced against him; and 
realizing that his sin was very grievous, and that his 
example before the nation was very detrimental to the 
moral and religious interests of the people, he resolved, 
and carried out his resolve, to make the example of his 
deep contrition and repentance as far-reaching in its 
effects for good, as his sin had been for evil. 

This was a noble resolution, and in nothing does 
the nobility of the man shine out more clearly than in 
his humble and public confession of his sin, his efforts 
to undo, as far as possible, the wrong he had done, and 
his meek submission to the penalties which God in his 
wisdom and mercy saw fit to inflict upon him, that thus 
his wrath against sin might be manifest to all, and that 
king and people might so be warned against it. "Better 
is he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a 
city." (Prov. 16:32.) So in overcoming the pride 
and selfishness that had taken deep root in his heart, 
David proved himself a greater hero than even in his 
youthful conflict with the giant of Gath, or in any subsequent 
encounter. 

That the divine forgiveness does not of necessity 
imply the remitting of all the penal consequences of sin 
is manifest in this case and in thousands of others. 
According to the divine law, the full penalty of David's 
sin was death. And, judged by the rigor of that law, 
this sentence was due under two indictments (See Lev. 20:10; 
25:17); but in view of his repentance the Lord 
remitted the death penalty (2 Sam. 12:13) and inflicted 
only such punishment as was necessary for the full 
correction of the offender and the warning and instruction 
of the nation, showing that he was no respecter of 
persons, and that king and people were on a common 
level before the divine law. It should also be observed 
that the penalties inflicted were to a large extent the 
outgrowth of former sins. The severest troubles came 
from his polygamous household, and the sons who gave 
him most trouble were the children of heathen wives; 



and the child of Bathsheba died. 

In Psalm 5 1 David makes public confession of his 
sin and of God's mercy in forgiveness. In Psalm 32 
he gratefully records the blessedness of the man whose 
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, unto 
whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose 
spirit there is no guile— no deceit, no hypocrisy, but 
all of whose doings are open and transparent, and manifestly 
wrought in righteousness. Here he declares, "I 
acknowledge my sin," and he testifies to the Lord's 
forgiveness (vs. 5); and for this divine forgiveness he 
exhorts all sinners to pray to God in a time when he 
may be found (vs. 6); i.e., before their hearts become calloused 
and set in an evil course. 

Then, even in the midst of the troubles consequent 
upon his sin, which he meekly and patiently bore, 
David learned by faith to rejoice in the Lord, saying, 
"Thou art my hiding place: thou wilt preserve me 
from trouble, thou wilt compass me about with songs 
of deliverance;" for he will not suffer any tribulation 
to overwhelm his trusting saints upon whom he has set 
the seal of his pardoning love. 

Then David voices the Lord's sentiments toward 
all his trusting obedient children thus, as though the 
Lord were answering back to his expressions of humble 
confidence and trust, saying, "I will instruct thee and 
teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will counsel 
thee, mine eye shall be upon thee [margin]. Be not 
as the horse or the mule, which have no understanding, 
whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, 
else they will not come near unto thee"— [R.V.] will 
not submit to control. 

"Many sorrows shall be to the wicked [as long as 
they remain wicked. David had proved that by sad 
experience— vss. 3,4.]; but he that trusteth in the Lord 
[which necessitates also the departing from iniquity], 
mercy shall compass him about." Therefore, said the 
confident faith of this repentant one to whom had been 
restored the joys of salvation, "Be glad in the Lord 
and rejoice, ye righteous; and shout for joy all ye that 
are upright in heart." 

If God thus restored to his penitent and believing 
servant the joys of his salvation, and made the bones 
which he had broken to rejoice (Psa. 51:8); if he created 
in him a clean heart, and renewed a right spirit 
within him (Psa. 51:8,10), who then shall lay any 
thing to the charge of his beloved? As freely as God 
forgave, so must all his people; and therefore we rejoice 
to recognize David as one of the ancient worthies 
—worthy of our love, our confidence and a noble example 
for our imitation of the many graces that adorned 
his character. And in nothing did the king give us a more 
worthy example than in the victory over himself to 
which attention has just been called. Especially in considering 
his exalted station, his prominence before the 



R2018 :page 184 

nation, the deeply disgraceful crimes of which he was 
guilty, the acknowledgment of which would be so humiliating 
and the consequent loss of esteem and confidence 
he must expect from the whole nation, and the 
appreciation which he doubtless had of the esteem he 
had so worthily held for so many years, and the keen 
sense of the disgrace which such a nature must have 
when brought again to his sober senses— when we consider 
all these things, the victory gained by David over 
himself in humbling himself and repenting, is one of 
the greatest and grandest achievements on the pages of 
history; and his course is one to be commended to every 
child of God who realizes that he has to any degree departed 
from the right ways of the Lord. 



page 185 
VOL. XVII. AUGUST 15, 1896. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 186 

Views From the Tower 187 

"The Lord Preserveth the Faithful" 189 

Poem: What Would Jesus Do? 193 

Restitution, Faith Cures (Continued) 193 

The Glory of Methodism 195 

Forgiveness of Injuries 196 

Are Public Prayers Authorized? 196 

Bible Study: Absalom's Rebellion 198 

Bible Study: Absalom's Defeat and 

Death 199 

Encouraging Letters 200 

page 186 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 



if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2026 : page 186 

"In a service that His love appoints 
There are no bonds for me; 

For my secret heart is taught the truth 
That makes His children free. 

And a life of self -renouncing love 
Is a life of liberty." 



Let us not be ashamed of the true gospel, nor of any of its agents 
or agencies. He who is ashamed of the brother or sister or tract or 
book through which God was pleased to send him the truth, shows 
clearly that, had he lived in the days of our Lord's humiliation, he would 
have been ashamed of him, and of the humble men whom he chose and 
used to promulgate his gospel in the beginning. The truth is not intended 
for the proud or the dishonest. God hides his truth from the 
worldly wise and prudent, and reveals it unto babes. (Luke 10:21; 
1 Cor. 1:19.) By candor and humility and zeal let us keep ourselves 
in the love of God and continue to walk in the light. 



R2011 :page 186 

"Thou must be true thyself 

If thou the truth wouldst teach, 

Thy soul must overflow, if thou 
Another soul wouldst reach; 

It needs the overflow of heart 
To give the lips full speech. 

"Think truly, and thy thoughts 
Shall the world's famine feed; 

Speak truly, and each word of thine 
Shall be a faithful seed; 

Live truly, and thy life shall be 
A great and noble creed." 



R2018 :page 187 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE confusion of tongues at the tower of Babel led 

to the scattering of mankind on the earth— to 

sectional and racial selfishness, independence, clannishness, 



—to classes and castes. This in turn has led to 
selfish animosities, wars, etc. On the other hand, it 
no doubt worked some advantage by preventing all 
from falling into the same ruts, vices and superstitions. 
But lately, especially since the beginning of "the time 
of the end" (A.D. 1799), the tendency in every direction 
is for the peoples of the earth to commingle, to obliterate 
caste and racial prejudices. People of every 
nation commingle with those of every other nation; 
not without prejudice, but nevertheless with the effect 
of gradually breaking down prejudice. 

The city officials are compelled to guard the sanitary 
conditions of the poorer quarters as well as of the 
wealthier; for disease in the tenements, where clothing 
or cigars are made, means disease elsewhere,— wherever 
their wares are used. Quarantines are as needful 
for paupers as for the wealthy who pay the tax for the 
expense incurred. In courts of justice crimes against 
the poor are recognized, as well as against the rich. 
This is not only just, but necessary for the preservation 
of respect for justice before the masses. The failure 
of a crop in one quarter of the globe does not now 
affect that part alone, but diffuses itself over the whole 
world by causing a slight general advance in price. So 
also with diseases. La Grippe spread as a scourge over 
Europe and America and was traced by science to Russia, 
and as the result of a famine which prevailed there the 
year before. The enlightened world has learned that it is 
not only humane to relieve the famine-stricken, but that it 
is necessary for the protection of those who have plenty. 

Even the lower animals are benefiting; for since it 
is learned that many contagious fevers are induced by 
the eating of infected meat and milk, the sanitary conditions 
of dairies are being guarded by the law; and the 
kind of cars in which cattle are shipped, and the food 
and drink supplied to cattle in transit, are being made 
subjects of careful legislation. 

This growing oneness of the interests of the world 
is well illustrated in Trades-Unionism. It started as 
local institutions, thinking little of the interests of others; 
but before long they were extended to all of the 
same craft in the same section or environed by the same 
conditions. Next it was found that with new machinery 
it was not difficult for a man of skill in one craft to 
turn his skill to another; and federations and amalgamations 
sprang up on broad bases of fellowship and cooperation. 
Next international unions were called for, 
especially in Europe; and it was found expedient also 
to organize the female laborers, since they with machinery 
were likely to become competitors to a larger 
extent yearly. And now, finally, realizing that the 
millions of Japan, India and China are likely to come 
into competition with civilized labor, the Socialistic Labor 
Congress of the world, which met in London in 
July, proposed to extend its doctrines and organization 
to the barbaric peoples. The resolution on the subject 



reads as follows:— 

"Considering that the aim of the foreign and colonial 
policy of the governing classes of all modern states, 
as the trustees of capitalists' interests, is to gain possession 
of new worlds to capitalize; considering further, 
that the aim of Socialists must necessarily be opposed 
to this absorption of barbaric races and the lands occupied 
by them into the great system of modern capitalistic 

R2018 :page 187 

civilization as tending to give to that system a new 

lease of life, shorter or longer, as the case may be, it is 

resolved that the policy of the Social Democratic party, 

irrespective of nationality, should be to support, and, 

in every feasible way, to make common cause with barbaric 

peoples in their efforts to maintain their independence 

against the raids of European civilization, no 

matter what the power may be, by whom the raid is undertaken, 

and no matter what may be the specious excuse, 

humanitarian or patriotic, by which such raids 

are supported or defended. It is further resolved that 

a standing international committee be appointed to 

watch events and to take such action in the above sense 

as from time to time may seem desirable, thereby inaugurating 

a new departure in the sense of a foreign 

policy, at once united and definite, for the Social Democratic 

party in all countries, irrespective of so-called national 

interests." 

While this proposition is absurd in the extreme, it 
illustrates the trend of our times; the unifying of the 
interests of mankind. The lessons of the present time, 
although taught by selfishness, are preparing mankind 
the better to appreciate the levelling and unifying which 
the Kingdom of God will shortly establish on an unselfish 
basis— on a basis of a sympathetic love which 
redeemed all and will bring all to a clear knowledge of 
the truth that they may be saved. 



The federative union of Protestants foretold in the 
Scriptures comes on apace. It has been hindered, however, 
to some extent by the hopes of some that it might 
as a federation include Roman Catholicism and Greek 
Catholicism, and thus be the more "imposing." Much 
dependence was placed upon the known sympathy of Pope 
Leo XIII. with the union movement; and it was confidently 
hoped by many that he would in some manner 
recognize the Church of England and its clerical orders, 
as the Greek and other Catholic systems had already 
been recognized. This matter seems to be positively 
settled in the negative by the Pope's last Encyclical 
(as we knew and pointed out from the Scriptures it 
would be). Now, therefore, all hope of union with 
Rome being abandoned, it is not unreasonable to expect 



that greater energy than ever will be directed to effecting 
the union or federation of Protestants, foretold. 

The following editorial review of the Encyclical in 
"Harper's Weekly" will be interesting:— 

"He of the Vatican has spoken again. Pope Leo 
XIII. has often spoken, but this time on a new theme. 
No pope of the last two centuries has surpassed him in 
keen and quick perception of the rapid changes in popular 
sentiment, and of the paternal way, from the Vatican 
point of view, in which to confront and adapt 
them. Besides, he excels in stately and labored declamations 
on the main thought of the hour upon ecclesiastical 
polity and doctrine. His encyclical is well 
timed, for it recognizes the preeminence of the aspiration 
for the union of Christendom. 

"Gladstone had heard that something of the kind 
was in due time to come from the Vatican. He therefore 
wrote his letter to Cardinal Rampolla, the Pope's 
Secretary of State, pleading for Leo's recognition of the 
validity of Anglican orders. The encyclical is not an 
answer to Gladstone, and was probably in type and 
translated into many languages before the great Englishman 
had put his plea on paper, and nowhere mentions, 
even remotely, the validity of the orders of the 
35,000 Anglican clergy. But in a sense it is an answer, 
for it says in substance: All who are out of my fold are 
schismatics; they belong to no Church; they must accept 
me as the one Holy Father, and they must adopt 
every one of the Roman Catholic doctrines. The inspiration 
of the Apocrypha, the celibacy of the clergy, the 
immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, papal infallibility, 
and all the rest must be accepted, or the recusant 
is 'outside the Catholic communion.' 

"The language is explicit. Nobody can be admitted 
into this blessed unity 'who in the least degree 
deviates from even one point of the doctrine proposed 
by the authoritative magisterium of the Church.' The 
primacy of the Pope, the recognition of his authority, 
and the assent to every doctrine which he represents 
are the conditions of the only Christian union which 
Rome can entertain. 

"The Pope begins by declaring his desire to bring 
all peoples into the one Christian fold, and then proceeds 
to place before them the example of the Church 
in which all should be united, and to show that the 
Church is a visible body, and only one body; that it is 
the guardian of the world's faith; that of necessity there 
must be a unity of government as well as of faith; and 
therefore that 'as Christ willed that his kingdom should 
be visible, he was obliged to designate a vicegerent on 
earth in the person of St. Peter. He also determined 
that the authority given to him for the salvation of 
mankind in perpetuity should be inherited by St. Peter's 
successors.' 

"The conclusion is now natural and easy. The 
authoritative magisterium being determined— and this 



is only a beautiful and classical euphemism for the 
mastery of the Pope above bishops, councils, and all 

R2019 :page 188 

else— nothing further is wanted than the application, 
which is substantially this: 'Come into the Church of 
Rome. Do not hesitate. The ultimate tribunal is 
vested in one man— namely, his own pontifical self— 
who, when speaking in his official quality, divides his 
authority with no man or number of men when he declares 
on doctrine or morals. He can annul whatever 
councils determine. He holds St. Peter's keys, and 
can bind or loose at will. All must obey his orders. 
How easy, then, is the union of all Christendom!' 

"One learns a lesson from this last encyclical from 
the Vatican— that Rome has lost nothing of its monumental 
egoism. The invitation of the Thirteenth Lion 
to all the lambs to come into union with him might 
easily have been made by Leo X. or Gregory VII. It 
is musty with the antiquities of the temporal power of 
four centuries ago. The dust of the centuries flies out 
of it as one turns over its parchment pages. Rome 
alone is in the true path. 

"Still, there is a difference in the way of putting 
things nowadays. Even a pope scolds no more. The 
language of the authoritative magisterium is calm. 
There is nothing of the elder bluster. The anathemas 

R2019 :page 189 

against Protestants are forgotten as though veritable 
antiques. This is a gain for the courtesy of words. 
Never more will a pope speak as universal master." 



Recent accounts of cyclones, hurricanes, "cloudbursts," 
tidal waves, etc., in various parts of the world 
are appalling. About six weeks ago 3500 Japanese 
were drowned by a tidal wave, and now about 4000 
Chinese have met a similar fate. The numerous disasters 
at home are too well known to require mention. 

Creation groans (Rom. 8:22) under the curse. 
Present conditions are only what we might expect as 
a race of criminals under sentence of death from the 
Divine Court. True, the ransom price for sin has been 
paid; but the time is not yet fully come for the lifting 
of the curse. It must yet rest very heavily upon 
the culprit race; a dark hour of trouble must precede 
the glorious sunrise of the new day wherein there 
"shall be no more curse." 

Great physical changes in nature may reasonably 
be expected as a part of the impending trouble (intermingled 
with the social, political, financial and religious 
troubles of this day of the Lord). What the 



changes will be we know not; but we do know that 
present conditions of climate, etc., are not such as we 
should expect or are promised "when the Kingdom is 
the Lord's and he is the governor among the nations." 
If, therefore, any of the King's Own shall witness at 
close quarters any of the fearful signs connected with 
the grand changes now due, let them remember that 
the Lord knoweth them that are his and will not permit 
anything to come upon them that he will not overrule 
for good. 



When pointing out some time ago that the Scriptures 
indicate that the Jews are to be persecuted in all 
lands, so as to drive them out, eventually, into their 
own land, we mentioned the anti-Jewish sentiment in 
France, Germany, Italy, Austria and Russia; and the 
probability that intense and general Jewish persecution 
would break forth ere long; but intimated that the 
British would probably not share in it. But even in 
Great Britain an anti-Jewish feeling is taking root. The 
publication of a letter from Mr. Gladstone in the public 
press, recently, avowed his opposition to the race, 
—saying, "I am an Anti-Semitist"— much to the surprise 
of others as well as ourselves. Jew-hatred— 
"Judenhetze"— is making progress in England; and is 
being discussed in the prominent journals. It is really 
a movement against the Jewish money-lenders, and is 
of a piece with the Silver Movement in the United 
States. The following is clipped from the Quarterly 
Review:— 

"The day may dawn, even in France, when a popular 
Government will be the voice of the people. In 
countries not so manipulated and hoodwinked— in the 
German Empire, with its military feudal spirit on one 
side, its spirit of Socialism on the other; in Austria, 
where the Hebrew conquest dates from yesterday; in 
Russia, which M. de Vogue calls 'a mightier Islam,' 
the reaction may take a swift and sudden turn that 
would be far more dreadful than any Judenhetze known 
since the expulsion of the Marranos from the Spanish 
Peninsula. It is not an appeal to the principles of '89 
which would then avail to prevent scenes of horror and 
confusion. The European Democracy has no mind to 
be shorn of its golden fleece for the benefit of the Rothschilds 
and the Oppenheims. Let the situation be clearly 
understood— and it is growing clearer with each day's 
news, in Italy, in the Transvaal, at Vienna— who can 
believe that Christendom will allow itself to be made a 
farm, a tenement of which but a handful even among 
the five million Jews are to enjoy the fruits and the 
revenue? The Emancipation of the Jews'— that old 
Liberal watchword— has already given place to its antithesis 
Emancipation from the Jews,' economic liberty 
for the Christian working class, defence against usury 



and speculative finance, and the rest of a sound social 
programme. Sooner or later, these new ideas will issue 
in legislative enactments; or, if they do not, a worse 
thing may happen in countries which have to choose 
between the rule of productive industry and the despotism 
of capital wielded by a cosmopolitan and antisocial 
power." 



R2019 :page 189 

"THE LORD PRESERVETH THE FAITHFUL." 

"O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth the 
faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer. Be of good 
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all 
ye that hope in the Lord."— Psa. 31:23,24. 

SINCE the publication of "Our Children in the 

Time of Trouble," in our issue of April 15, 

numerous requests have been received for a further expression 

concerning the probabilities of personal safety 

during the troublous times just ahead. 

One Brother writes:— "As the Lord almost invariably 
works through means, and as the 'prudent man 
foreseeth the evil and hideth himself (Prov. 22:3), 
I think it proper to seek of the Lord a way of escape. 
This question will force itself more and more upon God's 
people as the storm clouds gather and the thunders of 
his wrath become more appalling; and I believe it is of 
the Lord that his people should effectually hide themselves 
'until the indignation be overpast.' He has 
given them the exceeding precious knowledge of the 
truth that they may seek of him a place of safety. I 
have long believed with the brother to whose letter you 
replied in the above number that some remote place will 
be the safest. But we must not seek and inquire in 
fear and doubt of our loving Father's care, but in faith, 
because the fact that he has given us a knowledge of 

R2019 :page 190 

the coming trouble is proof that he intends we shall 
find a refuge. 

"This question is pertinent, not only to the children 
of the elect, but also to what you term the Elisha 
class.' My observations for a number of years have convinced 
me that the Elijah class' are not only few, but 
extremely few; and yet there are many Christians, devout, 
and unbendingly loyal to all the light they have, 
who do not know of the harvest time; and there are 
others who do know of it and are in full sympathy with 
the truth, who have confessed to me that they have no 
desire or hope beyond a home in the redeemed earth 
when Christ is King. Yet I perceive in them considerable 



of the spirit of Christ— meekness and loyalty. 
My observations convince me that these out-number 
the 'little flock' ten to one; and I am so glad that our 
Father will take care of them; but, as I said before, I 
believe he will use means." 

Another Brother says:— "Soon after I made my 
escape from Babylon you wrote me, in answer to a question 
respecting the time of trouble, that you understood 
the Scriptures to teach that the 'saints' would escape 
many of those things coming upon the world in the 
time of trouble. Now, will you kindly give me your 
opinion as to how a man in business will escape the 
financial crash? Is it by such a one foreseeing the 
trouble and withdrawing from business? or do you think 
that the saints who have families may continue in trade 
and have the Lord's special care which will bring us 
successfully through, up to the time of our change? 
I have had thoughts and conversations along this line, 
but have not become thoroughly convinced either way, 
and shall appreciate an answer either in the TOWER or 
by letter." 

A Sister wishes to know how Psa. 37:25,26 can be 
harmonized with the fact that some of the Lord's consecrated 
people have been in very poor circumstances, 
and whether this statement of the Psalmist is to be understood 
as a guarantee that throughout the trouble the 
Lord's people will not be reduced to beggary? 



The foregoing queries have been answered in part 
in the following WATCH TOWER articles: - 

"Your Safety in the Trouble. "-Oct. 1, '95, p. 229. 

"Come, My People. "-Mar. 15, '95, p.72. 

"The Time of Thy Visitation. "-Aug. 1, '95, p. 178. 

"Upon this Generation."— Sept. 1, '94, p. 285. 

Looking out upon the world of mankind we see 
them divided by the Word of God into two classes. 
(1) Those who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; who 
have accepted him as their personal Redeemer from sin 

R2020 : page 190 

and its penalty, and who accordingly are seeking to 
avoid sin and to be acceptable to God through Jesus 
Christ, our Lord. (2) The vast majority of mankind 
who (whatever the length and breadth of the divine 
provision for all in Christ) are yet in their sins, who 
have not accepted a share in the ransom nor fled away 
from the sins which beset them as members of the fallen 
race, who for these reasons are still unreconciled to God, 
strangers and foreigners to his love and promises, and 
enemies through wicked works. 

Of these two classes only the first could reasonably 
hope for any favor at God's hands. And this class, 
although not large, may be subdivided into three 



classes, as below. 

(a) Those whose appreciation of the great divine 
gift has developed a reciprocating love to God and 
Christ, which has led them gratefully to consecrate to 
the divine service their little all;— time, money, influence, 
reputation, talents,— 

"To be used in joyful service 
For the glory of their King." 
Such rightly feel that to serve so good a King is an 
inestimable privilege; and hence, to them his word is 
law, and it becomes their very meat and drink to do his 
will. Thus, daily, these become more and more conformed 
to the image of God's dear Son (Rom. 8:29), 
and thus they are making their calling and election 
sure as his joint-heirs— to be like him and be with him 
and to behold and share his glory. These alone "walk 
worthy of the vocation" whereunto all living believers 
have been called;— "worthy of the Lord." (Eph. 4:1; Col. 1:10.) 
To these all of the exceeding great and precious 
promises of God's Word belong— help and strength for 
the present life, and glory, honor and immortality for 
the future, with Christ, the Lord. 

(b) Some, who started out with an appreciation of 
God's gift and their consequent reasonable service of 
full consecration to God's service, have been sidetracked 
and hindered, by "the cares of this life or the deceitfulness 
of riches" (sought, even if not secured). 

These do not love sin, nor delight in its practice; they 

love righteousness in word, thought and deed, and wish 

that circumstances were favorable to righteousness, and 

long for the time when Satan and sin shall be bound 

for the thousand years of Christ's reign, and pray fervently, 

"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 

as it is done in heaven." Yet they are so in bondage 

to the customs of society, so fond of the approval of 

fellow creatures, and the spirit of Christ in them is so 

blended with the spirit of worldliness, that they are hindered 

from performing the sacrifice of earthly things 

and interests which they covenanted to do when flushed 

with their warm first love and appreciation of God's 

goodness and grace in Christ. They have lost much of 

their first love; and, consequently, self-sacrifices for the 

King and his cause are more painful and more difficult. 

At first they accounted it joy to be permitted to suffer 

for the truth and for right-doing with and like their 

Lord: now it is a painful duty which they shirk repeatedly, 

and repeatedly mourn over. They resolve 

that they will again take up the cross and find the old 

joy in bearing it; yet they do not do so. 

R2020 :page 191 

Their fault and hindrance began in dividing their 
hearts between heavenly and earthly interests. They 
listened to the voice of the world, the flesh and the devil 
(and the Nominal Church), saying, Be not an extremist 



in piety; take a moderate course, else you will be 
considered a religious fanatic, as Jesus, Peter, Paul and 
other ancient worthies were disesteemed. They thereupon 
dropped their full consecration, even unto death, 
and decided on a "moderate course" by which they 
could retain the esteem of their unconsecrated friends 
and associates, and, as they vainly supposed, exert over 
them a more powerful influence for good. They had 
no thought of abandoning their covenant of suffering 
and death with Christ, but intended merely to do their 
suffering and dying in a more moderate way than a full 
surrender— an out and out sacrifice, once and for ever, 
of earthly hopes, aims, friendships, etc. Alas! they 
did not realize that they could not sacrifice themselves, 
—that only the High Priest of our profession, Christ 
Jesus, can perform the great sacrifice by which we become 
dead to the world and alive toward God. He 
must lay his hands (power) upon those who would be 
joint-sacrifices; he must offer them.* And he offers none 
except the fully consecrated; nor would the Father accept 
upon his altar any others than these. In determining 
to sacrifice themselves piecemeal when and how 
they and their friends might please, was the primary 
mistake of (b). And the mistake continues; therefore 
their repeated determinations to "suffer joyfully" are 
always failures. 

The only way out of their difficulty is to do their 
first works (Rev. 2:5)— to commence over again by 
a full surrender of themselves to the Lord, that he may 
sacrifice them and give them grace to endure it joyfully 
and thus through full obedience restore them to class (a) 
as "overcomers" who shall "inherit all things." 

(c) This class is a large one, very inferior in its 
attainments. It includes, nevertheless, many who are 
highly esteemed amongst men as Christians. It is composed 
of those who have accepted Christ as their Redeemer, 
by accepting in faith their share of his great 
sin-offering. They desire all the blessings he has promised, 
but would like to give nothing or as little as possible 
in return. They hear God's voice through the 
apostle, urging them to present their bodies living sacrifices, 
and thus to suffer with Christ and by and by to 
share his glory, and they realize that it is but a reasonable 
service; but they do not heed the call, and will not 
be granted a portion of the great "feast," the "marriage 
supper," prepared for those who love their Redeemer 
with an intensity which delights to render life 
itself in his service. Consequently, so far as the present 
high calling is concerned, they have "received the 
grace of God in vain," in that they have not made even 
an attempt to learn of their calling, much less to make 
their election sure, by full consecration and a baptism 
into the sufferings and death of Christ.— Mark 10:38. 

Now amongst these three classes the favors of God 
must be understood to apply. The first (a) class undoubtedly 
is the one to whom as "overcomers" the 



promise applies,— "Watch ye that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all those things coming upon the world, 
and to stand before the Son of Man." They will escape 
(we believe) by being all gathered through death to 
glory before the terrible severity of the world's trouble 
will be permitted to come. 

The great time of world-wide trouble (40 
years) which began in October, 1874, is of two kinds. 
(1) Trouble, sittings, or fiery trials, upon the Church, 
that "every man's work [in the Church] may be tried 
so as by fire," and that the wood, hay and stubble of 
character or faith may be destroyed. (2) Trouble upon 
the world, financial, political and social, which will 
utterly wreck all present institutions and prepare for 
the rule of righteousness by the Kingdom of God. 
The first trouble will be specially upon the saints and 
all others who are in any degree subjects of divine favor. 
None who are truly God's sons will escape it. As it 
draws to a close, having selected, purified and proved 
the "overcomers," it will be followed by extreme trouble 
of a physical kind upon the world, in which those who 
were true children of God but whose lack of zeal did 
not permit them to be "accounted worthy" as "overcomers" 
(class b above), will suffer death,— not as sacrifices 
(for the acceptable day of sin-offerings, the "Day 
of Atonement," will be at an end), but, as the "scape 
goat," a destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be 
saved. These, "the great company," who must come 
up out of great tribulation and wash their robes white 
in the blood of the Lamb— these, surely, we cannot expect 
to see shielded from the very trouble which the 
Lord declares they need; and which in special mercy 
he will inflict for their perfecting.— Rev. 7:9,13-15. 

The third class described (c) remains for consideration. 
Can we expect that these who already have 
received the grace of God in vain, to the extent that 
they have refused to consecrate themselves fully to 
God— their "reasonable service,"— shall we expect that 
additional favors will be bestowed upon these, more 
than upon others who did not the Master's will, because 
they knew it not?— because the god of this world 
had blinded their minds? We incline to fear not! If 
they have not had a full opportunity, we doubt not 
they will yet receive it with the residue of mankind 
during the Millennium; but that God should specially 
protect these from the tribulations of the day of trouble 
does not seem to us to be reasonable or Scriptural. It 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES, Page 55. 

R2020 : page 192 

is those who knew the Lord's will and did it not who 
are to be "beaten with many stripes."— Luke 12:47. 



So far as we can at present see, the only ones promised 
"escape" from the coming storm are the overcoming 
class (a). Isaiah 26:20 should be understood as 
applicable to God's people throughout the past as well 
as in the present and so long as his "saints" shall be 
in the flesh and need divine protection. It does not refer 
to the severity of the coming catastrophe because 
the saints will all be gone before that time. 

We may, however, reasonably expect that divine 
protection will shelter two classes not recognized above. 
(1) The children of the Lord's consecrated people who 
will not have previously reached years of discretion and 
personal responsibility. (See 1 Cor. 7:14.) (2) Some 
whose eyes will get opened during the trouble, and who 
will promptly avail themselves of the grace of God and 
fully consecrate themselves to his service. These two 
classes will, we believe, be subjects of divine care in 
the day of trouble. And although they will not "escape" 
from it, as will the saints, they will, we believe, 
be preserved, guarded, provided for in the midst of it. 

We do not believe that efforts to escape the trouble 
by going into solitary places, etc., will be successful. 

R2021 : page 192 

It is the time for the building of the true antitypical 

Temple, the glorified Church; and, preceding it, "Before 

those days, there was no reward [hire] for man, 

nor any reward [hire] for beast; and for him that went 

out and for him that came in there was no peace, because 

of oppression: and I let loose all men, every one 

against his neighbor." (Zech. 8:10, Leeser's translation.) 

The trouble will be world-wide; there will be 

no place of safety except under divine providence; and, 

as we have seen, few can expect that protection. 

"Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth which 
have wrought his ordinances; seek righteousness, seek 
meekness: perhaps ye will be protected in the day of 
Jehovah's anger." (Zeph. 2:3.) This is the only safe 
course. Those who now seek according to this direction 
may yet make their calling and election sure, and 
be among the "overcomers" who shall "escape" the 
things coming upon the world. Those who do not 
"escape," but find themselves in the great trouble, can 
follow no better advice;— they may be hid or protected 
from at least some measure of the trouble. 

Hence, instead of seeking a place of safety (which 
cannot be found) for ourselves and our children, let us 
seek to bring ourselves and them into the above described 
condition of safety, by hearty obedience to the 
reasonable service set before us. 

The suggestions of Brother Clardy's letter, published 
on other page, we consider good. 



There is this to be said, however; although the 
great financial and social trouble has not yet come and 
will not come for some years, yet the great coming 
event casts its shadows before; and we have something 
to do with these present-time shadows, spasms and 
perplexities. While the hearts of the worldly-wise are 
failing them for fear (not from suffering) and for looking 
after those things coming (not things already experienced), 
God's people are to be in no such fear and 
perplexity. We know in whom we have believed and 
are persuaded that he is both able and willing to keep 
that which we have committed to his keeping. These 
thunderings and dark shadows only corroborate the divine 
Word which foreshows them all and the glorious 
results to follow. We will draw the nearer to the Lord 
and by faith shut about us the more closely the protecting 
door of our Lord's exceeding great and precious 
promises. 

But we are not to expect miraculous help except 
when necessary. We are to watch as well as pray, and 
to seek to order our course in life according to the leadings 
of divine providence for which we are to be constantly 
on the lookout. We are to look ahead (Prov. 22:3) 
and to use our best judgment accordingly, trusting 
in and looking for our Lord's providential guidance. 
This may mean a change of business or not, or even a 
failure in business. If you have done your best to "owe no 
man anything but love," and have used your best abilities 
diligently, and then fail, accept the result with resignation. 
With the consecrated the chief thought should not 
be ease, nor large profits, nor best wages, but best conditions: 
best conditions for personal development in Christian 
graces, and best conditions for rendering service 
to the Lord, his people and his truth. If you are married, 
the interests of your companion along these lines 
should have equal consideration; and if you have children, 
they and their interests, present and future, are a 
part of your charge. You will need divine help in 
weighing these interests, that you may give to each its 
proper share of consideration. If you have children, 
you brought them into the world, and are responsible 
to them and to God accordingly: you owe them not 
only religious instruction but secular education and a 
business or trade preparation, to fit them for and start 
them in life. If unprepared or unwilling to give them 
this reasonable start, you should not have begotten 
them. Having begotten them, they are a first-mortgage 
upon your time, influence and means; and in providing 
for them you will be blessed. Not even the 
gospel has a prior claim upon your time. 

But the interests of your children are a part of the 
Lord's providential care over you, if you are one of his 
fully consecrated ones. If, therefore, you see opportunities 
for teaching your children trades less liable to 
strikes, boycotts and wrangling than your own— more 
conducive to peace and the cultivation of the graces of 



R2021 :page 193 

the spirit, be willing to sacrifice something for their 
benefit, if the Lord providentially shows you a good 
opportunity to do so. 

Respecting present business trials: "Trust in the Lord 
and do good, and verily thou shalt be fed." "I have never 
seen the righteous forsaken [by the Lord] nor his seed 
begging bread." These promises are sure, and while 
doing good and trusting we may also rejoice. This 
does not imply that you will have no business trials and 
vexations and disappointments and discouragements. 
Such experiences may be just what you need to develop 
your Christian character— in meekness, patience, brotherly-kindness 
—Love. Your meal and oil may run low, 
as did those of the widow of Zarephath (1 Kings 17:12-16); 
but God knoweth it and will provide, with 
spiritual blessings accompanying, if you will but trust 
him and do what you can do. The Lord may provide 
the things needful through our own industry, or through 
the generosity of friends, or by public provision. While 
the former is to be desired and sought, the latter are 
not to be despised or rejected. None of these methods 
are begging. Accepting proffered help is not begging. 

R2021 : page 193 

WHAT WOULD JESUS DO? 



When the morning paints the skies, 
And the birds their songs renew, 

Let me from my slumbers rise, 
Saying, "What would Jesus do?" 

Countless mercies from above 
Day by day my pathway strew; 

Is it much to bless thy love? 

Father, "What would Jesus do?" 

When I ply my daily task, 

And the round of toil pursue, 
Let me often brightly ask, 

"What, my soul, would Jesus do?" 

Would the foe my heart beguile, 

Whispering thoughts and words untrue? 
Let me to his subtlest wile 

Answer, "What would Jesus do?" 

When the clouds of sorrow hide 
Mirth and music from my view, 

Let me, clinging to thy side, 

Ponder, "What would Jesus do?" 



Only let thy love, O God, 

Fill my spirit through and through; 
Treading where my Savior trod, 

Breathing, "What would Jesus do?" 
—Selected. 



R2021 : page 193 

RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 

-(CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST.)- 

CONTINUING from our last the consideration 

of the necessity that our hearts be purified 

by faith and kept clean through the application of 

the Word, in order that we may progress in the divine 

life, let us consider the necessity for purity of heart 

and the purifying of the flesh in our approaches to God 

in prayer. 

"HAVING OUR BODY WASHED WITH PURE WATER. 



"Let us therefore draw near, with a true heart, 
and with the confidence of faith, being sprinkled as to 
our hearts, and pure from an evil conscience, and our 
body being washed with pure water."— Heb. 10:22. 
Syriac translation. 

Here the Apostle mentions five conditions, (1) 
Honesty of heart; (2) an undoubting faith; (3) a blood-sprinkled 
heart (Heb. 9:14), a heart or will that has 
been justified not merely through faith but also through 
the application of the blood, symbol of the merit of the 
ransom, given once for all by our Redeemer; (4) a clean 
conscience; (5) washed or purified bodies; i.e., with 
the outward man in process of cleansing by the purifying 
of the word of truth and grace. 

The purifying or cleansing of the heart through 
faith in the precious blood seems to be much better understood 
by Christian people than the purifying of their 
bodies, their flesh, through obedience in the application 
to themselves in daily life of the promises, precepts, 
warnings and illustrations of Scripture— as water or 
cleansing truths. 

It is true that God accepts us into his family as 
soon as our hearts (wills) have been consecrated through 
the application of Christ's merit, even before we have 
had time to cleanse ourselves from much of the filth of 

R2022 : page 193 



the flesh. But this merciful provision to meet the necessity 
of our case should not embolden us to expect to 
be continuously received at the throne in filthiness of 
the flesh not even attempted to be removed, yet for the 
gradual removal of much of which in the present life 
every preparation has been made. 

On the contrary, realizing God's holiness and purity 
of motive and deed, we should realize that sin and 

R2022 : page 194 

sinners are very obnoxious to him; and, while accepting 

his favor in Christ's robe of justification granted to 

us, we should begin at once earnestly to "cleanse ourselves 

from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit [mind], 

perfecting holiness in the fear [reverence] of the Lord." 

(2 Cor. 7:1.) The Scriptures give us no ground to 

hope that when we shall have finished the race we shall 

be absolutely clean and that holiness in us shall be perfected. 

No, no; when we shall have done all that we 

can do we must still confess that we are not servants 

who have brought our Master profit; we must still confess 

that in our flesh is no perfection; that still God 

could accept us only in the Beloved, covered by his imputed 

righteousness; for of all the sons of Adam "there 

is none righteous; no, not one;" nor will any be perfected 

in holiness until our Redeemer shall give us new, 

pure and perfect bodies, through which our purified 

hearts (wills, intentions) can find exercise. But, just 

the same, our hearts (wills), if they are pure and subject 

to the Lord's instructions, will be constantly seeking 

to come as near as possible to absolute purity of 

the flesh and spirit and to perfect holiness. 

And, as the cleansing process continues through 
the washing of the water of the Word, our appreciation 
of what purity is grows; so that what we would have 
thought almost spotless purity at first comes gradually, 
under our clearer spiritual sight, to appear quite sullied. 
At first, the only "filth of the flesh" which we noticed 
as such were the gross impurities of word and act; but 
after having progressed a while, these gross impurities 
become repulsive so that we hate them and have no 
sympathy with them; by that time another set of sins, 
less gross, that we did not see at first as sins, are demanding 
and having our efforts to purge them out; and, 
as they go, other impurities, still more subtle, still 
more refined, still more deeply entrenched in our poor, 
fallen bodies, are discovered and being by God's grace 
purged out. The "filth of the flesh," as at first seen by 
many, consisted of murders, drunkenness, debauch, 
adulteries, filthy language, etc.: as seen later, it includes 
selfishness in its various developments, hatred, malice, 
envy, strife, vain-glory; but, as seen from the advanced 
standpoint of those who for some time have been striving 
by the Lord's help toward perfect holiness, it is seen 
to include every thing short of meekness, gentleness, 



patience, brotherly kindness, love. And it is well that 

we should see that, while such results are to be aimed 

at and to be attained as fully and as rapidly as possible, 

yet our Lord, as our High Priest, knows our circumstances 

and peculiarities, and not only is not expecting 

impossibilities but stands ready to assist us to the possibilities 

to which he calls us by his gospel and its exceeding 

great and precious promises. And surely, "he 

that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even as 

he [who called him] is pure."— 1 John 3:3. 

What we have said with reference to heart purity, 
the most important, applies also to physical cleanliness. 
Get the heart (mind) started toward purity, and the 
literal water will be used as well as the symbolical, and 
the outward man will soon be clean. 

PURIFICATION WITH FASTING AND PRAYER. 



Although not under the Law Covenant, we may 
with propriety look back to God's dealings with the 
ancient worthies and the typical arrangements of the 
past and draw therefrom some lessons of value. One 
lesson is in the fact that those who celebrated the Passover 
(typifying the Gospel Church which partakes of 
Christ, our Passover Lamb) were required to cleanse 
themselves and their houses and to put away all leaven 
(a symbol of sin) and generally to purify. See Exod. 12:19,20; 
13:7: John 11:55. 

On the great occasion of the giving to Israel of the 
Law Covenant, washings, purifying, etc., were strictly 
enjoined. (See Exod. 19:15.) The antitype of that 
is the institution of the New Covenant of grace at the 
hands of the greater Mediator, Christ. The appropriateness 
of the still greater purifying of all who accept 
the New Covenant must be evident. 

When Daniel the prophet sought the Lord in the 
special requests which God so specially answered, he 
"chastened" himself; that is, he sought by the practice 
of self-denial to bring himself into a special condition 
of heart and mind pleasing to God. (Dan. 10:2,3.) 
That his course was helpful to him and acceptable in 
God's sight is testified by the angel of the Lord— "O 
Daniel, a man greatly beloved [margin— "man of desires"], 
...fear not, Daniel: for from the first day 
that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to 
chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard." 
Verses 11,12. Compare also Chapter 9:3,4-18,20,21. 

While the fastings, washings and purifyings of the 
Law Covenant represent conditions of self-denial and 
deadness to the world, which should be the attitude of 
all true believers at all times, yet we have good New 
Testament precedent for the observance of literal fasts, 
etc. Note the following:— 

Our Lord fasted forty days at the beginning of his 



ministry, when specially seeking divine leading and instruction 
for the work; and we know not how often he 
fasted in secret.— Matt. 4:2. 

"When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad 
countenance,. ..that they may appear unto men to 
fast.. ..But thou, when thou fastest,. ..appear 
not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in 
secret,. ..and he shall reward thee openly."— Matt. 6:16-18; 
9:15. 

R2022 : page 195 

In the Church at Antioch were several of the 
brethren who served the Church, and prayed and fasted 
and sought to be and to do what would be most pleasing 
to God. It was from among these earnest seeking 
ones that God chose Paul and Barnabas for special 
service. What a suggestion there is in this for all who 
are desirous of being used and useful in the service of 
the same Master. The Church at Antioch seemed to 
feel the importance of the matter, too, for when sending 
them forth at their expense, as their representatives 
and the Lord's, they fasted first and then prayed 
and laid their hands upon the missionaries (as recognizing 
them as their agents and representatives) and 
sent them forth.— Acts 13:2,3. 

The Apostle mentions how he and his co-laborers 
approved themselves to the people of God, and among 
other items he mentions stripes, imprisonments and 
fastings. We are not to think of the Apostle as whipping 
and imprisoning himself, as do some of the monks 
and nuns, but as suffering these at the hands of unbelievers, 
on account of his faithfulness to the Lord, in 
declaring the good tidings of great joy— "Jesus and the 
resurrection"— of which he was not ashamed. So, likewise, 
some of his fastings may have been enforced fastings, 
because of his service of the truth; and, if so, no 
doubt they were all the more acceptable in God's sight. 
-2 Cor. 6:5; 11:27. 

To those who have written to us of their desire to 
abandon the use of tobacco, etc., or who find in themselves 
any weaknesses which they long to overcome, we 
advise not only the continual washing of their hearts with 
the truth and praying and watching unceasingly, but 
also additionally the frequent use of literal water in a 
physical bath and occasional fasting unto God as a sign 
to him of your earnestness of heart— as a proof to yourself, 
as well as to God, that your prayer is not merely 
a momentary fancy but a deep, earnest heart-desire. 

[CONCLUDED IN OUR NEXT.] 



R2022 : page 195 



"THE GLORY OF METHODISM." 



"THE increase of Methodism is one of the wonders 
of the age. Starting in 1739 with eight 
or ten persons. ..the number of its adherents has increased 
to millions and its influence encircles the globe. 
Its educational institutions are equal to those of any 
denomination of Christendom. It numbers among its 
adherents some of the foremost statesmen, financiers 
and professional men of the century. Its pulpits are 
filled by ministers the equal of any in ability and religious 
zeal. Taken as a whole, Methodism wields an immeasurable 
influence in the world, and has a tremendous 
responsibility. 

There is a growing danger that these outward material 
things should absorb our attention, causing us to 
forget the lowliness and purpose of our origin. When 
the king of Babylon looked upon the city that had risen 
to such grandeur under his fostering care, he said: 'Is 
not this the house of my power, and for the might of 
my power, and for the honor of my majesty?' His 
history is but another illustration of the proverb, 'Pride 
goeth before destruction,' and should stand as a warning 
to individuals, nations and churches, not to glory 
in material prosperity only. There may be much glitter 
and glare in the church to arrest the attention, and yet 
Tchabod' may be written upon her portals. 

"John Wesley said: 'In 1729 my brother Charles 
and I, reading the Bible, saw we could not be saved 
without holiness; followed after it, and incited others 
so to do. In 1737 we saw that this holiness comes by 
faith. In 1738 we saw likewise that men are justified 
before they are sanctified, but still holiness was our object, 
inward and outward holiness. God then thrust us 

R2023 : page 195 

out to raise up a holy people.' 

"Again, he says: 'This doctrine is the grand depositum 
which God has lodged with the people called 
Methodists; and for the sake of propagating this chiefly 
he appears to have raised us up.' 

"The glory of Methodism is, that its object was, 
'to raise up a holy people' and 'to spread Scriptural 
holiness over the (all) lands.' If that object is lost 
sight of, its glory will depart. Dr. Adam Clark says: 
If the Methodists give up preaching entire sanctification, 
they will soon lose their glory.' 

"The bishops in their quadrennial address in 1824 
said: If Methodists give up the doctrine of entire sanctification, 
or suffer it to become a dead letter, we are 
a fallen people. Holiness is the main cord that binds 
us together; relax this, and you loosen the whole system. 
This will appear more evident if we call to mind 



the original design of Methodism. It was to raise up 
and preserve a holy people.' The Centennial Conference 
of American Methodism which met in Baltimore, 
1884, reaffirmed this as our faith and purpose: 'We remind 
you, brethren, that the mission of Methodism is 
to promote holiness.' 

"That there may be no mistake as to what is meant 
by holiness in the above quotations, the General Conference 
of 1832 issued a pastoral address to the church 
and used the following words: 'When we speak of holiness 
we mean that state in which God is loved with 
all the heart and served with all the power. This is 
the privilege of the Christian in this life, and may be 
secured [commenced— EDITOR] instantaneously by an 
act of faith, as is justification.' 

"Hear then the conclusion of the whole matter: 
The germ of Methodism is holiness. The design of 
Methodism is to spread Scriptural holiness. The shibboleth 
of Methodism is holiness. The glory of Methodism 
is holiness. 

"Some of the greatest men that ever were connected 
with Methodism have told us, that when we 
cease to preach holiness, as above explained, our glory 
is departed."— Methodist journal. 

[Evidently the original glory of the "people called 
Methodists" was the true glory of the true Christianity. 
But alas! to how great an extent this glory has been 
lost by this as well as other denominations. It was the 
seeing clearly of the truths then due to be seen, that 
produced good effects and results in Wesley's day, although 
unpopular. It is the "present truth" that is 
needed to sanctify God's people to-day. "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy word is truth."— EDITOR.] 



R2023 : page 196 

FORGIVENESS OF INJURIES. 



"FORGIVENESS often seems to be more divine 
than any other virtue because it costs so 
much and is such an unmistakable proof of love. It 
cuts directly athwart that self-interest which is the 
gravest temptation, the deadliest danger, of our lives. 
He who can and does forgive in anything like God's 
own spirit and manner has taken a long step toward 
ideal righteousness. 

"We are to forgive those who have injured us, both 
for our own sakes and for theirs. For our own, because 
we need to learn to repress that indignant self -justification 
which is far too eager to exalt our own 
rights and belittle those of others; because we cannot 
consistently ask of them the forgiveness which we too 



often need unless we are willing to grant it in turn; and 
because we never can be sure that in their circumstances 
we might not have given offense, equal to, perhaps 
even greater than, theirs. 

"For their sakes, also, because they may have 
battled long and nobly with the temptation to wrong us 
before yielding, and deserve credit for it; because they 
need to be encouraged to begin again and do better; 
because they are our brothers and sisters before God; 
and because, if we continue implacable, they will have 
good reason to doubt whether our spirit is truly that of 
our heavenly Father, and such a doubt is an injury to 
them which we can prevent. 

"Moreover, forgiveness ought to be hearty and 
convincing, not merely that of the tongue, but evidently 
the glad renewal of confidence. And, if we are to imitate 
the divine example set us, it ought to be renewed 
in all its sincerity as often as needed, provided it be 
sought with equal honesty. Seventy times seven! That 
means indefinitely— if the offender be in earnest. 

"This suggests a limitation which is right and inevitable. 
He who seeks and receives forgiveness must 
prove his sincerity by the effort to avoid renewed offense. 
A merely formal request for forgiveness does not necessarily 
involve genuine penitence, and nobody has the 
right to impose upon one whom he has injured by pretending 
to be sorry when he is not sorry. Such a hypocritical 
wrongdoer must, for his own sake and for the 
general good, be refused forgiveness until he seeks it 
in the proper spirit. Travesties of penitence need rebuke, 
not pardon. Christian dignity, and the very dignity 
of God himself, must not be thus mocked. But 
with this exception it is both a sweet privilege and a 
solemn duty to forgive indefinitely, even as we hope to 
be forgiven." 

—The Congregationalist. 



R2023 : page 196 

ARE PUBLIC PRAYERS AUTHORIZED? 

A brother writes: "I have much enjoyed recent WATCH TOWERS. 
I see that the theme will be continued: Please say something in regard 
to Public Prayer. The brethren here are not one on that subject, some 
claiming that Christians should never pray in public. 

OUR Lord, after reproving the custom of the 
Pharisees, of standing on the street corners to 
pray, to be seen of men and to be thought pious, said, 
"But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet 
[private place], and when thou hast shut thy door, pray 
to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which 
seeth in secret shall reward thee openly." (Matt. 6:6.) 
From this, and from the fact that our Lord himself 



frequently retired for prayer to the mountain solitude, 
quite a few earnest souls have concluded that 
other than private prayers are disapproved if not sinful: 
and thus they have, we believe, done themselves injury. 

Our Lord himself set us the example of offering 
prayer in public; not only in the presence of his disciples 
frequently, but also in the presence of unbelievers 
at least once— at the tomb of Lazarus. (John 1 1:41,42; 
See Luke 10:21.) That which is generally termed 
"The Lord's Prayer" was not only uttered in the presence 
of the disciples, but is a sample of a collective 
prayer. It addresses "Our Father," not My Father; 
it requests forgiveness of "our sins," not my sins; 
as "we forgive" others, and not as I forgive others. 
It is a sample of a collective prayer, specially. 

The prayer recorded in the 17th chapter of John 
was evidently a public prayer, before the disciples at 
least, else it could not have been recorded by one of 
them as it is stated.— John 18:1. 

The apostles, guided by the same holy spirit, not 
only prayed to the Father in secret, but also prayed 
publicly before the Church and exhorted and instructed 
others respecting such public, congregational prayers. 

Frequent mention is made of the gathering of the 
Church for prayers, when it is not stated that they 
prayed audibly, and where the fact is not proved by 
the narration of the petition, but it is not reasonable 
to suppose that they gathered for prayer and that each 
then prayed privately and secretly. Besides, in some 
instances the prayers are recorded.— See Acts 1:14,24; 
12:5,12; 16:13; 20:36; 21:5. 

The Apostle Paul, writing to the Church at Corinth, 
clearly teaches that prayer and giving of thanks 
before the Church is to be done in an audible voice and 
in a common tongue, in order that the hearers of the 
prayer may be edified.— See 1 Cor. 14:14-17. 

However, we have no sympathy with the custom 
of some of pretending to pray to God, while really addressing 
the congregation. Although our prayers 
be distinct and intelligible to the audience, in order that 
the hearers may all be profited by being able to join 
sympathetically in a possibly more full and fluent petition 

R2023 : page 197 

than the majority could express, yet it should never 
be lost sight of that it is God, and not men, that is 
addressed. 

Neither have we any sympathy with the custom of 
opening Political Conventions, and Legislative Assemblies 
and Schools and Lodges with prayer. Since these 
are not meetings of the Church they can (as meetings) 
have no recognition from God. If delegates to a Convention 
or Legislature or Congress, or attendants at 
college or school be Christians they as such always have 
access to God by prayer, and they should not be found 



in any place where they could not ask and expect God's 
blessing with them. If a teacher be a Christian, he or 
she might without special impropriety offer an audible 
prayer, for wisdom and grace to instruct aright; and 
any of the pupils who are Christians might say, Amen. 
But school-children should not be taught to repeat the 
"Lord's Prayer:" It was given for no such purpose. 
Nor should teachers be required to offer prayer; 
for many are not Christians. And the children? Although 
innocent of personal crimes, they are still under 
Adamic condemnation, and are permitted to approach 
God only through faith, on the terms of the New Covenant; 
—except the children of such as have entered into 
covenant relations to God.— See 1 Cor. 7:14. 

R2024 : page 197 

The evil effect of promiscuous public praying is 
growingly manifest on every hand. Men who know that 
only as a great favor through influential friends could 
they gain an audience with the potentates of earth, and 
then only with great formality of dress, etc., have gotten 
the idea that anybody at any time and in any filthy 
rags of his own righteousness can rush into the august 
presence of the King of kings and have an audience 
with him. And Christians, ministers and educators, 
have sanctioned this hurtful folly. As a consequence, 
thousands do not truly come to God, but delude themselves 
that they are "all right" and "as good as the 
average Christian;" while really, not having come to 
God in his appointed way, they have neither part nor 
lot in his Church, nor in the exceeding great and precious 
promises made to it. 

"God heareth not sinners." (John 9:31; Job 27:9; 
Prov. 1:28,29; 28:9; Psa. 66:18; Isa. 1:15.) Christ 
is the way, the truth and the life, and no man cometh 
unto the Father but by him. (John 14:6.) While 
father Adam was created a son of God and then had 
access to his Father, yet this relationship and its privileges 
were cut off when he rebelled and was sentenced 
as a sinner to death;— all relationship was severed, all 
rights and privileges were forfeited. True, God has 
mercifully provided a great sacrifice for sin, and reconciliation 
through the precious blood of the Redeemer, 
and through him a return to all the privileges, communion 
and favors lost in Adam; but this provision is 
restricted: it is not for everybody; it is open only to 
those who, desiring to flee away from sin, come to a 
knowledge of the Savior and accept the favor of God 
on the conditions of the New Covenant. 

Provision is made for these, that they may divest 
themselves of the filthy rags of their own righteousness 
and put on the robe of Christ's righteousness through 
faith; and thus prepared they may be introduced to the 
Father as redeemed and restored sons— reconciled to God 
by the death of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Then, 



and not until then, should we expect that their prayers 
would be anything else than an abomination before 
God. None will be heard and accepted by the Father, 
while rejecting the New Covenant and the only name 
given under heaven or among men whereby we must 
be saved. 

But to those who realize their sins and, repenting 
of them, accept the Redeemer and the New Covenant 
as the only way back to sonship and fellowship with 
the Father, the Apostle says,— 

"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, 
but fellow citizens with the saints, and of the 
household of God." "For through him [Christ] we 
both have access by one spirit unto the Father."— 
Eph. 2:18,19. 

"Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest by the blood of Jesus, ...let us draw 
near with a true heart in full assurance of faith." (Heb. 10:19-22.) 
"Let us therefore come boldly unto the 
throne of the heavenly grace, that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:16. 

Here, then, is what we hold to be the Scriptural line 
on this important subject. (1) Prayer is the privilege 
of "believers," reconciled children of God, only. (2) It 
is appropriate for such children of God to pray collectively 
as well as individually and privately. (3) At a 
meeting of God's children, the fact that unbelievers 
might be present would not make prayer improper, because 
it is a meeting of the Church and not a meeting 
of the unregenerate, nor under their control. (4) Prayer 
is wholly improper at Political, Legislative, Social, 
Educational, and other meetings which are not 
meetings of the Church of Christ. Even though some 
of the regenerated sons of God be present, the meetings 
are world-meetings, not directly amenable to the 
Word and Spirit of God. If Christians find it expedient 
to attend such meetings, let them attend as citizens 
and not as saints, and let their prayers be offered in secret. 

"Unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to 
do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take 
my covenant in thy mouth— seeing thou hatest instruction 
and castest my words behind thee?"— 
Psalm 50:16,17. 



R2024 : page 198 

ABSALOM'S REBELLION. 

-AUGUST 23.-2 Sam. 15:1-12.- 

Golden Text— "Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy 
days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God 
giveth thee."— Exod. 20:12. 



IN this account of Absalom's rebellion there are 
several important lessons to thoughtful minds. 
(1) First of all we notice in Absalom the sin of disrespect 
to parents. The experience and wisdom of riper 
years are, when heeded, the safeguards of youth, and 
specially in the case of parental experience and wisdom, 
which parental love is ever desirous of utilizing 
for the benefit of sons and daughters, to protect them 
from the ills of life of which they have learned either 
by experience or observation. Youth, alas! too often 
disregards this divinely provided safeguard until by and 
by it learns its folly by bitter experience. The 
hopefulness of youth naturally gilds the future with 
glory; and, with ardent spirits, undisciplined, unrestrained 
and self-conscious, it plunges into new schemes, 
sanguine of the success of its theories until, by and by, 
its bright visions fade before the stern realities of life. 

So it was with Absalom; and so it is with every 
youth who disregards the commandment of the Lord, 
"Honor thy father and thy mother;" and again, as expressed 
by the Apostle, "Children obey your parents." 
The duty to "honor" parents, however, extends far 
beyond the obligation to obey them, which specially 
applies to childhood, and not to mature years. The duty 
of honoring parents extends from the cradle to the 
grave, and when the last honors are paid to the lifeless 
forms of parents they should still hold an honored place 
in the archives of memory. Nothing is more beautiful 
in youth than preferment and deference to riper years, 
and specially to old age. "Thou shalt rise up before 
the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man." 
-Lev. 19:32. 

(2) We notice in Absalom the sin of disrespect to 
the God of his father, which was but the natural result 

of his lack of love and confidence in his father. He entirely 
ignored the facts that the kingdom was the Lord's, 
and that the Lord placed whom he would upon the 
throne, so that his youthful ambition plotted not only 
against his father, David, but also against God, who 
had anointed David to be king, and who also promised 
to establish his throne and to indicate his successor, 
and to subdue all his enemies. In his rebellion Absalom 
vainly thought not only thus to outwit his father, 
David, but also the Almighty Jehovah. How vain and 
foolish! what reckless folly! And yet, how many have 
repeated this folly, and few of the sons of men have 
paused to consider how puny is the arm of flesh when 
lifted in defiance of the Almighty! 

(3) We see how political intrigue stole the hearts 

of the people and made the cause of Absalom temporarily 
very prosperous, so that "the conspiracy was 
strong and increased continually with Absalom." But 
every successful step of the plot was only bringing the 
young man nearer to the height from which he must 
eventually fall. So it is in the temporary success of 



every evil device: the much sought elevation only adds 
force to the final disaster. In this view it is manifest that 
the truest friendship to the wayward is resolute, wise 
and well-planned opposition, which no flattery or political 
craft can overcome. Such friendship is seldom 
appreciated except by Him who reads the heart, though 
it does sometimes turn the sinner from the error of his 
way and save a soul from death. For such service how 
necessary is great sobriety, patience, faith, hope and 
love! especially in any efforts to assist fellow members 
of the prospective body of Christ, who are now on trial 
for eternal life and in the race for the prize of our high 
calling, lest any, becoming wayward, should fail of the 
grace of God. 

(4) We observe the progressive course of evil- 
how the sin of ingratitude and dishonor to a father 
brought on ambition and defiance of God; how this led 
to unscrupulous political intrigue, flattery and lying; 
and finally to a bold and wicked plot which was treason 
alike to the king and to God. In all this Absalom was 
cultivating that haughty spirit which goes before a fall. 

While thus noting the course of Absalom and its 
lessons to the young, there is also a hint of wisdom for 
parents which they would do well to heed. The example 
of David to his children was not a faultless one: 
the sins of his youth and of his later years yielded a 
most undesirable harvest. Not only had he violated 
the law of God in multiplying wives to himself (Deut. 17:14-17), 
but he had further transgressed by taking 
some heathen wives, the mother of Absalom being the 
daughter of the heathen king Talmai, king of Geshur 
in Syria; and the children of a polygamous household, 
living apart from their father with their several mothers, 
were necessarily almost without a father's influence 
and care, so that Absalom was brought up under the 
influence of a heathen mother and apparently with little 
reverence or respect for the true God. 

The sin of Amnon for which Absalom slew his 
brother was one deserving of punishment, and yet in 
view of his own sin with the wife of Uriah how could 
David become the avenger? The crime doubtless caused 
him sorrow and tears and bitter reflections upon the 
past, all of which he recognized as part of his own penalty 
but, remembering his own folly, he could not 
punish the offender. 

R2025 : page 198 

In the slaying of Amnon, whatever purposes of 
selfish ambition or personal hatred may have mingled 
with his indignation, Absalom was avenging the crime 
against his sister with only a lawful vengeance, the prescribed 
penalty being death. To David, who loved all 
his children, this was a terrible blow, and Absalom, 
fearing his indignation, fled to his maternal grandfather 
where for three years, unrecalled by his father, he remained, 



under the influence of that heathen land, no 

doubt restive under unfavorable conditions, with no indication 

of any favorable turn of affairs and chafing 

under a sense of injustice, since in avenging his sister 

he had merely executed the sentence of the Law (Deut. 27:22; 

Lev. 20:17); and, brooding over his misfortunes 

and magnifying all the faults and weaknesses of 

his father, it is no matter of surprise that the spirit of 

rebellion strengthened; for in the absence of any 

expression of his father's interest in him, how could he 

R2025 : page 199 

know of his heart yearnings? And when after three 
years he was permitted to return to the land, still he 
was not permitted to see his father's face, nor to know 
of his continued love for two more years. 

It is not, therefore, surprising that the experience 
of these five years fastened upon the mind of Absalom 
the conviction that his father no longer loved him or 
considered his interests; and this feeling rankling in 
his heart, he prepared to set at defiance his kingly authority, 
and in the fire of his youth, the self-consciousness 
of early manhood and his now dominant ambition, 
he also recklessly ignored the divine authority. 

This attitude of David toward his son was a great 
mistake on the part of David, the realization of which 
when it was too late to rectify it doubtless greatly 
deepened the grief which was subsequently expressed in 
the bitter and tearful lament, "O my son Absalom! my 
son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee. 
O Absalom, my son, my son!" For five years David 
had allowed the hard side of his nature to thoroughly 
conceal his tender emotions; and not only so, but in all 
that time he had been neglecting his opportunities for 
exerting a godly influence upon his son, and that at a 
time when he most needed such influence, and instead 
of which he was surrounded with the influences of a 
heathen land. It was a dear price for David to pay for 
his resentment, and in the light of his son's highest 
interests it was certainly very poor policy. Yet how 
often is the mistake of David repeated by fathers! 
Many seem to forget the temptations, trials and inexperience 
of youth, and so fail to be gracious, considerate, 
forbearing and studious of their highest interests. 
Kind, generous, self-forgetful interest will follow the 
son long after childhood has matured into manhood, 
and will make parental counsel very potent long after 
parental authority has ceased. 

There is probably no time in life more fraught with 
danger than when the young birds leave the home nest 
and launch out to try their own wings and to carve out 
their own fortunes. And if they can go with a father's 
and a mother's blessing; if every rebuff and misfortune 
they meet from a hard, cold world elicits home sympathy 
and prayers and loving encouragement; if father's 



house is felt to be the place of refuge in case of a sudden 
disaster; if they feel that loving forbearance there 
offsets the hard knocks of experience outside, what a 
power is there for good! It certainly is not a wise 
father that will long permit any pride of dignity or stiff 
reserve to forego the privileges of his position for the 
blessing of his offspring. 

Parents should heed well this lesson, that the bitter 
lament of David over a son whom kindness, forbearance 
and loving counsel and sympathy might have 
saved, may not be theirs; and in every relation of life 
let us all see to it that love not only exists, but also 
that it is made very manifest. 

In verse 7 the word "forty" evidently should be 
"four." It is believed to be a transcriber's error. 



R2025 : page 199 

ABSALOM'S DEFEAT AND DEATH. 

--AUGUST 30.--2 SAM. 18:9-17,32,33.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, 
but the way of the ungodly shall perish."— Psa. 1:6. 

THE successful conspiracy of Absalom, so artfully 
planned and skillfully executed, finally drove 
David from Jerusalem and planted Absalom there. But 
the victory of the conspirators was not yet complete 
while David, the rightful sovereign, lived. So Absalom 
and his counsellors conspired further against the 
life of the king. 

But the Lord raised up in Hushai a friend for 
David, and placed him among the counsellors of Absalom, 
and thus through his counsel brought to naught 
the foolish and wicked conspiracy. In the pride and 
wickedness of his heart, bent on the slaying of his 
father, Absalom placed himself at the head of a great 
army and went forth to fight. In contrast with this 
wickedness mark the father's love, even under these 
extremely trying circumstances, saying to his men as 
they went forth to meet Absalom, "Deal gently, for my 
sake, with the young man, even with Absalom." 

How suddenly God brought to naught the evil designs 
of this wicked young man: elated with his success 
and proudly riding to expected victory, he was 
suddenly caught by the head in the branches of a great 
oak; his mule passed on leaving him helplessly suspended, 
and the friends of David finished the work. 
Joab's trumpet of victory is blown, the conspiracy has 
come to naught, the usurper is dead and buried under 
a heap of stones, and those that were with him seek to 
hide their faces for very shame; and King David, the 
Lord's anointed, returned again to Jerusalem in 



peace. 

In the lesson which these circumstances afford let 
us mark well how short is the triumph of evil doers. 
Though their eyes stand out with fatness and they have 
more than heart could wish (Psa. 73:7); and tho now the 
world calls the proud happy and they that work wickedness 
are set up, and they that tempt God are even delivered 
(Mai. 3:15), yet soon they will all be as stubble 
under the feet of the righteous. (Mai. 4:1.) The 
time may indeed seem long to those burdened by oppression; 
but it is not long in God's estimation. He 
will bring forth judgment unto victory just as soon as 
the wisdom of his purposes will permit. If justice be 
delayed, it is only for the development of some greater 
good than could be accomplished by a speedy adjustment. 
In this confidence, therefore, let the Christian 
rest, assured that all things— even the seeming delays 
—shall work together for good to them that love God, 
to the called according to his purpose. (Rom. 8:28.) 
"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which hath 
great recompence of reward; for ye have need of patience 
that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive 
the promise."— Heb. 10:36. 



R2025 : page 200 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Ohio. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been thinking about 1 Thes. 4:16. 
As noted in DAWN [Vol. II, p. 146], the word "shout," as per 
concordance, means "a shout of encouragement." I believe the word 
from which "shout" is here translated does not elsewhere occur in the 
New Testament. In looking at the word rendered "Jubilee," I notice that 
the meaning is given as "time of shouting" or "shout." 

It has occurred to me that possibly the word "shout" in 1 Thess. 4:16 
might mean the same as jubilee, and that Paul, possibly, there 
conveys the idea of an antitypical jubilee. The jubilee of old, I believe, 
was ushered in by the priests, the trumpet and the shout. Might it not 
be a jubilee shout? Might it not be possible that this passage is a 
proclamation of the Great Antitypical Jubilee? In Psalm 89:15 we read, 
"Blessed is the people who know the joyful sound [shout]." (See concordance 
for this word "sound" and also "joyful sound.") "They shall 
walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance." Isaiah 27:13 says:— 
"And it shall come to pass in that day that the great trumpet shall be 
blown." Zech. 9:14 says:— "And the Lord shall blow the trumpet." 

Should there be any such connection between the "shout" in 
1 Thes. 4:16 and the word jubilee, then the other scriptures I have 
named would appear to be specially significant. 

In the type, if I am correct, the first day of the Jubilee year was 
also the Day of Atonement. "In the Seventh month, on the tenth day 
of the month, ye shall afflict your souls." (Lev. 16:29.) From this it 



would appear to be a day of sorrow rather than gladness. Is it not 
probable that the trumpet did not sound until evening? Then the afflicting 
of the soul was over, the great atonement completed, the High 
Priest had entered within the veil and returned alive, all transgression 
had been symbolically carried away. In the evening, therefore, joy and 
triumph might well be in order. 

Do the Scriptures indicate just when the trumpet was blown? 

On the supposition that the shouting and sounding of the trumpet 
took place in the evening, it might follow that the antitypical trumpet 
might be looked for later than 1874. If October 1874 is the date of 
the commencement of the Antitypical Jubilee, then when would the 
Antitypical Trumpet be due to sound? 

R2026 : page 200 

I have thought that possibly the Pentecost, or Feast of Weeks, 
might be a type of the thousand years or times of Restitution. Doctor 
Smith's Old Testament History says (pages 264, 265 and 258), "The 
Pentecost was the Jewish Harvesthome." "The Pentecost is the only 
one of the three great feasts which is not mentioned as the memorial of 
events in the history of the Jews." "It was doubtless after the sacrifices 
of that solemn day were ended, that the trumpet of Jubilee pealed forth 
its joyful notes," etc. I would be pleased to have your views regarding 
this in your own time and way. 

Your brother, C. C. KELLY. 

[We are in full agreement with the various propositions above set 
forth. The Gospel age has been the antitypical "Day of Atonement," 
in which Christ Jesus our Lord redeemed the world and in which, also, 
the Church as his body "fills up that which is behind" of his sufferings. 
(See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES.) The Millennial 
age, we understand, was typified by the "Feast of Tabernacles." 
It will be a time of rejoicing but not a time of fixity, because that which 
is perfect will not fully come until the end of the Millennium, when the 
unfit who have neglected to hear the great Prophet, the Christ, will be 
destroyed from among the people, and the age of everlasting and fully 
established perfection amongst men will begin. The "harvest" (Oct. 
1874 to Oct. 1914) is the lapping time in which the Gospel age ends 
and the Millennial age begins. The Jubilee trumpet we identify as one 
with the Seventh Trumpet and Trump of God. (See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. II., page 197.) The Apostle Paul was a prophet as well 
as an Apostle and the "shout [of encouragement]" (1 Thes. 4:16) 
should be understood to be the people's response to the Jubilee trumpets 
blown by the priests.— EDITOR.] 



page 200 

Kansas. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our number here is holding its own, 
and we have been quite successful in scattering the truth. A great 
many appear to see the reasonableness and scriptural authority of the 
"Plan," but Oh! so few are willing to sacrifice and must simply be 
driven by the fiery troubles to give up their love for the god of this 
world. Thanks be unto God who giveth us the victory; his kingdom 



for which we have prayed is coming, and his will will soon be done on 
earth as it is in heaven. It seems that if the people would only open 
their eyes and ears they could not fail to understand (see) the Christ 
presence casting Satan out of his high ruling position. Let us work on, 
fight on, suffer on; the time is not much longer; and he is faithful and 
just for whom we labor, and will reward us bountifully. J. C. GAULT. 



R2026 : page 200 

Alabama. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-From an article in a late TOWER 
I find I had anticipated your ideas, for I had been teaching the same to 
my children and had set forth the same sentiments to a few special 
friends, in regard to the perpetuation of the lives of children of Christian 
parents; holding out the idea to them, as gathered from the Scriptures, 
that they, above all others, would have the special protecting care of 
God in this great battle of the day of God Almighty which is now being 
waged. While I recognize that they will have special protection thrown 
around them, yet, if they would enjoy the full benefits of his grace 
or favor, and live over into the full of the Millennial kingdom, when 
none will die except for wilful sin, they themselves have a work to 
do, after arriving at the years of accountability; viz., it is necessary 
that they live a righteous life, and the only difference between their 
relationship with God, and that of the children of the unrighteous, consisted 
in the more abundance of grace supplied them, which would the 
better strengthen them, and support them in this hour of trial; that God 
could not, nor would not, look upon sin with any degree of allowance in 
any one; but by his grace or favor, for their parents' sake, in Christ, the 
Father would be more liberal in supplying his grace to the children of 
Christian parents. I have told my children in my talks to them that if 
they did not live on and on forever it would be because they resisted the 
leading of the spirit, and persisted in living an unrighteous life. 

Will you bear with me while I relate two instances in point, relating 
to my own family, in brief. My business called me from home. I 
received intelligence that my youngest child was dangerously ill. I 
immediately took it to the Lord in earnest prayer. This was about 8 P.M. 
The spirit's leading was so plain in the matter that next morning, 
before any further advice in regard to the condition of my child had been 
received, I wrote a card, saying that though the child had been very 
sick it was better and would be all right soon. The next evening I received 
a card from home which had been written before mine reached 
them stating that it was greatly improved and that there seemed to be a 
sudden change for the better about 8 o'clock the night previous. This 
is a matter of record. 

The second case is that of my daughter. When she was a child 
(she is now 18) her eyes became affected so she could not see her way, 
and had to be led about. I sent her to an oculist, and she remained 
there for about three months; she came home considerably improved. 
We continued his treatment for some time after her arrival at home, until 
finally the medicine seemed to lose its effect, and she became worse. 
I carried the case to God in prayer; and she is now comparatively well. 
While this case is not so well marked by immediate results, it is plainly 
the work of restitution. 

Your yokefellow in Christ, J. W. CLARDY. 



page 201 

VOL. XVII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1896. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 202 

"It Repented the Lord" 203 

Evident Invalidity of the Apocrypha 204 

Restitution, Faith Cures (Concluded) 206 

Bible Study: David's Love for God's 

House 209 

Bible Study: David's Gratitude to God 210 

Interesting Letters 21 1 

page 202 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2026 : page 203 

"IT REPENTED THE LORD." 



"And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth 
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only 
evil continually. And it repented the Lord that he had 
made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart; and 
the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created, 
from the face of the earth."— Gen. 6:5-7. 

THE question naturally arises, If God is omniscient, 
knowing the end from the beginning, how could 
he repent of his course in creating man? 

The word "repent" means, according to Webster, 
"To change the mind, or course of conduct, on account 



of regret or dissatisfaction with what has occurred." 
The question then is, Did God change his 
mind [plan] or his course of conduct? We claim that, 
knowing the end from the beginning, God's mind could 
not change; hence "repent" in this text must signify 
change of conduct. That is, God did change his course 
of dealing with man because of man's wickedness which 
grieved him, but he did not need to change his mind or 
plans, because these plans had from the very first recognized 
the corrupting and degrading tendency of sin, 
and provided (in purpose of mind) the Lamb of God— 
"slain from the foundation of the world," as the redemption 
price.-Rev. 13:8; 17:8. 

It is difficult for our finite minds to comprehend 
this, because for us to change our course of action usually 
means to change our minds or plans as well— 
because of our shortsightedness. To comprehend Omniscience 
and Omnipotence is as difficult as to comprehend 
eternity or the infinitude of space. But what no 
one can fully comprehend, we, as God's children, may 
at least apprehend by faith, guided by his revelation to 
us. To those whose eyes are anointed with eyesalve 
(Rev. 3:18), the fulfilments of the prophetic statements 
of God's Word, in both the Old and the New Testaments, 
now discernible, give ample proof that God does 
know the end from the beginning; that he changes not 
from his original purpose. (Mai. 3:6; Isa. 14:27.) 
God's plans were perfect before they began to be executed; 
hence all the changes of God's course or conduct 
are working out the accomplishment of his original 
purpose which contemplated these very changes. Those 
who recognize the gradual development of God's original 
plan can see clearly that the various changes in his 
course or dealings, as displayed in the Jewish, Gospel 
and Millennial Ages, do not at all indicate so many 
changes of his mind or plan, though they are doubtless 
so misunderstood by many. 

It is asked, Why then is this passage so expressed as 
to give the impression that because God's heart was 
grieved by reason of man's wickedness, his mind as 
well as his action changed? We answer, This matter 
is stated in a manner suited to convey to the general 
reader as much as he is able to comprehend of God's 
reasons for the change. God was very much grieved 
and displeased by man's rapid progress in wickedness; 
that, instead of loathing his sinful condition and looking 
to God for relief, he took pleasure in still further 

R2027 : page 203 

degrading himself; and God, according to his original 
purpose, changed the course of his dealings and ended 
that age by blotting out of existence for a time those 
who were so unworthy, that their gross depravity should 
not interfere in the further development of his plan.* 
Thus also when God speaks of the sun as rising and 



setting, he addresses himself to men according to their 
comprehension; as is the custom of both the learned 
and unlearned to-day. 

It was then, and still is, impossible for the fallen 
natural man to clearly appreciate and realize these matters; 
and God's purpose seems to be to prove to man 
the Omniscience as well as the Justice and Love of his 
Creator, rather than to tell him of them. 



*Under the strict discipline of the Millennium, those who then 
will not even attempt righteousness will be compelled to conform to it 
and to taste of its advantages over sin and its results, so that there will 
be no excuse for the failure of any to choose life and live forever. 



R2027 : page 204 

EVIDENT INVALIDITY OF THE APOCRYPHA. 

BY REV. F. W. FARRAR, DEAN OF CANTERBURY. 

"IT is a matter of real astonishment that outside 

the circle of the canonical gospels so few reminiscences 

are preserved of the Perfect Man, who, though 

he was the Son of God, yet lived as a living man among 

living men. There are multitudes of historical celebrities 

respecting the incidents of whose lives endless details 

and anecdotes have been recorded and preserved. 

It is little short of amazing that neither history nor tradition 

should have embalmed for us one certain or precious 

saying or circumstance in the life of the Savior 

of mankind, except the comparatively few events recorded 

in four very brief biographies. St. Paul has 

preserved for us the one deep word of the Lord Jesus, 

how he said, "It is more blessed to give than to receive," 

and it is just possible that the rule, "Approve 

yourselves trustworthy moneychangers," quoted by 

several of the Fathers, which, after all, is little more 

than an epitome of the parable of the talents and the 

pounds, may be a true recollection of his words. Many 

of the "unrecorded sayings" of Christ (the agrapha 

dogmata) are profound and forcible, and it is far from 

improbable that some of them may be a true echo of 

what he said; but there is not one of them which adds 

a new thought or a new lesson to those contained in 

the authentic discourses and parables. It is quite certain 

that neither from the apocryphal gospels, nor from 

any other source, do we derive one anecdote or even 

one hint upon which we can rely as expressing a single 

new feature of his example, or a single additional particular 

of his life. 

"WHAT WAS CHRIST'S APPEARANCE? 



"We could not have a more signal proof of this 
failure of tradition than the astounding fact that, not 
only at this day, but even in the early centuries, there 
was not even a dim remembrance as to the physical appearance 
of the King of Glory. Was he of beautiful 
features and commanding aspect, or was he of marred 
visage and mean appearance? We might surely have 
anticipated that so much at least might have been remembered. 
But it was not. The descriptions of 
Christ, which for centuries haunted and dominated the 
numberless endeavors of Art to represent him during 
and since the Middle Ages, were late forgeries, not 
earlier at the earliest than the seventh and eighth centuries. 
As early as the fourth and fifth centuries it was 
disputed whether he was 'the chief among ten thousand 
and altogether lovely,' 'fairer than the children of 
men,' and 'endowed with the oil of gladness above his 
fellows;' or whether he was smitten and stricken and 
ugly and dwarfish. The earlier view that he was exceptionally 
unbeautiful in appearance prevailed mainly 
in consequence of the false conception of life, and the 
revolting glorification of dirt and unnatural asceticism, 
which invaded Christianity from Paganism and the 
East, and upheld before Christians the ideal of yogis 
and fakirs. The belief that there must have been 
'something starry' in the look of Christ, and that one 
who is repellent in aspect could never have won the 
passionate adoration of multitudes, commended itself 
to the opinion of many in the fourth century, who, 
further, rightly argued that his outward form could 
not but have been translucent with the moral and spiritual 
beauty within. But the remarkable thing is that 
neither party of those who treated the subject from opposite 
points of view was able to claim the slightest 
authority of tradition for their opinion on a subject so 
full of interest. They argued exclusively a priori, 
from what they regarded as most fitting, or a posteriori 
from their interpretation of passages in Isaiah and the 
Psalms. Nor did the earliest efforts of Christian art 
afford them the smallest assistance. For nearly five 
centuries it was generally regarded as profane, among 
the greatest writers and thinkers in the church, to attempt 
any naturalistic representation of Christ at all. 
The sweet and simple artists of the catacombs, with no 
exception before the fourth century, and with but few 
exceptions for two or three centuries later, only idealized 
him as a radiant boy; and men like Eusebius, Epiphanius 
and Asterius were even shocked and scandalized 
by any wish or attempt to paint the human Christ in any 
naturalistic method, or otherwise than by way of symbol. 

"Now, if tradition could not even tell the Christian 
inquirer of 1,000 or 1,700 years ago whether the 
lineaments of Jesus were beautiful or ill-favored, it is 



supremely unlikely that it should have preserved any 
other particulars. In point of fact, the Apocryphal 
Gospels do not represent tradition at all. They are for 
the most part poor, valueless, ill-guided and to a great 
extent heretical figments. 

"Happily their authors, some of whom wrote as 
late as the seventh and eighth centuries, had not the 
audacity to pretend that they could reproduce any of 
Christ's essential teaching. They occupied themselves 
exclusively with the invention of imaginary details 
about his infancy, or about his cross or his passion. 

"OF WHAT VALUE ARE THE APOCRYPHAL ACCOUNTS? 



"Several answers may be given apart from the fact 
that it is always interesting to watch the tendency of 
human speculations about sacred things. First of all, 
they furnish a melancholy proof of the sort of way in 
which many Christians had begun, as time went on, to 
form most distorted and erroneous opinions about the 
person and character of Christ. Secondly, they furnish 
us with a striking gauge of the unapproachable and 
immeasurable superiority of the Canonical Gospels. 
Thirdly, they show us that such was the unique divinity 
of Christ that he stood infinitely above all the capabilities 
of human invention. Whenever men venture 
to give the reins to their imagination respecting him, 
even with the intention to exalt and magnify, they do 
but instantly dwarf and degrade his sinlessness and supreme 
majesty. 

"Passing over the many legends of the Virgin— 
which, however, are not yet due to Mariolatry, but to 
the desire to glorify Jesus through her— we come to 
the pretended anecdotes about Jesus as a boy. 

"STORIES ABOUT THE BOYHOOD OF CHRIST. 



" 1 . Many of them are mere translations into hard 
prose of the metaphors of the prophets and psalmists. 

R2027 : page 205 

Thus, since we read in the Psalms, 'Praise the Lord 
upon earth, ye dragons and all deeps,' we are told that 
when Jesus was a child, dragons came out of a cave 
and worshiped him. If we read in the Canticles, 'I 
will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of its 
boughs,' we have the story that during the flight into 
Egypt Mary longed to refresh herself with ripe dates, 
and Jesus commanded the palm branches to bow down 
to her, rewarding their obedience by sending a palm 
branch to heaven by the hands of angels, and making 



it the sign of victory. If the prophet says, 'The idols 
of Egypt shall be moved at his presence,' the prophecy 
is transformed into the tale that, as the Holy Family 
entered the city of Hermopolis, the 365 idols of its 
temple all fell with their faces to the earth, in consequence 
of which the priests and all the people were at 
once converted. 

"If we read in Isaiah, 'The ox knoweth his owner 
and the ass his master's crib,' and in another verse, 'In 
the midst of the years shalt thou be known'— with the 
mistranslation of the Septuagint, 'in the midst of two 
animals shalt thou be recognized'— we are furnished 
with the tale, reproduced in so many thousand pictures, 
and even in the Catacombs, that, as Jesus lay in the 
manger, the ox and the ass worshiped him. 

"2. Another large class of the apocryphal stories 
of the infancy consists in a multiplication of meaningless 
miracles. There is not a single miracle of the gospels 
which does not teach us deep lessons: there is not 
a single miracle invented in these fictions which does. 
In the gospels, the evangelist's every miracle is a revelation; 
but the apocryphal miracles of the infancy are 
mere startling thaumaturgy. The boy Jesus drops all 
kinds of robes into a single dyer's vat, and when the 
dyer is vexed, he pulls them all out dyed with the different 
colors required; he 'profanes' the Sabbath by 
making sparrows of clay, and when he is reproved by 
the scribes he claps his hands and makes them fly. 
Breaking a pitcher, he brings back water to his mother 
in his robe. While working in the carpenter's shop he 
sees Joseph vexed because the two beams for a couch 

R2028 : page 205 

are of unequal length, and Jesus pulls the shorter one 

to the requisite size. He is accused of having pushed 

a boy from a housetop, and killed him; he therefore 

leaps down from the roof, raises the boy to life and 

makes him acknowledge that it was another lad who 

had given him the push. He changes into kids some 

boys who had hidden themselves from him when he 

wanted them to play with him; and then, at the entreaty 

of their mothers, transforms them into boys. It 

is needless to touch further on this prodigality of superfluous 

and unmeaning portents. 

"THEY PRESENT A FALSE PICTURE. 



"3. But, worse than this, the Apocryphal Gospels, 
from the ignorance, and probably, in most instances, 
from the heretical opinions of their writers, make 
the boy Jesus positively repulsive in character. He is 
implacably revengeful and cruelly remorseless. He becomes 
the terror of the neighborhood in which he lives, 



so that, because of him, his parents live in perpetual 
disquietude and alarm. He is pert, petulant and intolerable 
to his teachers, and instead of listening to their 
instructions, lectures them on 'physics and metaphysics, 
hyperphysics and hypophysics.' Let one or two 
instances suffice. 

" 1 . 'When the Lord Jesus was returning home 
with Joseph in the evening he met a boy who ran to 
thrust him so violently that he fell down. Jesus said 
unto him, 'As thou hast thrown me down, so shalt 
thou fall and not rise.' And the same hour the boy 
fell down, and breathed his last.' 

"2. Again Jesus had been making some pools and 
channels of water, and 'the son of Annas, the scribe, 
was standing there with Joseph, and took a branch of 
willow and spilled the water which Jesus had collected. 
And when Jesus saw what was done, he was angry and 
said to him, 'Wicked, impious and foolish one, wherein 
have the pools wronged thee? Behold now, thou shalt 
also wither as a tree.' When the parents complained, 
his mother came and entreated him to be less wrathful. 
'But he said, 'He was worthy of death because he destroyed 
the works which I had wrought.' Therefore 
his mother besought him saying, 'Do not, my Lord, 
because they all rise against us.' And he, not willing 
that his mother should be grieved, spurned the body 
of the dead with his right foot, and said to him, Arise, 
O son of iniquity, for thou art not worthy to enter into 
the rest of thy father.' Then he who was dead arose 
and departed. 

"3. Again, when he is sent to a teacher to learn 
his letters, the master begins imperiously to teach him, 
saying, 'Say Aleph.' But Jesus said to him, 'First 
tell me what Beth is.' The master, being angry, struck 
him with a rod of storax-wood; and soon after he smote 
him he died. And Jesus returned home to his mother. 
But Joseph being afraid called Mary to him and said, 
'Know truly that my soul is sad unto death on account 
of that boy.' 

"THE AUTHENTIC ACCOUNTS ENOUGH. 



"It is, then, abundantly clear that the spurious 
James, and Matthew, and the others, have not only 
nothing genuine to teach us about Jesus, but that the 
picture of him which they represent is utterly debased. 
The genuine gospels were written for our learning, not 
for our amusement; to promote our salvation, not to 
gratify our curiosity. Their very silence is eloquent 
with truth. What do they tell us of the infant and the 
youthful Christ? They give us the narrative of his 
birth; they present us with the picture of the sweet, 
submissive years spent in the shop of the carpenter at 
Nazareth; but from his early return from Egypt to 



Galilee, up to the commencement of his ministry, when 
he 'began to be about 30 years old,' they preserve but 
one anecdote and one word. The one anecdote is the 
story of that visit to Jerusalem; and this to show us 
how, in his earliest years, he loved his Father's house 
of prayer. The one word is 'the carpenter,' in the 
disdainful question of the vulgar and the ignorant, who 
thought that they had abolished his claims when they 
asked, 'Is not this the carpenter?' That one word tells 
us all that is to be told of more than twenty years, during 
which he grew 'in wisdom, and stature, and favor 
with God and man.' A scanty record? Not scanty 
for its purpose, for in that one word is revealed to all 
mankind nothing less than the sacred dignity of labor, 
and the blessed truth that the true grandeur and meaning 
of human life depend neither on rank nor fame, 
neither on the glare of publicity nor on the entourage 
of power, nor on the multitude of things which a man 
possesses." 



R2028 : page 206 
RESTITUTION, FAITH CURES, PRAYER CURES AND 
THE GIFT OF HEALING. 
--(CONCLUDED FROM OUR LAST.)- 
PROOF-TEXTS CONSIDERED. 



Although we have already considered the principle 
proof-texts for Faith Cures, it may not be amiss to examine 
a few more passages of Scripture supposed to imply 
that it is the duty of Christian people to pray for 
their recovery from sickness and not to resort to 
medicines. 

(1) Psalm 103:2-4. "Bless the Lord, O my soul, 
and forget not all his benefits: who forgiveth thine iniquities; 
who healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth 
thy life from destruction." 

It should not be forgotten that the great work begun 
at Calvary (and which in its ultimate effects is to 
bring blessings to every member of the human family 
who will accept of them upon God's terms), has not 
yet reached its completion. The sacrifice for sins 
is "finished," "once for all;" and those who believe 
and obey the gospel, the "saints," have their sins 
"covered" under the robe of Christ's righteousness, so 
that they may have access to and communion with their 
Heavenly Father; but their sins wait to be "blotted 
out" (Acts 3:19) until the end of the "better sacrifices" 
of this antitypical "Day of Atonement;" when 



their sins shall be completely blotted out— new unblemished 
spiritual bodies being granted them instead of the 
present imperfect ones upon which the marks of sin 
and imperfection are all too manifest. The work of 
Christ for the Church, of blotting out sins and healing 
all blemishes or diseases of mind and body, will not be 
complete until the Millennial morning; and this Psalm 
must be understood from this standpoint. It cannot 
be understood from any other standpoint, for in no other 
way is it true. Those who have received physical 
healing either by "gifts" or "prayers of faith" have 
never yet been completely healed of all their diseases. 
At very most they receive a temporary blessing and 
must wait until the "Morning," when the Redeemer 
shall heal all the diseases of all his people by giving 
them the bodies prepared for those who love God. 

So long as the "night" continues, disease and discomfort 
will continue. Not only does the whole creation 
groan and travail in pain together until now, but 
"ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of the spirit, 
even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for 
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body [the 
Church, the body of Christ]." (Rom. 8:23.) "Weeping 
may endure for a night but joy cometh in the 
morning."— Psa. 30:5. 

(2) "Himself took our infirmities and bare our 
sicknesses. "-Matt. 8:17; Isa. 53:4. 

To apply this passage of Scripture as our Faith-Cure 
friends do is utterly wrong; a total misapplication 
of the words, and a violation of the context. This passage 
is quoted to prove that none of the saints should 
have sicknesses and infirmities. But the Evangelist, to 
the contrary, affirms that these words of the prophet 
have had their fulfilment. He says that the fulfilment 
took place in his day, at the first advent, in the healing, 
not of the saints, but of the multitudes. 

A comparison of Isa. 53 with Heb. 4:15 and 
Mark 5:30 and Luke 6: 19 shows us clearly that this 
prophecy was completely fulfilled; and that the object 
was that our Lord should suffer pain from the infirmities 
of those whom he relieved, because, being without 
sin, he was also without sickness and pain, except as 
he thus "took" and "bare" it from others that he 
might be touched with a feeling of our infirmities. 

Those who misunderstand this passage ask: If 
Christ bore our sins and sicknesses, why should we 
have them to battle with? We answer: He bore the 
penalty of our sins in order that in God's due time he 
might justify and, by a resurrection, deliver from death 
all who accept his grace. And he was touched with 
a feeling of our infirmities in order that he might be a 
faithful and sympathetic high priest, and that we might 
realize him as such. 

(3) The case of Hezekiah's healing in answer to 
his prayers and tears is cited as a proof of a proper 
course.— 2 Kings 20:1-7. 



We reply that it is not denied that God at sundry 
times has been pleased to grant miraculous answers to 
prayers as evidences of his own power. But nothing 
about Hezekiah's case indicates that such healings were 
common occurrences. On the contrary, the prophet 
did not pray with him, nor suggest prayer, but evidently 
was surprised when sent back to inform Hezekiah 

R2029 : page 206 

that he would recover. Moreover, Hezekiah, although 
very sick, does not seem to have prayed for 
healing until told that death was near. In the healing, 
a lump of figs, a human instrumentality, a poultice, 
was used; but many who believe in faith healing today 
would object to a fig poultice or any other human 
instrumentality. 

(4) King Asa was diseased in his feet, "yet in his 
disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians; 
and Asa slept with his fathers"— died. (2 Chron. 16:12.) 
This is cited to prove that to call a physician 
was a sin, and that therefore Asa died. 

Not so, we reply. The whole case must be kept 
in memory, if we would understand this portion of the 

R2029 : page 207 

record. Israel was separated from the nations of the 

world by divine providence, and a special agreement 

made between God and that nation, called The Covenant 

of the Law. This was instituted formally at Mt. 

Sinai in the wilderness of Zin, after God had brought 

Israel out of Egypt. While that Covenant made nothing 

perfect and none of the Israelites got or could get 

eternal life under its provisions, until Christ who as the 

Prince of Israel fulfilled all of its requirements and inherited 

its reward of eternal life, it had special provisions relating 

to the physical health and prosperity of Israelites. 

(See Deut. 7:11-15 and 28:1-12,15,21,27,28,37-42,45-53,59-61.) 

If faithful to God, they would be blessed 

in temporal things above all other nations; but, on the 

contrary, if Israel would not obey the Lord, they were 

to receive extraordinary punishments. 

Asa, as the king or representative of this nation, 
was specially subject to the foregoing conditions. He 
had sinned (See preceding verses: 2 Chron. 16:7,10), 
although in general a worthy king (See 2 Chron. 15:16,17,18); 
his sickness was in the nature of a punishment 
for his sin according to the Israelitish covenant 
with God. His heart should have repented and turned 
toward God, but instead he imprisoned God's servant, 
trusted to physicians, defied God and was cut off according 
to the covenant. 

Thousands of Israelites were destroyed by plagues, 
sometimes for national sins, under the operation of 
their covenant above cited. On such occasions the 



rulers understood that it was a punishment and made 
no effort to use medicines nor to stop the plagues by 
sanitary laws or arrangements, but offered sin-offerings 
and prayed for divine mercy.— See 2 Samuel 24:12-15-25; 
Joshua 7:7-11-25,26; Numbers 21:5-7-9. 

But such a course would not be the proper one for 
the rulers of other nations, then or now. It was the 
proper course for Israel because of God's special covenant 
with that nation. They were slow to learn this 
lesson, and inclined to think of their calamities as similar 
to those of other nations; and hence the Lord more 
than once through the prophets reminded them that, so 
far as they were concerned, if they had his good favor, 
it was manifested in their prosperity; if they had his 
disfavor, it was manifested in the calamities (evils) 
under which they suffered. (See Isa. 45:7.) He assures 
them (Amos 3:6) that, if there were in their cities 
calamities or plagues or disasters (physical evil things 
of any sort— not moral evils), he was their author. 
But this does not apply to other nations. Consequently 
the intelligent people of to-day are quite right in not 
regarding as manifestations of special divine anger the 
London plague and the Chicago fire and the St. Louis 
cyclone and the Chinese floods and the Japanese earthquake 
and tidal-wave and the Russian famine and coronation 
disasters and the Egyptian cholera and other 
less natural disorders and disasters and accidents by 
rail, water, fire, famine, fever, consumption, etc., etc. 

Not only has God no such covenant with the nations 
of the world to-day, but he has never made such 
a covenant of temporal prosperity with his saints. 
Quite to the contrary, they are called to walk with God 
by faith and not by sight— not by outward evidences of 
divine favor. The Gospel Church is specially told that 
her calling is to suffer with Christ for well-doing. She 
is invited to sacrifice present prospects and earthly favors, 
and is offered instead heavenly joys and blessings— a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. She is 
to look not for the things which are seen, but for those 
which are unseen and eternal. She is to realize the 
divine wisdom and submit gladly to such experiences 
of prosperity or adversity, health or sickness, as the 
Lord may see to be to the highest interests of her members, 
all of whom, as true members of the body of 
Christ, are dear to the Bridegroom Head who promises, 
graciously, that he will not suffer his members to be 
tempted above what they are able to bear, but will 
succor them, cause all present experiences (bitter and 
sweet) to work for their good, and no really good thing 
withhold from them. 

(5) Romans 8:11 is sometimes cited as a proof 
that Christians are to expect physical healings. This 
is as much of a mistake in one direction as some 
well meaning Christians make in an opposite direction, 
when they understand this verse to teach 
the resurrection of our present identical bodies (in exact 



opposition to 1 Cor. 15:37,38). The expression, 

"If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the 

dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the 

dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit 

that dwelleth in you," should be interpreted in harmony 

with the context. Verse 10 declares, "If Christ 

be in you, the body is dead"— not literally dead, but 

reckonedly dead, in that the human will has died and 

the will of God in Christ has been accepted instead. 

The will is dead to sinful things; it does not love nor 

practice them, as it once did. The Apostle's argument 

is that such a deadness to sin, although desirable, should 

not be satisfactory to us; we should not stop there; we 

should by God's grace seek to get alive to righteousness 

and active in its service as once we were alive to 

sin and its service. He proceeds to show that this, although 

a great change, is possible to us; and he tells 

us how. He says that the mighty spirit of God which 

could and did resurrect our Lord from literal death is 

able to quicken (make alive) to the service of righteousness 

these very bodies once alive to sin but now by 

God's grace mortified, killed, "dead to sin." He 

therefore urges all who have the spirit of Christ not 

R2029 : page 208 

only to be dead to sin but to permit the spirit of Christ 
in them to make them alive to holiness and in general 
to God's service. He shows them further that the 
new spirit (mind) of Christ which they have received 
is a spirit of adoption into God's family as sons, and 
that if they are sons they not only are "free" but must 
have fruit unto holiness, and that their join t-heirship 
with Christ as sons depends upon this quickening of 
their mortal bodies— "if so be that we suffer with him 
[Christ], that we may be also glorified together." 

All who catch the real sense of the passage will 
see that it has no reference to physical quickening and 
immunity from sickness and pain, but to a quickening 
or energizing by the Lord's spirit so as to be, not only 
willing, but glad, to "suffer with him." Nor could it 
possibly refer to a literal resurrection of the mortal 
body, for not only are we assured that the body which 
is buried is not the one which will be raised, but we know 
that the spirit of Christ does not dwell in dead bodies: 
it is "the body without the spirit [of life that] is 
dead." 

(6) If sickness cannot come upon God's consecrated 
people contrary to his permission, would not the 
taking of medicine be putting ourselves in conflict with 
God's will? 

No. It is God's will that every member of the 
"body of Christ" should be touched with a feeling of 
the world's infirmities, in order that, when exalted to 
the Kingdom, they may be very tender, sympathetic 
and generous, when, as the royal priesthood, they shall 



judge the world. (1 Cor. 6:2.) Our Lord and Master, 
who had none of the imperfections of the fallen 
race, but was holy, harmless and separate from sinners, 
needed to take from men their sicknesses and infirmities 
(Matt. 8:16,17), in order that he might be touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities and be a faithful High 
Priest. It would be thoroughly illogical to suppose 
that the lessons necessary to the preparation of the High 
Priest for his office and service are not necessary to 
the underpriests who are called to suffer with him and 
to reign with him. 

Hence, those who see their high calling should not 
expect immunity from sufferings and trials and difficulties; 
and the usual aches and pains— headaches, 
toothaches, etc., etc.— which come to the Lord's people, 
as well as to the world, in a natural way, should be 
treated as the world treats them, but with greater patience 
and cheerfulness: that is, they should be avoided 
by reasonable care as to food, clothing, etc., and they 
should be alleviated by the use of such cures as may 
come under our notice. We need not fear thwarting 
God's will; that is impossible: he will take care of that 
part. See also our comments on this subject in our 
issue of July 15, page 168. 

SCHLATTER, MARK SMITH AND OTHER HEALERS. 



From Pennsylvania, Kentucky, Colorado, Illinois, 
New England and Australia come seemingly well authenticated 
accounts of miraculous healings of some 
diseases. Some of the healers pray with the sick, some 
do not; some lay on hands and anoint with oil, but 
mostly they merely grasp the hands of the sick. Some 
get all the money they can from the sick; others, 
like the Master, will receive no compensation. Some 
love to be called Rabbi and Reverend, others are plain, 
unassuming Christians. In answer to many inquiries 

R2030 : page 208 

respecting these healers and the source of their power, 
we answer:— 

We believe that some of them are God's agents, 
thus used in order to make a beginning of restitution 
work and to break it gradually to the people. It is, 
however, copied and sought to be offset in its effects by 
others whose powers are from the prince of darkness, 
who still endeavors to blind the minds of men to God's 
goodness and plan. (2 Cor. 4:4.) It is not possible 
for us to be sure from the meager and often incorrect 
newspaper reports, which are servants of God and which 
the servants of the adversary. Nor is it necessary that 
we should decide; God is at the helm and will direct 
his own, and whatever of the wrath of men or devils 



would not serve some useful purpose, either of trial or 
sifting, will be restrained. 

In thinking of these healers, we draw the line on their 
profession of faith in Jesus (as their Redeemer and Lord), 
and the doing of the healing in his name and by his power. 
Here we are on guard, however, against Spiritists, Christian 
Scientists and such like, who use the name Christ 
in a deceptive manner, meaning thereby themselves; i.e., 
denying any power or authority from Jesus, they claim 
that his power was merely because he was one of them 
—one of the Christ class possessed by their spirit, which 
is really deceptive and anti-Christ,— against Christ and 
in opposition to a true interpretation of the Bible. 

And amongst those seeming to us to be on the 
right side of the line of faith, we feel that those who 
refuse to make merchandise of their gifts or prayers 
and those who reject human titles and manifest most of 
humility and zeal and faith are most worthy of confidence 
and respect. But we know of none claiming 
these healing powers who are acquainted with and accept 
the divine plan and present truth as we understand it. 

Salvation! O ye toiling saints, 

By faith ye have it now; 
The promise is your daily strength, 

While to God's will ye bow. 

Salvation! O the blessed theme 

Shall fill the world with joy! 
When all its mighty work is seen, 

Praise shall all tongues employ. 



R2030 : page 209 

DAVID'S LOVE FOR GOD'S HOUSE. 

-SEPT. 6.-1 Chron. 22:6-16. Compare 1 Kings 1; Psa. 84. 

Golden Text— "Blessed are they that dwell in thy 
house; they will be still praising thee."— Psa. 84:4. 

AFTER the stirring events considered in our last 
lesson, David, being recalled by the people, 
returned to Jerusalem and set about bringing order out 
of the general confusion into which Absalom had 
plunged the nation. At the time of his returning a 
usurper, with some show of success, sought to intercept 
him and secure the throne for himself; but he was 
promptly dealt with, and David was again established 
in his kingdom, and several years of peace and progress 
followed.-2 Sam. 20:21. 

But the king's troubles were not yet ended: again 
from his own household came the notes of discord, and 
the experiences with Absalom seemed likely to be repeated 



in the rebellion of another son, Absalom's younger 
brother Adonijah, who had laid his plans and skillfully 
prepared to seize the throne and thus establish 
himself as David's successor. (See 1 Kings 1:1-53.) 
This attempt at usurpation and self-appointment led 
to the immediate anointing and proclamation of Solomon, 
whom God had indicated as his choice among the 
sons of David to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of 
the Lord. (1 Chron. 22:9,10; 28:5-7.) So Solomon 
was recognized as king in Israel in the room of his father 
David.- 1 Kings 1:34,39,40; 1 Chron. 29:22-25. 

David had now accomplished nearly all of his earthly 
mission. He found the dominion small, and now it 
was much extended. He found it in disorder, and left 
it thoroughly organized. He found religion at a low 
ebb, and he had succeeded in greatly reviving and energizing 
religious devotion and zeal. He found powerful 
enemies on every side, threatening the destruction 
of the nation, but he had subdued all the enemies 
and led the nation to a condition of peace and introduced 
them to a season of unparalleled prosperity. And 
not only so, but he had laid the foundation for the more 
permanent establishment of the service of God and the 
religious health of the nation in his preparations for the 
building and service of the temple which God had promised 
that his son and successor should build, and in the 
religious zeal and enthusiasm he had aroused on the 
part of the whole people, so that as one man they were 
at the service of Solomon in the great work. His life 
had been an eventful and a troubled one, not without 
its grave mistakes, but it had accomplished great 
things in bringing order out of confusion and establishing 
peace and prosperity on a permanent footing. 
The glory of Solomon's reign was but the harvest of 
David's labors and sufferings. While David was not 
permitted to build the temple himself, because he was 
a man of war, this was no reproach against David for 
engaging in those wars, for he had done so in the name 
of the Lord and for his people, and not from the unholy 
ambition of the world's warriors, for plunder and 
prestige. 

To some who think of the building of the Jewish 
temple as a mere mechanical service, like the building 
of any other temple, heathen or Christian, it may seem 
that there was much unnecessary ado about it. How 
strange, they mentally say, that it should be considered 
necessary for the whole nation to be at peace before 
the building could be undertaken! Why could not some 
be building while others were out fighting the battles? 
and why should the king be charged with the business? 
Were there not in all Israel plenty of architects and 
workmen and men suited to oversee the work, without 
burdening the king with it? 

Let us not forget that the building of the Jewish 
temple was not a mere mechanical service, the putting 
together of so much stone and mortar and wood, etc., 



but let us view it from the standpoint of David, who, 

in charging the congregation of Israel to diligently cooperate 

with Solomon in the work, said, "Solomon, my 

son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and 

tender, and the work is great; for the palace is not for 

man, but for the Lord God." (1 Chron. 29:1.) And 

the sacred edifice was not one of human designing: the 

plans and specifications were given to David by the 

spirit of the Lord:— "All this, said David, the Lord 

made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, 

even all the works of this pattern." 

"And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong 
and of good courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed; 
for the Lord God, even my God will be with 
thee; he will not fail thee nor forsake thee until thou 
hast finished all the work;... also the princes of all 
the people will be wholly at thy commandment. "-- 
1 Chron. 28:12,13,19-21. 

Thus it was to be a building into every fiber of 
which should be worked the religious devotion and zeal 
of the whole nation, and which should therefore stand 
as a monument of such devotion and zeal, and a testimony 
to coming generations which should awaken and 
preserve the same in them. Thus viewed, the work 
was indeed a great work; and, since all the people were 
to be interested and active in it, it was necessary that 
it should be undertaken only in a time of peace, when 
the attention of the people was not absorbed in wars 
and their attendant perplexities and calamities. It is 
manifestly appropriate, too, that the Lord's anointed 
king, in preference to any other individual, should have 
been charged with this important business, since it was a 
national enterprise, and he stood as the representative 
and head of the nation. 

In this view, as well as in view of its divinely ordained 
typical significance, it is also manifestly appropriate 
that its beauty, its costliness and all its adornments 
should represent the labor and care and sacrifices 
of the loving hearts and active hands of a people devoted 
to God. So David expressed it, when he said, 
"The house that is to be builded for the Lord must be 
exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout 
all countries."— 1 Chron. 22:5. 

In the charge of David to his son Solomon concerning 
the building of the temple, to which our attention 
is called, we catch a glimpse of the man after long experience 
and discipline had mellowed and enriched his 
character. Now, over every other ambition, his zeal 
for God predominates, and his chief desire for Solomon 
is that he may prove true and faithful to God and zealous 
in his service and that so he might abide in the divine 

R2030 : page 210 

favor. Then he bade him be strong and of good 
courage in the great work before him, assuring him of 



abundant prosperity and divine favor if he would only 
continue to heed and fulfil the statutes and judgments 
which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel. 
This counsel to Solomon may also with equal propriety 

R2031 : page 210 

be accepted by every Christian in the service of 
the Lord,— "Be strong and of good courage." Both 
strength and courage are necessary to faithful service 
and to success in the good fight of faith; and both are 
developed by patient endurance and faith in God under 
the various trials to which the Christian is exposed. 
The counsel of the Apostle Paul to the Church also 
tallies with that of David to Solomon, when he says, 
"Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might;" 
and again,— "Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit 
you like men, be strong."— Eph. 6:10; 1 Cor. 16:13. 

The prayer and thanksgiving of David to God, recorded 
in 1 Chron. 29:10-19, ascribing praise to him 
for the privilege of collecting the materials for his 
temple and humbly acknowledging that all their gifts 
were only returning to God that which was his own, 
expressing his joy in the freewill offerings of the people 
and praying that their hearts might ever incline to him, 
and that he would give unto Solomon a perfect heart, 
is full of touching pathos, reverence, meekness and holy 
enthusiasm. Read it and underscore its touching 
phrases, that again and again you may be refreshed and 
instructed by it. Then mark (vs. 20) how he led all 
the people to fervently bless the Lord, and how the enthusiasm 
thus kindled anointed Solomon a second time 
to sit on the throne of the kingdom of the Lord. (Vs. 22,23.) 
This second anointing was like the grand Amen! 
of the whole nation to the first anointing (1 Kings 1:38-40), 
which was, comparatively speaking, done in a 
very quiet way. 

Psalm 84, from which the Golden Text is taken, is 
another expression of David's devotion and zeal for the 
service of the Lord. While we thus contemplate the 
typical temple which kindled such an enthusiasm 
among the worthy saints of the Jewish dispensation, 
with what intensity of zeal and fervor should we regard 
that antitypical temple, the Church of the living God, 
whose living stones shall to all eternity show forth the 
praises of him who quarried and polished and fitted 
them together until it grew into a holy temple for the 
Lord in which he is pleased to dwell, and of which 
Christ Jesus is the chief corner stone.— Eph. 2:19-22. 



R2031 : page 210 

DAVID'S GRATITUDE TO GOD. 



--SEPTEMBER 13.-2 Sam. 22:40-51.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord is my rock and my 
fortress, and my deliverer."— 2 Sam. 22:2. 

THIS entire chapter is one of David's songs of 

praise and gratitude to God for his goodness and 

his loving providences which had been so manifest toward 

him ever since his anointing by Samuel the prophet, 

and doubtless before that as well. It calls to 

mind another expression of one of his psalms,— 

"Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous; for praise is 

comely for the upright." (Psa. 33:1.) Indeed, the 

writings of David, and all the prophets and apostles as 

well, abound in fervent expressions of praise and thanksgiving 

to God. They not only praise the Lord themselves, 

lovingly and gratefully recounting all his mercies, 

but, with impassioned eloquence and holy enthusiasm, 

they call upon all the sons of men, and every 

thing that hath breath, and even inanimate nature, to 

laud and magnify his holy name. The worshippers are 

also bidden to bring with them to the concert of praise 

every musical instrument of human device; and grateful 

reverence exclaims,— "Blessed be his glorious name 

forever, and let the whole earth be filled with his glory. 

Amen and Amen!"-Psa. 33:2,3; 50:1-6; 72:19. 

See also Exod. 15:1-21. 

As we thus consider that, by the voice of inspiration, 
the whole human race is called to praise and worship 
and thanksgiving, we are led to consider further 
the relationship which the spirit of praise has to the 
Christian or godly character. David says, it is "comely 
for the upright." But why so? It is because loving 
gratitude is one of the divinely implanted instincts 
of a soul bearing the image of God, and one which 
should therefore be cultivated. It is this element of 
the intelligent creature that is designed to be responsive 
to the divine goodness and benevolence; and it is 
this element of character in man which makes fellowship 
and communion with God possible. If the goodness 
of God could awaken in us no sense of grateful 
appreciation; if we were wholly dead to such sentiments, 
there could be no pleasure on God's part in manifesting 
his goodness to us, and there would be nothing 
in us to call out his love; and so also nothing, of all 
his goodness and grace, would awaken love in us. But 
since for the divine pleasure we are and were created 
(Rev. 4: 1 1), God endowed his intelligent creature 
with this element of character which, being responsive 
to his own goodness, institutes a lively and delightful 
fellowship with himself, which is the chief end of human 
existence, both on the side of the creature and of 
the Creator.-Psa. 16:11; Prov. 11:20; 15:8. 

Rejoicing and the spirit of praise are thus seen to 
be indissolubly linked together in the divine economy; 
and so David links them, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord, 



for praise is comely," thus making the two almost synonymous. 

To see this principle illustrated take as examples 

the dog and the hog. Neither can have any 

appreciation of the divine goodness, neither being created 

in the mental or moral likeness of God, and hence 

being utterly incapable of knowing or thinking of him. 

Man is the highest being that they can know in any 

sense or degree; and that is first, because man is visible 

and tangible to them, and second, because they have 

some similar faculties, though very inferior and exercised 

within a much narrower sphere. The dog has in 

him to a considerable degree the sense of gratitude: 

feed and caress him, and he shows signs of gratitude 

and affection, and a desire to reward you with a 

manifestation of appreciation. He wags his tail, looks 

R2031 : page 211 

kindly into your face, licks your hand, caresses you 
with his head and watches to see what errand he can 
do for you. But the hog, on the contrary, makes no 
demonstration of appreciation: he takes all he can get 
without even so much as a look of recognition; his eyes 
are always downward, and his snout continually rooting 
in the earth for more; and a grunt is the only sound 
to which he gives expression. A hog, therefore, can 
have no pleasure in man; nor can man find any pleasure 
in the hog. There is no bond of fellowship whatever, 
and man therefore tolerates his existence only 
until his flesh is fit for the slaughter and the market, 
while between the dog and his master there is strong 
friendship which, when cultivated, gives pleasure to 
both, and they become life-long friends, irrespective of 
any commercial value. 

It is plain, therefore, that in the cultivation of the 
spirit of praise, thanksgiving and loving appreciation 
of all the manifest goodness of God, is the Christian's 
secret of a happy life. And in order to the cultivation 
of such a spirit it is necessary that we continually call 
to mind his acts of mercy and of grace; that in our 
prayers we frequently tell him how all his goodness is 
remembered, how every fresh evidence of his love and 
care causes faith to take deeper root and makes the 
sense of his presence and favor more fully realized; and 
how through such experiences our love and joy are 
made to abound more and more. We love him because 
he first loved us; and every time we see some new mark 
of his love, our love, if we have truly appreciative 
hearts, is called out more and more, and we are made 
to rejoice in God, in whose presence is fulness of joy. 
It is to this end that our Lord encourages our frequent 
coming to God in prayer with large requests for his 
favor, saying, "Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy 
may be full."-John 16:24. 

We observe that in Israel the spirit of praise was 
cultivated by calling to mind and recounting what the 



Lord had done for them. "If I do not remember thee," 
says David, "let my tongue cleave to the roof of my 
mouth. "-Psa. 137:6. See also Exod. 15:1-21; Deut. 7:17,18; 
8:2; 15:15; 32:7; 1 Chron. 16:12; Psa. 20:7; 
63:5-7; 143:5,6; 77:10-12. 

So must the Christian continually call to mind the 
works of the Lord, especially his own individual experience 
of the Lord's leading and care and deliverances 
from dangers and snares and the wiles of the 
adversary. If we keep these things in mind and meditate 
upon them, our appreciation of God and his goodness 
grows, and the spirit of love and praise takes possession 
of the heart, and thus we are made to rejoice in 
the Lord always, and in everything to give thanks. So 
also the soul is made to hunger and thirst after God 
and to realize that God alone is its satisfying portion, 
and to desire more and more of his fulness. Thus, as 
the Psalmist suggests, our prayer will be, "As the hart 
panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after 
thee, OGod."-Psa. 42:1. 

This same principle of gratitude and praise, which 
reciprocates loving kindness and generosity, is that 
which also makes human friendship and fellowship possible 
and delightful. In our intercourse one with 
another, if the kindnesses we show awaken no sense of 
appreciation, receive no acknowledgment, and their repetition 
is expected as a matter of course, there can, in 
the very nature of things, be no such thing as fellowship. 
True, as Christians, we may not relax kindness 
and generosity on this account; for we, like our heavenly 

R2032: page 211 

Father, are to be kind to the unthankful as well as 
to the thankful (Matt. 5:44-48); but when this goodness 
awakens no appreciation, no love, fellowship becomes 
impossible. 

In David's thanksgiving for victories over his enemies 
we observe that those enemies were the enemies 
of the Lord and his people, whom David was commissioned 
of God to conquer. These battles he undertook in 
the strength which God supplied, and the victories he 
properly ascribes to God, the rock of his salvation. The 
words, regarded from the standpoint of the future, are 
also prophetic of the victories of Christ, of whom David 
was a type, and to whom Jehovah will grant victory 
full and complete over all his enemies,— the enemies of 
God, the enemies of truth and righteousness. The whole 
strain of thanksgiving, thus viewed in its wider application 
to the conquests of Christ, is eloquent in its prophecy 
of his glorious victory, as well as in praise to Jehovah. 
(1 Cor. 15:27,28.) The prophecy of a future wider 
dominion, contained in verses 44-46 can only be considered 
as fully applicable to the wider dominion of 
Christ. 

The Golden Text is a blessed assurance applicable 



to all of the Lord's people, and it is amply verified to all 
those who delight themselves in the Lord, who meditate 
upon his goodness and render to him the praise 
that is due to his holy name.— "The Lord is my rock 
[upon which I may safely build my hopes], and my 
fortress [in which I may safely hide], and my deliverer 
[in every time of trouble]." 



R2032: page 211 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Virginia. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I have been thinking much on the covenants 
lately. It is a significant fact that in all ages God has made Covenants, 
with visible signs thereof. His first covenant was made for all nations, 
and called an everlasting covenant, the sign of which he produces. 
(Gen. 9:12-17.) The token of the next covenant is described in Gen. 17:11. 
His covenant made with and for Israel at Horeb has its visible sign 
to be repeated by those under that covenant.— Ex. 31:17; Ezek. 20:12. 

Now, I want to ask, what is the visible sign of the New Covenant, 
if not the Memorials? Does not the Apostle bear out this, by saying, 
"As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's 
death," etc.? Does it not show that we are under the New Covenant 
of love? He said, "Do this in remembrance of me," and, when we 
"do this," we show our love for him, for, "he that loveth me keepeth 
my commandments." Would like to hear from you on this. We could 
not tell whether Israel recognized their Law Covenant or not, were it 
not for the observance of the Sabbath sign. This, of all the Ten Commandments, 
was the only one that others could decide as to their observance. 

Yours in the blessed hope, M. L. STAPLES. 

[In reply: While we believe that symbolic immersion is enjoined 
as an outward testimony or witness to the true immersion of the will into 
the will of God, as expressed in Christ; and that the Memorial Supper 
is enjoined as the proper and helpful remembrancer of our Lord's death, 
yet we do not regard these in the same light as circumcision to the children 

R2032 : page 212 

of Abraham and the Sabbath of the Jew, for they were compulsory 
as to outward form: ours are obligatory in their essence, but not in their 
outward form if not clearly seen. For instance, Cornelius was accepted 
under the New Covenant when he had eaten of the Paschal Lamb by 
faith and had immersed or buried his will into the divine will, before he 
ate of the symbolical Memorials (bread and wine), and before he had 
been symbolically buried with Christ into death in immersion. The 
same has been true of many since who did not at first, and others who, 
perhaps for lack of proper instruction, never discerned the relationship 
between the symbols and the facts. 

The Passover and the Sabbath and Circumcision were so strictly 
enjoined that the man who did not observe them could not be reckoned 
a Jew; but many are recognized both by God and men as Christians, 



under the New Covenant, who do not properly appreciate either baptism 
or the Memorial supper. 

Rather we would say that all the typical things of the past find antitypes 
under the New Covenant. The Passover lamb typified Christ 
slain as our ransom price; the eating of the lamb represents our 
faith-appropriation of Christ's righteousness, and was perpetuated as a type 
in the bread and wine Memorial. Circumcision typified our putting away 
the filth of the flesh [selfishness in every form] as new creatures; the 
Sabbath typified the rest of faith provided for all who come into New 
Covenant relationship with God. But the seal or mark of the New Covenant 
is on a wholly different plan: it is the possession of the spirit of Christ. 

The manifestations of this holy spirit are three-fold. (1) Love supreme 
to God and joyful loyalty to his cause even at the cost of suffering. 
(2) Love of the brethren— unselfish, noble, pure,— a desire for 
their welfare which is always alert to do them good. (3) Love, sympathetic, 
for the world, prompting to good works, as opportunity may 
afford, and to a desire and effort always to live peaceably with all men. 
Necessarily the foregoing will imply development in patience, meekness, etc. 

"If any man have not the spirit of Christ [in some degree, and progressively] 
he is none of his." His spirit is the bond of perfectness, the 
seal of the New Covenant.-EDITOR.] 



Pennsylvania. 

DEAR BROTHER:— Last Sunday at our meeting we had a lesson 
from Romans 12:1, and among many thoughts brought out from such 
a prolific subject were some on the use we make of our consecrated 
time. I am engaged in the grocery business; but the condition of trade 
in general demands almost "eternal vigilance" at the present time. 

The question which has presented itself to me many times is, 
Should I, as one of the consecrated, put forth such efforts to make and 
maintain custom as it is now necessary to do? I issue weekly price-lists, 
many times offering goods at less than cost for baits, and give away 
many more "gifts" with more profitable goods; not of preference to that 
sort of dealing, but because all my competitors are doing the same thing, 
and, to maintain my trade and living (as I am not wealthy), I am compelled 
to follow suit. 

Another objectionable feature about that kind of method is that it 
squeezes my weaker brother in the same line of business. I am acquainted 
with many of them; some are widows striving to make an 
honest living by selling goods, but I am compelled to throw all my 
better feelings to the wind and "wade in," no matter whom it injures. 
This is a sad confession for one who is bidding for the position of assisting 
our Lord in the lifting of mankind out of the chasm of selfishness from 
which they must be saved in the age we believe to be so close at hand. 
I am not trying to get you to justify my actions in this matter, but desire 
your opinion as to the advisable course of God's professed children engaged 
in business during the present time, when it is a case of the big 
fish eating the smaller ones. Yours in Christ, . 

[In reply: The conditions you name are common to nearly every 
form of business, and prevail throughout the civilized world increasingly. 
It is a part of the general "trouble" of our times. The increase of 
machine capacity and the increase of the human family, both contribute 
to reduce wages and make steady employment more precarious. More 
men seek to engage in business; and competition and small profits, while 



beneficial to the poor, are commercially killing the small store and high 
prices. In consequence small stores and small factories are giving way 
to larger ones which, by reason of better and more economical arrangements, 
permit better service and lower prices. Larger stocks of fresher 
goods at lower prices and with better service are to the general advantage 
of the public as compared with the old time little shops with stale 
goods, high prices and careless service; even though temporarily some 
poor widows or worthy ones may suffer through mental, physical or 
financial inability to keep up with the new order of things. And even 
these, if they can take a broad, benevolent view of the situation, may 
rejoice in the public welfare, even though it enforces an unfavorable 
change in their own affairs. They may rejoice with those that are benefited 
and wait patiently for the coming Kingdom which will make 
God's blessings more common than at present to all. But only those 
who have the "new nature" and its love can be expected to view things 
thus unselfishly. The present commercial competition is not, therefore, 
an unmixed evil. It is one of the great lessons being given to the world 
as a preparatory study before entering the great Millennial age, when 
the business of the world will be largely, if not wholly, on a socialistic 
footing— not for the wealth or advantage of the individual, but for the 
general welfare. 

Meantime, however, the selfish competitive strain grows more galling 
continually to those possessed of noble, generous impulses, whether 
Christians or not. We are glad to note your own appreciation of the 

R2033 : page 212 

subject and your dissatisfaction. 

Our advice is that you keep a sharp lookout, and, if you see some 
other branch of business less beset with competition and therefore more 
favorable, make a change. If not, or until you find a more favorable 
business or more favorable conditions, we advise that you continue where 
you are and modify your course to some extent; i.e., divide matters as 
evenly as you can between the three conflicting interests,— your own, 
your competitors' and your patrons' or neighbors' interests. If your 
business is meeting expenses and a reasonable profit, endeavor to keep 
it there, but do not push it in the endeavor to become "rich;" for "they 
that will [to] be rich fall into temptation and a snare." (1 Tim. 6:9.) 
We should avoid any dishonorable competition or meanness toward 
competitors, and any misrepresentations of goods to customers. Justice 
and honesty must be carefully guarded at any cost: then add all the 
"moderation" in favor of your competitor that love may suggest and 
circumstances permit. 

We are not forgetting the injunction, "Thou shalt not follow a multitude 
to do evil" (Exod. 23:2), nor counselling the slightest compromise 
with injustice. Your question, we take it, is not whether you may 
do injustice, but whether love will permit you to do all that justice would 
not object to and that custom sanctions. The worldly heart does not 
scruple about such "trifles:" it is your "new nature," whose law is love, 
that would prefer to see your competitor prosper, and longs to do good 
unto all men as it has opportunity— especially to the household of faith. 
Cultivate this "new nature" by obeying its law of love in every way 
possible. "If it be possible, so much as lieth in you, live peaceably with 
all men,"— dealing generously and according to love. He who is imbued 
with the spirit of love thinketh no evil toward his competitor, and 
seeketh not his own (welfare, merely) and would not rejoice in a competitor's 



failure. 

The difficulty is that the whole world is running on the depraved 
basis of selfishness, which is quite incongruous to love. With some the 
plane is higher, and with some lower: some limit their selfishness to 
the line of justice, others descend in selfishness to injustice and 
dishonesty, and the tendency is always downward. The "New Creature" 
Christ must never go below justice and honesty and must seek as much 
as possible to rise above this highest worldly standard toward perfect 
love. It is the fault of the present competitive system that the interests 
of the buyer and those of the seller are ever in conflict. No power can 
correct, control and alter all this except the one power that God has 
promised,— the Millennial Kingdom, which shall enforce the rule of 
love and liberate from the propensities and bonds of selfishness all who, 
when they see and know the better way, will accept of the help then to 
be provided.-EDITOR.] 



page 213 

VOL. XVII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1896. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 214 

View from the Tower 215 

Poem: Abide in Me 218 

Some Better Thing for Us 218 

Thy Light is Come 220 

Questions of General Interest 221 

Bible Study: Wholesome Counsel 223 

Encouraging Letters 224 

page 214 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE CHART OF THE AGES. 



IT IS five feet long, of heavy, tinted cloth, with spring roller, 
having painted thereon, by a good artist, the outlines, etc., of the 
divine plan of the ages, the same as represented by the diagram in the 
front of MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 1. Ordinarily it would cost about 
five dollars to prepare such charts; but by giving large orders in the 
dull seasons we can supply them at one dollar and fifty cents each.— 
and we prepay the expressage. The painter has just completed a new lot, 
and we are prepared to fill all orders. To foreign countries at same price. 

A careful study of the "Three Discourses on the Chart" will enable 
many of the friends of the truth to explain the chart, and the divine plan 
there symbolized, to their friends and neighbors. These three discourses 
are published in pamphlet form, bound in leatherette, at 10 cents per 
copy, postpaid. Every one who has a chart should also have this 
pamphlet. Later on you will be able to present other features, finding 
help in MILLENNIAL DAWN, each chapter being a discourse. 



R2037 : page 214 

FLORIDA LAND FREE -NEAR THE TRACT SOCIETY'S 
PROPERTY 

Some of the brethren own considerable land in Florida (a portion 
of which was some time ago donated to the TRACT SOCIETY and sold 
by it and the proceeds used in spreading the truth). These brethren 
wish us to say for them that,— 

They have no desire to withhold this land from those who would 
wish to settle on it and cultivate it, but who cannot afford to purchase. 
They therefore make an offer of a ten-acre plot (sufficient for an 
early-vegetable farm there) free, to actual settlers. 

This land is in the healthiest part of Florida— between the Gulf 
of Mexico and Tampa Bay, close to the railroad and within four to 
eight miles of St. Petersburg, which has one of the finest harbors in Florida. 
The atmosphere there is so pure that fresh meat hung in the open 
air will not spoil in the hottest weather. 



R2033 : page 215 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



WE are frequently reminded of the words of the 
apostles relative to the insidious attacks of 
Satan that would come upon believers in the last days 
of this age, as we witness his attacks not only upon 
every servant of the truth, but also upon the truth itself 
—the Word of God. What a comfort we have in 
the assurance that all the true "sheep" will hear and 



know the Shepherd's voice, and that none shall pluck 
them out of his hand,— that the "very elect" shall not 
be deceived. How this should and does stimulate us 
to press for the mark of character development which 
will make our calling and election sure. 

Satan seems to know that these attacks will be all 
the more forceful if they are apparently scientific discoveries, 
etc., and so he operates along that line. Thank 
God,— "We are not ignorant of his devices." For 
instance, Spiritism and Christian Science, having captured 
their thousands and gotten well established are 
continued, while other signs and wonders are introduced 
under the name of Theosophy (already described 
in these columns); and now later Hypnotism is introduced, 
not as a religious but as an occult power which 
will inferentially corroborate and endorse Satan's pseudo 
religions and discredit the teachings of the Scriptures. 
Thus, for instance, the visions and revelations 
granted of the Lord to some of the apostles and prophets 
(Dan. 7; 2 Cor. 12:1; Eph. 3:3; Rev. 1:1,10) 
are, by the powers of Hypnotism, made to appear very 
ordinary, such as may be had by any one who will be 
put by himself or by a professional into a cataleptic 
sleep or trance. This, because professing to be non-religious, 
scientific, will catch some who instinctively 
fear the trance-mediums and clairvoyants of Spiritism; 
and yet it will surely pave the way to the latter, and away 
from God's Word which condemns it and everything 
akin to it— witchcraft, etc. 

One of the latest feats of Hypnotism was the simulation 
of our Lord's death and resurrection. This was 
performed both in Europe and in the United States. 
Hindu Theosophists by the power of Hypnotism put 
one of their number asleep in London in a coffin, with 
the understanding that he would be awakened after 
three days in Vienna, whither, with guards, etc., the 
coffin was conveyed. On the third day at Vienna the 
coffin was opened and the fakir found apparently dead. 
The rigid form was taken from the coffin and placed 
upon a table, where, to demonstrate that the subject 
was wholly unconscious, needles were thrust through 
his flesh, but brought no sign of consciousness. Finally, 
at the command of the chief Hindu fakir, the hypnotic 
spell was broken, the man's consciousness returned, and, 
with manifestations of pain from his long cramped position, 
he got up and ate and went about his business. 

Thus, without directly attacking the Bible account 
of the awakening from the sleep of death of Lazarus, 
and Jairus' daughter, and the son of the widow of Nain, 
their influence is offset by these modern "strong delusions" 
to "believe a lie." (2 Thes. 2:11.) Nay, more; 
it goes farther and would even discredit or cast into the 
shade the resurrection of our Lord Jesus. 

Similar was the demonstration which took place in 
the United States, only still more realistic; for the subject 
was not only put into a death-like sleep, but was 



actually buried under three feet of earth through which 

R2033 : page 216 

a wooden pipe permitted air to reach the subject, and 
down which the public looked upon the buried man's 
face. The New York Journal (Aug. 30, '96) publishes 
an illustration of the grave, its occupant, and the public 
gazing down upon him, together with the subject's 
own account of the matter, and of his feelings, etc.; 
and the Editor introduces it in the following words:— 

"John D. Wyatt has just been resurrected at Indianapolis, 
Ind., after being buried alive at his own request 
for three days. No fancied grave was his, for 
though in hypnotic sleep, he was actually buried under 
four feet of earth. It was a marvelous experience. 
No man ever endured one like it." 

It is claimed that ere long the public will become 
accustomed to hypnotic phenomena by their introduction 
through dentistry, where it will be used in a manner 
calculated to support the claims of "Christian Scientists," 
that there is no such thing as pain, but merely 
an imagination thereof. 

Truly, the great Adversary is being permitted to 
prepare "strong delusions" for those who, having 
been brought in contact with the truth, either resist it 
or, by failure to follow the true light loyally, show that 
they are unworthy of it, "that all might be condemned 
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 
-2 Thes. 2:11,12. 



Another illustration of Satan's subtle workings is 
found in the claimed "latest discoveries of science." For 
two centuries science has been making discoveries which 
it has claimed completely overthrow the reliability of the 
Bible narrative; but as often have these scientists been 
compelled to admit that they have erred. The fact 
is that scientists are usually infidels, if not openly, then 
of the "higher criticism" type, who have little respect 
for the Bible, and who are on the lookout to secure 
world-wide fame by finding and promulgating something 
which would do what other scientists had tried to 
do but failed; viz., to cast discredit on the Bible. It 
is not remarkable that being thus prejudiced against 
the Bible, these worldly-wise scientists, going about to 
disestablish God's Word, and seeking honor one of another, 
and not submitting themselves to the guidance 
of faith in their researches, will, in the future as in the 
past, frequently "believe a lie" and publish it for the 
truth, until disproved and repudiated later by some 
other scientists. Our prejudices should be in favor of 
the Bible, and only positive, unimpeachable evidence 
against it should be even considered. 

The modern field for scientific research is Assyria, 



where the ancient buried ruins of Babylon, Nippur, etc., 
being dug into, furnish relics and records of an early 
day— antedating all history except that of the Bible. 

R2034 : page 216 

So, then, let it be understood that the scientific research, 
for which our day is noted, is frequently only an effort 
on the part of those engaged in it to immortalize themselves 
by impeaching the record of God's Word, if they 
can possibly do so. 

The latest news of this kind is from a party of Armenians, 
representing the University of Pennsylvania, 
who have for some time been excavating the ruins of 
the ancient city of Nippur in the Valley of Babylon. 
This news is that these scientists, having dug down below 
the level of the known Nippur, found about thirty 
feet below it a still older Nippur with valuable relics, 
tablets, etc. 

Immediately Prof. S. A. Binion (who, so far as 
we are aware, has never seen the excavations at Nippur) 
hastens to tell the public through the daily press 
what he don't know about Nippur, and to most dogmatically 
assert respecting tablets, broken vases, etc., 
bearing inscriptions, and their supposed decipherment, 
—"These tablets show that a high state of civilization 
existed 7,000 years before the birth of Christ, and 3,000 
years before the creation of the world as set down in 
the marginal chronology of the Bible." "Many cuneiform 
records upon tablets, of Babylonian history, have 
been unearthed, in an excellent state of preservation. 
Some of these are 9,000 years old, and are almost as 
clear today as when the writing was done." Professor 
Binion very accommodatingly furnished also a "sectional 
drawing" showing the temples, streets and 
houses of ancient Nippur, from which thirty-six feet of 
covering, debris, is supposed to have been removed; 
and also showing the still more ancient Nippur, from 
which thirty feet additional debris had been removed. 

This drawing covers nearly a page of the New 
York Journal of Aug. 30, '96, under a full page headline 
declaring as follows:— 

"A BURIED CITY UPSETS THE CHRONOLOGY OF 
THE BIBLE. 

Under the above mentioned picture of the two 
cities, in large types, appeared the following:— 

PREHISTORIC NIPPUR 7000 YEARS BEFORE CHRIST. 

THE REMAINS OF THE ASSYRIAN CITY, NIPPUR, BUILT 

3,000 YEARS BEFORE ADAM AND EVE 

WERE CREATED. 

(FROM A SECTIONAL DRAWING AND RESTORATION 

OF THE EXCAVATION BY PROFESSOR S. A. BINION, 



THE ARCHAEOLOGIST.) 

Every scientist, every editor, every business man, 
every mechanic and every day-laborer can, if he will 
but think, see through the fraud thus practiced upon 
a confiding public by a Professor and an editor. Why, 
if the University of Pennsylvania had a thousand times 
as much money as it now possesses, and if it spent 
every cent of that sum in excavating at Nippur and 

R2034 : page 217 

had laborers at work night and day, none of its professors 
would live long enough to see such a job of work accomplished 
as Prof. Binion and the New York Journal 
represent— thirty-six feet of debris removed from off 
a city of miles in extent, and thirty feet more from off 
a lower city of similar size. 

What are the facts? Simply these: A few years 
ago the management of the University of Pennsylvania, 
desirous of fame for their institution, concluded that 
foot-ball and boat-rowing are not the only outside 
enterprises in which a modern college may engage, 
and with commendable enterprise undertook scientific 
digging into the ruins of Nippur. At the outset Rev. 
Dr. Peters was placed in charge of the work. Under 
his direction a shaft or pit was sunk on the principal 
mound, and some underground passages excavated 
thirty-six feet from the surface. But to be a successful 
"scientist" in such a work, a man needs to have a 
lively imagination and to give it full play, else he will 
fail to "astound" the world with his "archaeologic" 
ability in deciphering real and imaginary hieroglyphics 
on pieces of pottery, etc.; and so Dr. Peters was superseded 
by a man pretty sure to find something that 
would cover himself and the University of Pennsylvania 
with glory and renown— Prof. Hilprecht. 

The latter gentleman has not uncovered the entire 
city of Nippur, but merely removed a few more cubic 
yards of debris from what is believed to have been a 
temple; and sinking a shaft or pit thirty feet still 
lower, through the debris, he found at that level "virgin 
soil" and some relics of an ancient civilization 
which it would in every way be to his interest to believe 
and seek to prove existed 7,000 or 8,000 years 
before A.D. 1. 

Whether or not there are two cities of Nippur, 
one built upon the other with thirty feet of debris between, 
nobody can yet say truthfully. It will require 
vastly more money and labor than has already been 
expended, to demonstrate the truth or fallacy of the 
suggestion. The Valley of Babylonia is supposed to 
have been the cradle of the race; and it is possible that 
Nippur was a city built before the deluge of Noah's 
day. If its temple were but sixty feet high, thirty 
feet of silt and debris would still leave a temple thirty 



feet high, whose upper levels may have been used after 
the flood. Or it may be that the level first recognized, 
thirty-six feet below the surface, was never a city level 
but merely one level of the temple. 

Prof. Binion describes the written tablets as "in an 
excellent state of preservation," "almost as clear today 
as when the writing was done;" but Prof. Hilprecht, 
now at Constantinople, told quite a different 
story to the representative of the London Daily News 
who interviewed him, and who says: "The labor of 
piecing together the thousands of fragments of vases 
and other objects, and of deciphering the inscriptions 
upon them, has during the past winter nearly cost him 
his eyesight." Prof. Binion is probably mistaken also 
in saying that these broken fragments are in Philadelphia. 
According to the "firman" or permit issued to 
the University by the Turkish government, all findings 
were to belong to the Turkish museum. 

These "scientific" gentlemen who endeavor to 
discredit the Bible by fraudulent pictorial misrepresentations 
and descriptions, ask us to take their word 
for it, that the Bible account, which has time and 
again come off victorious in contests with "scientists," 
so-called, and which alone of all histories carries an 
unbroken line from creation to our day, and is represented 
by a living race— the Jews— is now utterly overthrown 
and proved unreliable, by the finding of some 
broken pottery bearing peculiar letters and symbols 
which one scientist fondly hopes will raise him and the 
college employing him to world-wide renown. 

As for us, we will hold on to the Bible and wait a 
few years until another "scientist" equally anxious 
for renown will refute the present conclusions and show 
wherein the deductions are false. It has ever been 
thus. Not long ago Chinese histories were paraded 
similarly, to prove that China had a civilization and 
history one or two thousand years older than that of 
the Bible; but to-day archaeologists concede that the 
very ancient history of China is mythical, a fabrication. 

We have gone into this matter at some length because 
we have had many inquiries concerning it, and because 
it serves as a sample of the many ways the Adversary 
is attacking the Bible, and overthrowing the 
faith of those who have not put on the whole armor of 
God, that they may be able to stand in this evil day. 
(Eph. 6: 13.) What a defense against doubt and every 
attack of the devil is the knowledge of the divine plan of 
the ages! Praise God from whom our blessings flow! 

Professor Sayce, one of the best informed as well 
as one of the most candid of modern archaeologists, 
writing upon the reliability of the Babylonian records 
and their probably faulty interpretation says, under 
date of June 30, '96:- 

"I pointed out some years ago that the length of 
reign assigned to several of the kings in the first two 
dynasties is suspiciously, if not impossibly, long, and 



that the same high number recurs with too great a frequency. 
Since then the American excavators in 
Babylonia have discovered tablets which show that in 
the early period of Babylonian history records were 
kept of the events which marked the several years of 
each king's reign, and it was by these events that the 
legal documents of the time were dated. I believe 
that it will turn out that the compiler of the dynastic 
list supposed in some cases that where two or three 
events characterized the same year they were to be 
reckoned as representing separate years, while in other 
cases the co-regencies of a father and son have been 
neglected, as they have been in Egyptian and Jewish 
history." 

"ABIDE IN ME." 



That mystic word of thine, O sovereign Lord! 

Is all too pure, too high, too deep for me; 
Weary with striving, and with longing faint, 

I breathe it back again in prayer to thee. 

Abide in me— o'ershadow by thy love 

Each half-formed purpose and dark thought of sin; 
Quench, ere it rise, each selfish, low desire, 

And keep my soul as thine— calm and divine. 

As some rare perfume in a vase of clay 

Pervades it with a fragrance not its own- 
So, when thou dwellest in a mortal soul, 

All heaven's own sweetness seems around it thrown. 

The soul alone, like a neglected harp, 

Grows out of tune, and needs that Hand divine; 

Dwell thou within it, tune and touch the chords, 
Till every note and string shall answer thine. 

R2035 : page 218 

Abide in me: there have been moments pure, 
When I have seen thy face and felt thy power; 

Then evil lost its grasp, and, passion hushed, 
Owned the divine enchantment of the hour. 

These were but seasons beautiful and rare; 
Abide in me, and they shall ever be; 

I pray thee now fulfil my earnest prayer- 
Come and abide in me, and I in thee. 

Harriet Beecher Stowe. 



R2035 : page 218 



SOME BETTER THING FOR US. 



"These all, having obtained a good report through faith, received 

not the promise, God having provided some better thing for 

us, that they without us should not be made perfect.— Heb. 1 1 :39,40. 

IN the eleventh and twelfth chapters of Paul's letter 
to the Hebrews the two classes who are to constitute 
the two phases of the Kingdom of God (the human 
and the spiritual*) are brought to our attention. At 
the time of this writing the heirs to the earthly phase 
had all run their course, and were awaiting their reward 
in the resurrection, John the baptist having been 
the last and most highly honored of all that noble line 
of ancient worthies (Matt. 11:11); but the heirs to the 
heavenly phase had just entered upon their course; and, 
knowing that it would be a long and painful one, the 
worthy Apostle would have them draw a large measure 
of inspiration and zeal from considering the faithfulness 
and patient endurance of the worthy ones who 
shall constitute the earthly phase of the Kingdom. 

His words, while addressed directly to the early 
Church, apply with equal force to the whole Church, 
to the end of the age; and in some respects the application 
will be seen to have special force in the end, or 
harvest, of the age. In recounting the prominent 
characters among those to inherit the earthly phase of 
the Kingdom, beginning with Abel, he shows that it 
was their faith in the promises of God that nerved them 
to such endurance and faithfulness, even unto death; 
and so he would have us consider and, with the same 
faith, rely upon the exceeding great and precious promises 
given unto us, whereby, as Peter says, we may 
"escape the corruption that is in the world" and be 
made "partakers of the divine nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
He shows how by faith they walked with God; how 
they ventured upon his promises, doing his will and 
leaving the results with him; how they overcame great 
obstacles in the strength of that faith; and how they 
endured persecution, pain and loss, and then died in 
faith that what God had promised he was able also to 
perform, and would perform in his own good time and 
way. They were such men and women, says the Apostle, 
as the world was not worthy of. They endured as seeing 
him who is invisible, so strong and courageous was 
their faith. 

Yet, though the reward of those ancient worthies 
will fully recompense their faithfulness, the Apostle 
would have us know that God hath still reserved "some 
better thing for us;" viz., the inheritance of the heavenly 
phase of the Kingdom. In so doing, however, God is 
not rewarding us according to our deserts; for neither 
our merit, nor that of the ancient worthies, could claim 
by right an inheritance in either phase of the Kingdom. 



Both callings are of his abounding grace. The times 

and seasons for the selection of these two companies, 

as well as the conditions of eligibility to them, were 

fixed by Jehovah before the foundation of the world; 

and within those appointed seasons those individuals 

who will have complied with the conditions become 

heirs of the promised inheritance to be realized in the 

time appointed. God has a right thus to do what he 

will with his own, and his wonderful favors will be received 

with thanksgiving by all his righteous heirs 

without respect to comparisons; and all will be satisfied 

when they awake in his likeness, whether it be on 

the human or on the spiritual plane of being. 

The "better thing" reserved "for us" who are 
called of God during this Gospel age is the join t-heirship 
with Christ, Jehovah's only-begotten Son and heir 
of all things, the partaking with him in all his subsequent 
work for the blessing of all God's intelligent creation. 
Therefore it is, as the Apostle states, that the 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. 1., Chap. xiv. 

R2035 : page 219 

reward of the ancient worthies tarries until first the 
overcoming Gospel Church is exalted to the throne 
with Christ in the dawn of the Millennial age, now so 
close at hand. As soon as the spiritual phase of the 
Kingdom is established in power the setting up of the 
human phase will be immediately accomplished. In 
humble recognition, therefore, of the divine purpose 
and order in the superior exaltation of the Gospel 
Church, we repeat the Apostle's statement that "they" 
—those noble, loyal, righteous, faithful ancient worthies 
—"without us shall not be made perfect." Their 
perfecting will be instantaneous with their awakening 
from death, their trial having been passed successfully, 
as attested by the Lord's word. 

But as to whether we shall be numbered among 
the "us" depends yet upon our successful running of 
the race set before us. Surely, no less faithfulness and 
nobility of character can be expected of us than of those 
who ran for the earthly prize. And since all the blessings 
of God's plan,— the exaltation of the ancient worthies, 
the liberation of the whole world from the bondage 
of sin and death and the final judgment of angels 
—await the manifestation of the spiritual sons of God, 
the Gospel Church, therefore the Apostle in chapter 12, 
in forceful metaphor, points us back to those ancient 
worthies as a stimulus for faith and zeal; saying:— 

"Therefore also we, being compassed about with 
so great a cloud of martyrs [Greek marturon— who so 
nobly witnessed for God and righteousness], let us 
[emulate them and] lay aside every weight and the sin 



which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience 
the [higher, heavenly] race that is set before us, 
looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, 
who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the 
cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God." Jesus, our Ransomer, is 
also our forerunner and pattern in this race. He ran 
successfully, and in consequence is even now at the 
right hand of the throne of God, whither we also may 
go to him. His way to the crown was the way of the 
shameful cross, and he said, If any man love me, let 
him take up his cross daily and follow me: the servant 
is not above his Lord. Persecution and shame and 
grief and loss are our portion in this present world, and 
the exaltation and the glory will follow in due time, if 
we faint not. Therefore we are urged to consider his 
example and teaching lest we be weary and faint in 
our minds under the trials of faith, patience and endurance 
of this evil day. 

Again referring to the ancient worthies and their 
faithfulness (12:18-24), we are reminded of our much 
more favored position on the stream of time; for we 
are not approaching, as were they, the established typical 
kingdom of God under the typical mediator Moses; 
but, in point of time, we are approaching the glorious 
antitype of that— the Kingdom of Christ. How inspiring 
is this thought of the proximity in time to the glory 
of the Kingdom! And if this was true of the early 
Church, how much more is it true of us who are living 
in the end, the "harvest," of the age? 

The Apostle would also lead us to a fuller appreciation 
of the glory to be revealed in the setting up of 
the real Kingdom— the antitype— by a reference to the 
glory that attended the setting up of even the typical 
kingdom, and the enunciation of its righteous code of 
divine law. (Verses 18-21; see also 2 Cor. 3:7-11; 
Exod. 19.) That was a scene whose majesty and glory 
caused all Israel to fear and tremble; and even Moses 
said, "I exceedingly fear and quake." But, he says, 
that manifestation of glory was nothing in comparison 
to the glory that excelleth, which shall attend the setting 
up of the real Kingdom. That will be the glorious 
New Jerusalem, the true Mount Zion, the city (government 
or Kingdom) of the living God, the city for which 
Abraham looked afar off. It will be the general assembly 
of the Church of the firstborn in the midst of a welcoming 
host, "an innumerable company of angels:" it 
will be the gathering together of the Church unto Christ, 
the mediator of the New Covenant which speaketh 
better things than the blood of Abel— not vengeance, 
but peace, pardon and life,— and unto God, the Judge 
of all, and to the spirits [lives] of just men made perfect; 
—first the earthly phase of the Kingdom, and finally 
the full number of the restitution host. 

What a glorious prospect! and how full of solemn 
import to us specially, who have approached to the very 



threshold of this blessed hope;— solemn, in that the 

overcoming to be done before we reach the goal will 

tax all our fortitude and faith and test every principle 

of righteousness to the utmost. To do this will require 

the greatest humility and dependence on Christ, not 

only for redemption but also for grace to help in every 

time of need. If we should allow pride and self-righteousness 

to come in and our ears to grow dull to the 

voice of him that speaketh from heaven, we shall no 

more escape the wrath of God than would an Israelite 

have escaped it had he disobeyed the voice which commanded 

that he should not touch the mountain where 

God appeared unto them and spoke to them through 

their mediator Moses; for our God is a consuming fire 

to all who attempt to approach him except through our 

mediator, Christ, just as, in the type, he was a consuming 

fire to any who disregarded the mediation of Moses. 



page 219 

"ONLY FOR JESUS! -Lord keep it forever 
Sealed on the heart and engraved on the life! 

Pulse of all gladness and nerve of endeavor, 
Secret of rest, and the strength of our strife." 



R2036 : page 220 

THY LIGHT IS COME. 



"Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen 
upon thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and 
gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon 
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And 
the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings 
to the brightness of thy rising."— Isa. 60:1-3. 

THE words of this prophecy have a double application, 
—first to spiritual Israel, and second to 
Israel after the flesh. The great and long-looked-for 
light is the Lord Jesus Christ, the light of the world; 
and the time indicated is the end or harvest of the Gospel 
age, when he comes in glory and power to shine as 
the sun in his Kingdom. That the prophecy had a 
partial fulfilment to fleshly Israel at our Lord's first 
advent is true. He indeed was the light and glory of 
Israel; but as a nation they knew not the time of their 
visitation (Luke 19:44): the light shined in the darkness, 
and the darkness comprehended it not. (John 1:5.) 
Consequently the glory of the Lord was not then seen 
upon Israel: they did not know their King, nor enter 



with him into his Kingdom, though the privilege was 
then offered to them. They did not arise and shine, 
and therefore darkness came upon them; and, as a nation, 
blinded to their highest interests, they stumbled 
into the ditch (Matt. 15:14), a great time of trouble, 
which, beginning with the destruction of their holy city 
and the complete wreck of their national polity, drove 
them out of their own land and left them as fugitives 
in every land and the subjects of more or less persecution 
even unto the present day. 

All this reminds us very forcibly of the words of 
Jesus to them,— "Yet a little while is the light with you. 
Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon 
you; for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not 
whither he goeth. While ye have the light, believe in 
the light, that ye may be the children of light." (John 12:35,36.) 
But alas! Israel heeded not the light, nor 
the warning. It was as the Prophet had foretold (Isa. 1:3), 
"Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." 
However, Behold (says Paul) the goodness as 
well as the severity of God: on them which fell from 
their high privileges, severity; but upon you Gentiles, 
goodness, if you heed and continue to walk in the light, 
but, if like them you become proud and self-righteous, 
you also will be cut off from the divine favor and left to 
stumble in darkness.— Rom. 11:22. 

Indeed, that such would be the case with the masses 
of nominal spiritual Israel in the end of the Gospel 
age, as well as with fleshly Israel in the end of the Jewish 
age, was also foretold by the Prophet, who said, "And 
he shall be for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of 
offence, to both the houses of Israel." (Isa. 8:14.) 
Again, in the end of this Gospel age, the Lord of the 
whole earth has come. He comes not for a sin-offering, 
as at the first advent, but he comes now in the 
plenitude of his kingly power to begin his glorious 
reign and to exalt his faithful Church as his bride and 
joint-heir to his throne and his glory. He comes while 
yet darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the 
people, and the glad message to all his faithful saints 
is, "Arise, shine! for thy light is come." "Who hath 
ears to hear, let him hear." 

Observe that the Prophet calls upon the saints to 
shine now, and also tells of a glory about to be revealed 
in them. The thought of the passage is plainly that 
they have something to do with the shining to which 
they are exhorted, while the glory to be put upon them 
is apart from their own doing, a reward from God to 
the faithful ones who now diligently let their light 
shine for him. 

Jesus said to his disciples in the beginning of the 
age, "Ye are the light of the world;" and so the true 
followers of Christ all through the age who have been 
with Jesus and learned of him have been the lights of 
the world. (Matt. 5:14-16.) But this prophecy, taking 
the standpoint of the end of the age, indicates that 



greater light is due here than at any previous time. 

And so we find it. Although the Lord has been enlightening 

and leading his people ever since the days of his 

first advent, yet now they are to arise and shine as never 

before. Within these days of the Lord's presence 

(since 1874) the light of divine truth has been shining 

more brightly than ever, so that his people have been 

able to discover and understand God's deep designs, 

and to see in his mighty work a grand and benevolent 

plan of ages, fully worthy of the wisdom, power, justice 

and love of our God. To use another figure, the table 

of the Lord has been richly spread with all the bounties 

of the harvest season, and the Lord himself, according 

to his promise, is serving.— "Blessed are those 

servants whom the Lord when he cometh shall find 

watching: verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird 

himself and make them to sit down to meat and will 

come forth and serve them."— Luke 12:37. 

Well may the Church arise now and put on her beautiful 
garments; for very shortly she is to receive beauty 
for ashes and the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness. 
The time is come when she may lift up her head and 
rejoice, knowing that her deliverance draweth nigh. 
(Luke 21:28.) The exhortation to arise and shine is 
therefore to all who have been enlightened by the harvest 
message in these days of the Lord's presence. The 
prophet tells us that this truth which so fills our hearts 
with joy and gladness is nothing less than the glory of 

R2036 : page 221 

the Lord which is risen upon us. How blessed the 
thought, how precious the truth! The humblest saint 
who has been brought to a knowledge of it, and who 
has been thrilled with its blessed inspiration, may rejoice 
in the realization that the glory of the Lord has 
already risen upon him. 

Is it indeed true that the glory of the Lord is risen 
upon this humble one who has to fight hard the fight 
of faith day by day to keep his mortal body in subjection 
to the mind of the spirit, and who realizes every 
moment that he stands only in the imputed righteousness 
of Christ, his own being but as filthy rags? Yes, 
it is even so; and the fact that the glory of the Lord is 
risen upon thee, that it has thrilled thy soul with a joy 
unspeakable and full of glory even now, is a special evidence 
of his love and care for thee. And more, it is an earnest 
or foretaste of that fulness of glory and blessing promised 
a little further on, if we are faithful to the light we 
now enjoy; if, with a holy zeal for God, we arise and 
let it shine— in our words, in our works and in our 
characters. 

A few more days or years of cross-bearing and 
trial, a few more days of valiant and persistent warfare 
with the principalities and powers of darkness that conspire 
against us to bring us again into bondage to sin, 



a few more opportunities to tell the blessed tidings to 
those who sit in darkness, to bear our loving testimony 
to the power and grace of our God, and then, by and 
by, we shall shine in the glory of the Kingdom for the 
blessing of all the world;— "His glory shall be seen 
upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, 
and kings to the brightness of thy rising." Let us 
therefore be faithful to the light; let us walk in the 
light while we have the light; for if we prove unfaithful 
to it, it will be withdrawn from us. If, after receiving 
it and being blessed by it, we fail to appreciate it, and 
seek for the satisfying portion elsewhere, thus plainly 
indicating our lack of appreciation, it will not continue 
with us. 

While this harvest message comes to all the professed 
people of God with this stirring appeal, "Arise, 
shine!" it comes also with an inherent power to separate 
between the true and the false, the faithful and 
the unfaithful. Like a magnet, it attracts only its own 
kind. The spirit of God which is in the truth must 
also be in every one who receives it: all such, and only 
such, have an affinity for it and can be attracted by it; and 
the more they are filled with the spirit of God the more 
they will prize the treasure of divine wisdom and cling 
fast to it, notwithstanding the opposition that may be 
brought against them. Those who have less of the 
Lord's spirit may not hold to it so tightly, and unless 
they become filled, sooner or later, they will be overcome 
by opposition, either open or subtle, and will be 
swept away. There must be a very strong and close 
affinity for the magnet of truth to hold fast to it against 
all opposition. Those in whom the spirit of the world 
dwells, whether they be professed Christians or not, 
have no affinity for it, and are not drawn by it. It is 
no matter of surprise, therefore, that we find the large 
majority of professed Christians, who are really worldlings, 
either indifferent or in opposition to the truth; 
for the nominal spiritual Israel, like fleshly Israel, is to 
stumble at this stumbling stone, and only the remnant 
of both houses shall be counted worthy of the Kingdom 
and its glory. Now, as in the end of the Jewish age, 
the masses of the professed people of God are blinded 
and stumbled because their hearts are not in the proper 
attitude to receive the blessings God has to bestow. 

Another thought is prominent in this glowing prophecy 
and this cheering exhortation to arise and shine. 
The words remind us of our Lord's counsel to Mary, 
immediately after his resurrection. Overcome with joy 
she was inclined to linger in his presence; but gently 
he reminded her that the good news of his resurrection 
would be equally good to all the other disciples, and 
that it was her privilege to bear it to them. The time 
for his ascension to the Father was not yet, and he 
would meet with them all again.— John 20: 17. 

So now, while we are made to realize and to rejoice 
in the presence of our Lord, the prophet bids us 



be mindful of our brethren to whom this joy has not 
yet come, and to whom it is our privilege to bear these 

R2037 : page 221 

good tidings. All who are truly the Lord's faithful 
covenant people will recognize the glory of this harvest 
message; they will be attracted by it and rejoice in it. 
But since we cannot always discern the hearts to know 
who are the worthy ones, we must expect the repulses 
of many whose hearts are not yet in condition to receive 
it. But, nevertheless, let us arise and shine. Let us 
bear the blessed testimony wherever we have opportunity, 
especially to them who are of the household 
of faith. 

After spiritual Zion has been glorified with Christ 
to shine as the sun in the Kingdom (Matt. 13:43) and 
that true light shines upon the nations, it will be first 
upon the house of Jacob— the return to them of divine 
favor, "mercy through your mercy" (Rom. 11:26-31); 
then this call will come also to them, "Arise shine, 
thy light is come!" 



R2037 : page 221 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question.— Some define gnosis, rendered "knowledge" 
in 2 Pet. 1:5, as "the spirit of judicial investigation 
and inquiry." If we are always willing to add 
to our faith the gnosis, the spirit of judicial investigation 
and inquiry, the epignosis, the exact, sufficient 
knowledge, will certainly be the reward. Do you consider 
this the Apostle's meaning? 

Answer.— Reference to other passages in which the 
word gnosis occurs shows that the above definition is 
not adequate. See 1 Cor. 8:1; 2 Cor. 4:6; Eph. 3:19; 
2 Pet. 3:18; etc. 

To our understanding the Apostle's meaning is 
not, "Add to your faith an investigating disposition," 
but as follows: 

Beginning with those who already have some 
knowledge, enough to be a basis for faith, he exhorts 

R2037 : page 222 

them to add to their faith fortitude (common version, 
"virtue"); that is to say, he implies that if they hold to 
their faith against the attacks of the enemy it will develop 
fortitude, an added grace of character. And when 
he says, "Add to your fortitude knowledge," we understand 
him to mean that if faith be held firmly, and 



fortitude of character result, this, under the Spirit's 

guidance, will bring the faithful one to deeper and wider 

expanses of knowledge; or, as the same Apostle suggests 

(2 Pet. 3:18), the faithful one will grow in both 

grace and knowledge, and the holy Spirit, through its 

begetting, will enable such to know (appreciate) the 

deep things of God, the things freely given unto such 

by God, the knowledge of God resulting from our experience 

in the school of Christ. It is concerning this 

knowledge, not merely concerning the intricacies of doctrinal 

matters, but the heart sympathy and communion 

with the Lord himself, that the Apostle Paul exclaimed, 

"I count all things but loss for the excellency of the 

knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord."— Phil. 3:8. 

This knowledge, received into a good and honest 
heart, will bring forth the fruitage or grace of character 
here termed "self-control" (common version, "temperance"). 
As is elsewhere stated, "He that hath 
this hope in him, purifieth himself," controls himself, 
purges out more and more of the old leaven. Following 
and connected with the attainment of such self-control 
would come patience: for the self-mastery would 
teach the necessity for sympathy with and patience toward 
others. This patience in turn would lead to and 
develop the next grace mentioned; namely, piety— a 
condition in which the love of God is shed abroad in 
the heart, influencing all the thoughts and words and 
deeds. This condition in turn develops brotherly kindness 
—a love for all who are brethren and yoke fellows 
in the cause of righteousness and truth, the cause of 
God. And brotherly kindness in turn leads to that 
still broader and deeper experience designated the chief 
of all graces; namely, love, love for God, love for the 
brethren, love deep and pure and true, which thinketh 
no evil and doth not puff itself up, and is not easily 
offended, rejoices always in the truth and never in iniquity, 
the climax of Christian attainment in the present 
life; the grace of all graces, which never fadeth, and 
which will but be perfected when we receive the new 
resurrection body. 

Question.— If our Lord had power to take his life 
again after having laid it down (John 10:18), would 
not this indicate (1) that his covenant to give his life 
a ransom was not binding and (2) that he possessed 
knowledge and power in hades? 

Answer.— This passage should read, "I have power 
to lay it down, and I have power [or privilege] to receive 
it again." We understand our Lord to have meant 
that he was commissioned or authorized by the Father 
so to do. 

Our Lord, born under the Law, was subject to its 
conditions, and additionally he took fresh responsibilities 
upon himself at the time of his baptism, specifically 
consecrating his all to the Father's service, in 
harmony with the Father's provision for him. But, 
while his life was consecrated, it was still in his own 



hand, it could not be taken from him. To be his sacrifice 

it must be his own offering in every sense of the 

word. Hence when he said, "Thinkest thou that I 

cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently 

give me more than twelve legion of angels?" he undoubtedly 

spoke the truth. (Matt. 26:53.) His request 

would have been honored. Having violated no 

law, his life was not forfeited, and we believe could not 

have been taken from him. But having consecrated 

his life, and realizing that it was the Father's will that 

he should attest his obedience by the death of the cross, 

he kept his covenant with the Father and would not 

ask for protection, but freely delivered himself up on 

our behalf. He does not indicate by his language that 

he could ask for angelic protection and yet retain 

the full measure of the Father's approval; but, choosing 

the latter, he refrained from making the request. 

We remember in this connection his previous prayer, 

"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me— 

nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matt. 26:39.) 

What our Lord did, and what he refrained 

from doing, we know was the Father's will. To what 

extent he could have done contrary to the Father's will, 

or what would have been the consequences to himself, it 

is not necessary for us to know, and what would have been 

the results of such improbabilities have not been revealed. 

The substitution of the word "receive," a better 
translation, clears away the difficulty from the word 
"take." It is distinctly stated that he was raised up by 
"the glory of the Father."— Compare Rom. 6:4; 8:11; 
1 Cor. 6:14; 2 Cor. 13:4. 

Question.— Several of the brethren here, myself 
among them, are railroad employees. We have intimation 
that we will be expected to vote at the coming 
election, and that for the gold party. What is our 
duty? Does Colossians 3:22 bear upon this question? 

Answer.— The Scripture you quote does not apply 
to your voting privileges. The "servants" there addressed 
by the Apostle were bond-servants or slaves; 
but even in their case he cannot have meant that they 
should violate their consciences in obedience to the 
commands of their masters. 

The safe plan is to take no part in politics; and to 
tell inquirers with whom you are intimate that, although 
an ardent admirer of this as the highest type of human 
government, you are, as Cromwell expressed it, "a 
fifth monarchy man"— waiting for and talking for "the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son;" for which we pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it 
is done in heaven." 

The Quakers take note of the fact that God's people 
are not to engage in carnal warfare, but they overlook 
the fact that when they vote for a government 
they ought to support it by words and deeds. Thus 
our Lord said, "If my kingdom were of this world, 
then would my servants fight." 



Of course if "the powers that be" should ever compel 
us to vote or to fight, it would be our duty to act 

R2037 : page 223 

with the side most nearly approved by our consciences. 

Some will take knowledge of you— especially if 
your daily conduct support well your profession; 
others will ridicule you; but few will injure you, "if 
you be followers of that which is good," and faithful 
to your duties. And if you should sustain injury, God 
is able to make it work for your good. But, whatever 
your conscience may dictate, obey it. 

R2038 : page 223 

Question.— In the May 15 issue, page 116, you 
refer to the withdrawal of the Roman army under 
Vespasian from the siege of Jerusalem, A.D. 69. It is 
claimed by some that this retirement was by Cestius in 
65. Will you please explain? 

Answer.— Both statements are correct. Cestius 
Gallus with a Roman army first undertook the subjection 
of the rebellious Jews. He was defeated in 65 A.D., 
and Vespasian was sent to conquer them. The latter 
having reduced the principal fortresses was just ready 
to attack Jerusalem when the death of Nero stopped 
him until he should get orders from the succeeding 
emperor. Disorders at Rome and his own proclamation 
as Emperor hindered the war for about a year, 
when the army returned under Titus, and Jerusalem 
fell. It is quite probable that the majority of those who 
recognized the Lord's prediction and escaped availed 
themselves of the first of these two opportunities. 



R2038 : page 223 

WHOLESOME COUNSEL. 

-SEPT. 20.-Prov. 16:22-33.- 

Golden Text— "There is a way that seemeth right unto a man; 
but the end thereof are the ways of death."— Prov. 16:25. 

THE most important thought of this lesson is expressed 

in the Golden Text. It is a solemn 

warning against self-deception— against pursuing a 

course of conduct which is radically wrong, being opposed 

to the spirit and intent of the divine law, and yet 

which may be made to seem right by a line of false reasoning 

suggested by the will of the flesh and apparently 

founded upon the Word of God, yet denying its 

fundamental principles of righteousness. The delusions 

of Satan also greatly help along such deceptions, 



and thus the blinded one is urged along in a course 
which seems to him to be right, but the end of which 
is death. 

Christians should above all things guard themselves 
against the folly of this way. To do this, let us ever 
remember that, even though through Christ we have a 
reckoned standing of justification before God, the human 
heart which we still have is "deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked (Jer. 17:9), and that it 
requires constant watching and purging to enable us to 
put in practice the Apostle Paul's rule,— In simplicity 
and godly sincerity have your conversation in the world. 
(2 Cor. 1:12.) To do this requires humility, sobriety, 
godliness. If the heart be puffed up with pride, or 
ambitious for vain glory, or if it be selfish, or in any 
measure intoxicated with the spirit of the world, then 
beware; for there is great danger of getting into that 
way that seemeth right, to a man because blinded by 
his own perverse will or fleshly mind. 

The best safeguard which a Christian can have 
against the snares of Satan is that understanding which 
is here (vs. 22) described as "a well-spring of life unto 
him that hath it." Such understanding is not merely 
that of the head, but of the heart specially; for, "With 
the heart man believeth unto righteousness," and "out 
of the heart are the issues of life." If the heart be 
wrong, the head will seek to justify it, and in so doing 
will pervert judgment and truth. Therefore, take 
heed, and "keep thy heart with all diligence." 

Not only will the "wise and understanding heart" 
keep the feet in the paths of righteousness, but also 
"the heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth 
learning to his lips" (verse 23), so that he shall speak 
forth "words of truth and soberness," words of wisdom, 
of kindness and of love. How important that the 
fountain should be sweet, that thus the stream that issues 
from it may be healthful and refreshing to all 
within the range of its current! Truly, "pleasant words 
[of wisdom, of counsel and of loving kindness] are as 
a honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones 
[in that they refresh and comfort and stimulate courage 
and thus fortify the soul and strengthen it to noble 
deeds]."— Verse 24. 

How different is the picture of the ungodly man! 
(Verses 27-29.) "An ungodly man diggeth up evil 
[apparently finding a morbid satisfaction in searching 
for it], and in his lips there is a burning fire. A froward 
man soweth strife, and a whisperer separateth chief 
friends. A violent man enticeth his neighbor, and 
leadeth him into the way that is not good. He shutteth 
his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips, 
he bringeth evil to pass." Thus, as Isaiah says, "The 
wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, 
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, 
saith my God, to the wicked."— Isa. 57:20,21. 

But blessed is the man that hath learned the right 



ways of the Lord and walketh therein with a perfect 
heart. Such a one, unlike the wicked who go about 
digging up evil, delights himself in doing good and 
in speaking forth the words of truth and soberness. 
He is slow to anger, and studies carefully how to rule 
his own spirit, which is surely a great work and worthy 
of the ambition and effort of every Christian. (Verse 32.) 
How blessed (vs. 31) are the closing years of a 
long life devoted to this most worthy end of ruling one's 
own spirit in harmony with the principles and precepts 
of the Word of God; when, as Mr. Whittier has beautifully 
expressed it,— 

"All the jarring notes of life 

Seem blending in a psalm, 
And all the angels of the strife 

Are rounding into calm;" 
and when the hallowed influences of ripened Christian 
graces are manifest to every beholder. Truly, "the 
hoary head is a crown of glory if it be found in the way 
of righteousness." But if not, it is but a monument 
of folly and its ripened evil fruitage is most undesirable. 

The statement of verse 33 is to the effect that God's 
overruling power takes cognizance of even those things 
which men may regard as mere chance, and that nothing 
can come to pass without his knowledge and permission, 

R2038 : page 224 

and that eventually all things will be overruled 
to the accomplishment of his purposes. 

SEPTEMBER 27, REVIEW LESSON. 



Golden Text— "The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the 
righteous runneth into it and is safe."— Prov. 18:10. 

The earnest Christian of many years has had this 
assurance amply verified by blessed experience. Let those 
younger take heed, apply their hearts unto instruction, 
learn to trust the Lord with implicit faith, and he will 
make you also to realize the blessedness of this refuge, 
and the sweetness of abiding in him. Let the language 
of our hearts continually be, "What time I am afraid, 
I will trust in thee." 



R2038 : page 224 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Washington. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER:-The enclosed Postal Order is a 
thank-offering to the Lord for an especial favor. The occasion is, that 
I have recently completed the perfect memorization of the Book of 
Isaiah; and I desire with a humble heart to thank God for the preservation 
of my memory, for its power of rapid reception and the tenacity 
with which it retains that which has been stored in it. Please do not 
think me boastful, for I fully realize that it is God's gift, and I feel very 
humble in view of the fact that I have so misused it in the past. 

The book was more than half learned in detached portions before 
I dreamed of making it a complete subject; then it was completed 
much sooner than I had expected it to be. It has been mostly the work 
of my morning hours. I rise habitually at four and leave home for the 
shop at seven. Breakfast and other duties occupy part of the time, but 
I get from an hour to an hour and a quarter for reading and study, and 
that is the best time I have for it. This is the only entire book of the 
Bible which I have memorized, except the first epistle of John, which I 
had learned before meeting MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

I know that it is one thing to fill the mind with a collection of 
words, and another to understand their meaning; and I ask your prayers 
that God's holy Word may not be to me as the words of a book that is 
sealed, nor I as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal, but that I may have 
the seal of understanding and the stamp of obedience on my heart. 
Pardon me if I seem egotistic, but God's mercy to a weak old man fills 
me with the desire to tell some one of it, and I have no one here to 
whom I can talk about these things and who can sympathize with me 
in them. The memorial which I send is small, but it is nearer in its 
proportion (as coming from me) to the widow's mite, than it once would 
have been; and I trust you will accept it in the spirit in which it is offered, 
and that the Lord will use it, as he does many small things, to 
his glory. Yours in love and sympathy, . 

[When the memory is thus stored with the words of divine revelation, 
what food is furnished for prayerful meditation, what a ready 

R2039 : page 224 

weapon of defence is at hand against every attack of the adversary, what 
words of wisdom, counsel, instruction, comfort, consolation, warning, 
encouragement and cheer will spring up in the mind as necessity may require. 
We commend the brother's course to all to the extent of their 
ability and opportunity, remembering the counsel of the Lord, "My son, 
keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep my 
commandments and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye. Bind 
them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart."— 
Prov. 7:1-3. See also Deut. 6:6-9; Psa. 1:2. 

Such storing of the memory with heavenly "food," if it be but 
one verse a day or one verse a week should not be neglected: the results 
will be surprising in even one year. "Thy word was found and I did 
eatit."-EDITOR.l 



Maine. 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The following item from a religious 
publication shadows forth the wide-spread feeling that to accomplish 
any purpose, even to subduing the earth and crowning the blessed 
Christ, only the unity of Christians is necessary. It reads:— 



"The time has quite come to beat the sword into a plow-share, and 
the spear into a pruning hook. This age has the courage and the faith, 
if applied in the right direction, to grasp the mighty contents of prophecy 
and hurry its fulfilment, thus quickly bringing on its blessings. 

"God is willing that something should be done for him on a scale 
as magnificent as for war or international display. The Christian nations 
are well equipped with ships for destruction and tremendous engines 
of war. Let the Church of Christ drop its differences, and bury 
them to the centre of the earth; then unite to do this thing. The angels 
will again throng the skies, with their song, 'Glory to God in the 
highest, and on earth peace, good-will to men.' From heaven itself 
mighty, unseen forces will move to help on the work of crowning Jesus 
King of kings. May there not be found somewhere a man, who will 
be as great for God, as Napoleon Bonaparte in war, as statesmen have 
sometimes been for their country, as many now are for the simple purpose 
of making money?" 

Strangest of all is the idea that it is in the hands of men to accelerate 
or retard the accomplishment of God's great and glorious designs. 
It seems to me that the assertion that this age has "courage and 
faith to grasp the mighty contents of prophecy," is little better than the 
incoherent mutterings of one in deep sleep. Who can grasp the mighty 
contents of the prophecies unless God reveal them? God declares 
that he reveals them only to his humble, watchful children; and we know 
that the boasted numbers of Christendom have no such characteristics. 
And to hurry God's movements: what comment is adequate to such 
towering pride? 

We can know what God wills to be done only by his revealing it; 
and nowhere has he revealed that he would have a grand display of 
earth's pageantry to usher in the kingdom. Truly, the "outer darkness" 
is very great; but my heart rejoices to walk the lowly vale with the 
self-sacrificing One. W. F. EATON. 

[REPLY. Very true; and yet it is well to remember that most of 
us who now rejoice in God's "marvelous light" were once in the same 
darkness. There is every reason why we should think charitably and 
even hopefully of such blind reasoners. They are on the Lord's side at 
least, and longing for the better day, however ignorantly. A zeal not 
according to knowledge is far more pleasing to God than a knowledge 
without zeal. The zeal shows the state of the heart, and the knowledge 
the condition of the head to some extent. It was because Saul of Tarsus 
had the proper zeal that God corrected his knowledge and made 
him the great Apostle Paul; while it is declared that "unprofitable servants" 
who have knowledge, and who do not have the loving zeal to use 
it, will be cast out of the light into the "outer darkness." 

A man, such as the writer of the above, who respects "the contents 
of prophecy," is a much more hopeful subject for effort than the many 
who know not and care not for the prophecy, and who disbelieve the 
promise of a coming Kingdom of God in which God's will shall be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The eyes of such may be profitably anointed with a few facts as follows: 

(1) This century has witnessed the greatest missionary efforts ever 
put forth. 

(2) Some sanguine people reckon the converts from heathenism 
during this century as high as one million souls. 

(3) Statistics show that during the same period the numbers of the 
heathen have increased about two hundred millions. 

(4) It does not require a great mathematician to see that there is no 



hope for the conversion of the world, unless God interposes supernaturally. 

(5) These facts should awaken all who are truly God's people to a 
study of God's Word, to see what is the "hope of the groaning creation;" 
and they would find it to be the Kingdom of God— the glorified Church, 
whose Lord and head is Christ Jesus; and that his Kingdom is to be introduced 
by divine power and judgments in a great time of trouble now 
nigh, even at the doors.— EDITOR.] 



page 225 
VOL. XVII. OCTOBER 1, 1896. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items, Bibles at Cost, etc 226 

View from the Watch Tower— 

The Silver Question in Prophecy 227 

The Cries of the Reapers 232 

The Facts Fitted to Prophecy 233 

What We May Expect 235 

Solomon Anointed King 235 

Solomon's Wise Choice 236 

page 226 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



BIBLES AT COST-CHEAPER THAN EVER. 



Competition has finally brought the prices of Bibles to, we believe, 
the very lowest notch. 

Recent concessions for large lots permit us to name the following 
remarkable low rates:— 

"Bagster Teachers' Bibles," Emerald type, gilt, 97 cents each. 
The same with red under gold edges, $1.10 

"Oxford Teachers' Bibles," Minion type, gilt edges, 97 cents each. 
The same with red under gold edges, $1.10 

"Oxford Teachers' Bibles," large type ('Bourgeois"), 
with the pronouncing feature added, gilt edges, $1.38 

The same with Patent Index cut into edge, $1.68 

Ditto, with red under gold edges, $1.48 

The same with Patent Index cut into edge, $1.78 

All the above contain full Teachers Helps (index, concordance, 



maps, etc.) and are bound in "French Seal," divinity circuit. 
ADD 25 CENTS FOR POSTAGE ON ANY OF THESE BIBLES. 



R2045 : page 226 

A PRECAUTIONARY CORRECTION. 

Anent the offer of our last issue, of Florida land, free: One of the 
brethren fears that the statement with reference to the Florida climate 
near St. Petersburg might be misunderstood; and suggests that we say 
to the friends that fresh meat hung in the open air will keep for a long 
while there, but not forever: it becomes dry and unfit for food. 



page 226 

EXTRA COPIES OF THIS ISSUE. 

Anticipating the desires of the friends, we have printed an extra 
supply of this issue. Orders will be filled in rotation as received. 



R2039 : page 227 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



THE SILVER QUESTION, AS RELATED TO PROPHECY 
FULFILLING BEFORE OUR EYES TO-DAY. 



AS our readers well know, we take no part in this 
world's politics. "For our enrollment as 
citizens is ready in the heavens, wherefore a Savior we 
are ardently awaiting." (Phil. 3:20, Rotherham.) 
"Now, therefore, we are no more strangers and foreigners, 
but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the 
household of God." (Eph. 2:19.) Attending to our 
heavenly politics is not only our preference, but it is 
also our King's command,— "Seek ye first [chiefly] 
the Kingdom of Heaven." Loyalty to this kingdom, 
which alone can bring to mankind the blessings of 
perfect rulers and perfect laws, demands all our mind, 
strength, and energy (except so much as is necessary 
to secure needful food and raiment). We, therefore, 
have no time to spend in disputing respecting 
"the course of this world" and the schemes and 
theories which, if put into effect, would accelerate or 
retard the coming trouble and dissolution. Nor can 
we know which methods would most quickly and most 



thoroughly work out the great plan of God for instructing 
men regarding their own impotency and lack 
of wisdom, and thus preparing them to realize Christ's 
Kingdom as "the desire of all nations." 

What we have to say upon the gold and silver 
question, the money question, will thus be seen to be 
lifted out of the realm of politics altogether, and not 
designed to make one solitary vote for either party, 
believing that God has decreed the overthrow of present 
institutions in the very calamities in which the 
exercise of their own worldly wisdom and selfishness 
shall involve them. However, in the financial developments 
of recent years we see the beginning of a 
marked fulfilment of prophecy which must not be 
overlooked or passed by unnoticed. 

We refer to the prophecy of the Apostle James (5:1-6): 
—"Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for 
your miseries which shall come upon you. Your riches 
are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten. Your 
gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall 
be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it 
were fire. Ye have heaped treasures together for the 
last days." 

Hitherto we have contented ourselves with a 
general application of this prophecy to our day and the 
approaching trouble, which will fall with special severity 
upon the rich. The particulars of the fourth verse 
of this prophecy have until recently perplexed us. It 
reads,— "Behold that hire which you fraudulently 
withheld from those laborers who harvested your fields, 
cries out; and the loud cries of the reapers have 
entered the ears of the Lord of armies." Here special 
reference is made to a very large class of the toiling 
population of the world, the food producers; and 
to some great fraud practiced against these specially. 

But is this reprimand spoken against the farm 
owners? Does it signify that they have been defrauding 
their farm hands of their wages? or do the words 
apply to another class who are defrauding the farming 
population in general out of their legitimate earnings? 
Let us see. 

In times past farmers as a class have been regarded 
as amongst the most upright, as well as the 
most free and independent among men, and their employees 
have been fairly well paid and contented. As to 
defrauding their helpers of their wages when earned, 
that seems well nigh impossible, the laws being such 
that the humblest laborer could sell the farm to recover 
wages due him by its owner; besides, injustice 
on so small a scale would not seem of sufficient importance 
to be made the subject of prophecy, but would 
be included under the more general warnings against 

R2040 : page 227 

iniquity. Where then has there been, or could there 



yet come to be, such a great fraud as would thus cry 
out to God and be immediately associated as a leading 
cause in precipitating the coming trouble; as indicated 
in this prophecy? 

We meet with no better success if we attempt to 
apply the prophetic statement to laborers in general; 
for we fail to find a general fraud practiced by employers 
to withhold wages. On the contrary, the contracts 

R2040 : page 228 

between employers and employees are yearly 
becoming more precise and explicit, leaving no room 
for frauds. The laws give "wages" a preference 
over all other debts in the event of insolvency; and in 
every way they seek to protect the laborer from frauds, 
even giving him a judgment against his employing 
debtor which would permit the sale of his works for 
its payment. Besides, had the Lord meant in a general 
way that all labor will be oppressed and underpaid, 
and had he wished to call this defrauding, it would 
have been just as easy to have omitted all reference 
to farmers. Finding that none of these suggestions 
fit the prophetic statement, let us examine the prophecy 
afresh in the light of recent developments, and we will 
see that it foretells that the farmers of Christendom, as 
a class, suffer from a great fraud, whose effect will 
ultimately be the precipitation of the great trouble 
coming upon the world as a judgment;— in the day of 
vengeance and of recompensing and righting many 
wrongs. This view seems to meet every requirement 
of the prophecy and to coincide exactly with transpiring 
events. 

For centuries the farmers have been properly considered 
the conservative element of society. More cautious 
than the laboring, mechanical and clerical classes, they 
move more slowly, and thus have tided over many a 
political crisis, in Europe as well as in the United States. 
Accustomed to moderate toil and to moderate remuneration, 
farmers have been very generally the representatives 
of justice and contentment, and have been so regarded. 
But a change has come, or is coming, over the 
affairs of farmers throughout Christendom. Although 
they have profited somewhat by the mechanical inventions 
of our day, they find themselves retrograding 
financially, especially during the past four years. 
This applies, not merely to one section, but in general 
to all parts of so-called Christendom. What is the 
trouble? The answer given is, Overproduction has 
caused a decline in prices so great that the business is 
unprofitable; and many who are handicapped with 
debts, interest, etc., have lost, or are in danger of losing, 
their farms, etc. But why do not farmers abandon 
crops that are not profitable in favor of other crops 
for which there is a greater demand, and in which 
there are better profits? The answer is, They have 



done this, especially for the past three years, with the 
result that all crops are depressed in price; and since 
debts must if possible be met, the unprofitable crops 
are increased in the vain hope of a year of good prices 
which would make up past deficiencies and clear off debts. 

But is it true that there is an overproduction? 
Are large stocks of grain and cotton being stored away 
annually, representing such an overplus? No; the 
amounts carried over are so moderate as to cause apprehension 
of a famine if the crop should be short one 
season in the United States or India or Russia. It has 
been just so for years— plenty generally, but comparatively 
little to carry over to the next year. Why, then, 
is it that overproduction is claimed, and blamed for the 
great decline in prices? May there not be some other 
influence at work? 

Yes; it is becoming more and more manifest that 
there is another influence at work besides that of supply 
and demand, and that it has been affecting prices 
for some years with a steadily downward tendency. 
For instance, the price of cotton* in 1878 was 1 1 cents 
per pound. Since then it has steadily declined to 7 
cents in 1894. The price of wheat in the same period 
(with some fluctuations in years of foreign shortage 
and famine) has steadily declined from $1.20 per bushel 
in 1878 to 61 cents in 1894. These two items (wheat 
and cotton) constitute the chief items of the United 
States' exports; consequently such heavy declines in 
values mean a great loss of wealth to the United States 
as a whole people; but to the farmer it means worse— 
to him it means the loss of all profit and scarcely a living 
for his family and help. 

But it will be noticed that other farm products 
have not suffered so great a decline, and the difference 
may afford a clue to the reason of the decline 
in these two staples. For instance, rye sold in 1878 at 65 
cents per bushel and in 1894 at 68 cents. Oats sold in 1878 
at 33 cents per bushel, in 1894 at 37 cents. Corn sold 
in 1878 at 52 cents per bushel, in 1894 at 51 cents. 
Kentucky leaf tobacco sold in 1871 at 7 cents per pound 
and in 1894 at 9-1/2 cents. Fresh beef wholesaled in 1878 at 
5-1/4 cents per pound, and in 1894 at 5-1/2 cents. Fresh 
pork sold wholesale in 1878 at 4-1/4 cents per pound, 
in 1894 at 5-1/2 cents. Hay sold in 1878 at $7.25 per 
ton, in 1894 at $8.50. 

We account for this difference between the farm 
products which have more than held their own down to 
1894 (viz., corn, rye, oats, tobacco, beef, pork) and 
those which suffered a decline of one hundred per cent, 
during that period (viz., wheat and cotton), thus: 
The former were not affected by the decline of the 
value of silver during the period named and the latter 
were affected by it, and fell and rose in price in proportion 
as silver fell and rose in price— barring minor 
fluctuations incident to supply and demand. 

But how could the price of silver affect the two 



principal staples of our land and not affect the others? 

We answer, Because our wheat and cotton are sold in 

competition with the wheat and cotton of silver standard 

countries, while the other products named encounter 

no such competition, or one so insignificant as 

to be easily overcome. For instance, United States' 

beef, pork, corn and tobacco control in the markets of 

the world and suffer no competition from products of 

silver countries; while the rye and oats, when exported, 

compete with the products of gold standard 

countries. On the contrary, United States' wheat and 

cotton compete with Russia's wheat, India's wheat 

and India's cotton. India and Russia are both silver-standard 

countries. The price of wheat in silver, in 

India has been well maintained all this time, while 

United States' wheat has declined one-half. 

Indian wheat to-day brings about $1.20 per bushel 
(silver) as against $1.10 (silver) in 1878; and if the 
United States and Europe had not (from 1872 to 1878) 



*Since farm prices may vary greatly, we make use of Waldron's 
averages of New York City wholesale prices, which include transportation 
from the interior and middlemen's profits. We compare the 
years 1878 and 1894 because 1878 marks the date of the resumption 
of specie payments and every way is a fairer starting point than 1873, 
although the latter would make a more favorable showing for our use 
in several respects; and because 1894 marks the point where silver, 
wheat and cotton reached their lowest, and brought general demoralization 
along agricultural lines;— leading to heavy competition and overproduction 
and consequent depreciation in prices for corn, oats, barley, 
potatoes and other products dependent upon home consumption. 

R2040 : page 229 

taken from silver the monetary standing it has enjoyed 
from the earliest dawn of history,* our United States 
and Canadian wheat would all along have brought 
the same or better prices, being of superior quality. 
The difficulty with the United States' farmers' receipts 
from their wheat is that this nation is doing business 
on a gold basis; and so the $1.10 to 1.20 per bushel 
(the steady price of wheat, the world's staple food, in 
silver, the world's money+), when converted into gold, 
fell gradually with the price of silver; and the latter 
depreciated because of legislative action by the principal 
governments of the world. The same influence 
affected cotton: it is still worth ten cents a pound in 
silver in India and would be bringing more in the United 
States if gold and silver were again on a parity; 
because our cotton is of superior quality. 

That overproduction alone cannot be blamed for 
the great fall in the price of wheat and cotton, is evidenced 
by another article similarly affected, where overproduction 
cannot be blamed; namely, rice. The price 



of rice has fallen more than one-half by reason of the 

demonetization of silver. American importers can purchase 

rice in India, China and Japan at say 4 cents per 

pound silver money, which would make it cost them 

only 2 cents per pound in our gold standard money, 

and they will buy where they can buy to their own advantage. 

The rice-growers of the Southern States are 

feeling the pressure dreadfully, but do not know who 

or what to blame for it. 

These misfortunes of the United States' farmer 
through the demonetization of silver are shared also 
by the farmers of Canada and Europe. They, too, 
had to meet the silver prices of India and Russia, while 
paying their help, their taxes, their interest, etc., on 
a gold basis of doubled value. Consequently, as all 
who are acquainted with foreign affairs know, the 
farmers of Europe and Canada have been groaning 
aloud and praying their rulers to provide some relief. 
Various measures of relief have been discussed, but 
nothing satisfactory has been found; and competition 
receives the whole blame. Few except the shrewd 
bankers see the real situation; and it is to their interest 
to hide the truth and, so far as possible, to prevent 



*Silver money was the only money standard of the Jewish nation. 
Gold was then treated as merchandise— as precious stones— and 
fluctuated in price accordingly. All values were measured by silver 
standard, as they still are except in Europe and the United States. 

+More than one-half the people of the world still recognize silver 
as their standard; and where it has been demonetized, the people, the 
masses, as they awake to the situation, are crying out to have it 
remonetized. 

R2041 : page 229 

the trick played upon the people from being discovered 
by the people, and the conditions changed. 

But how came it that a measure destined to work 
such havoc to the interests of the people should become 
the law of every civilized land? 

It was carefully planned and gradually brought to 
the point of success. Great Britain is unique among 
the nations in that her agricultural interests are as 
nothing compared to her commercial interests. In 
proportion to her population she is the richest nation 
of earth. According to a standard work— Mulhall's 
Dictionary of Statistics— the wealth of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1892 was 
$45,745,000,000. Much of this is invested in manufactures 
and shipping; but being of small territory, as 
compared with the United States, proportionately less 
is required for home railroads, etc., and proportionately 
more of it seeks investment abroad— wherever 
profits show themselves combined with safety. Hence 



Great Britain is unique also in that it is a creditor 
nation, whilst most of the nations are borrowers. Thus, 
for instance, the United States, although actually 
wealthier, has nearly double the population of Britain 
and an immense stretch of country, mines, railroads, 
etc., and hence is a borrower. 

The study of British financiers (than whom there 
are none shrewder) has naturally been along selfish 
lines. They studied and advocated, not what would 
benefit the world as a whole, but what would benefit 
their little corner of it; and not either the interests of 
their little islands, but specially, if not wholly, their 
own interests as financiers,— money lenders. But in 
all this, be it remembered, they did no different from 
what many others would have done if they had possessed 
the vantage ground of money to lend and brains 
to guide them in loaning it to their own best advantage. 

These financiers as early as 1798 seem to have conceived 
the idea of separating gold and silver, and as 
silver was in use by the masses of the world and could 
not be moved by them, they there adopted gold as their 
standard; and from then until now have sought to degrade 
silver. Their efforts were unavailing, however, 
until 1873: until then silver not only held its own, but 
the world over really had a greater purchasing power 
than gold at the 16 to 1 ratio. 

The United States civil war was encouraged by British 
financiers, who made vast fortunes out of the necessities 
of that hour; and long experience having made them 
masters of the arts and mysteries of national finances 
(while others were as yet novices), they prepared and 
laid plans to make even greater profits out of the close 
of hostilities and the returning prosperity. Their method 
of operation was cooperation: they advised and influenced 
American bankers; and we must admit that 
some of their purely selfish advice was as good as could be 
found at the time and under those trying circumstances. 

The first step of these financiers was to have the United 
States Government stop issuing legal tender notes, 
"greenbacks," upon which no interest was paid, and 
instead to issue larger notes bearing interest, called 
"bonds." These the National Banks could purchase and 
draw interest on and use as a basis for their notes. 
Thus the government debt would be controlled by the 
British money lenders and their American allies and 
agents. This program was mapped out in a circular 
sent to moneyed people and United States banks, 
known as the "Hazzard Circular" because issued by 
Charles Hazzard who claimed to be the agent of London 
capitalists (1862). The following copy of the circular, 
was published in the Council Grove Guard, Sept. 18, 
1886, and purports to have been taken from the letter 
files of the First National Bank of Council Grove, Kansas, 
by Isaac Sharp, in 1873. James G. Nisbett of Posey 
County, Indiana, has made affidavit that Charles 
Hazzard gave him a circular about July 25, 1862, substantially 



the same. The following is an extract:— 

"Slavery is likely to be abolished by the war power, 
and chattel slavery destroyed. This I and my European 
friends are in favor of; for slavery is but the owning 
of labor, and carries with it the care of the laborer, 

R2041 : page 230 

while the European plan, led on by England, is capital 
control of labor by control of wages. This can be done 
by controlling the money. The great debt that capitalists 
will see to it is made out of the war must be 
used as a measure to control the volume [quantity] of 
money. To accomplish this the bonds must be used 
as a banking basis. We are now waiting to get the 
Secretary of the Treasury to make this recommendation 
to Congress. It will not do to let the greenback, 
as it is called, circulate as money any length of time, 
as we cannot control them. But we can control the 
bonds, and through them the bank issues." 

These "financiers" have no special desire to injure 
other men; but, treating finances as their "business," 
they scheme to make all the profits they can, whoever 
must pay these profits. These British bankers are really 
pawnbrokers on a large scale. When poorer nations 
are in any distress and apply for a loan, it is to 
British money lenders that they appeal. These shake 
their credit, depreciate the value of their bonds, buy 
them cheap, obtain commercial treaties, and often control 
the custom houses and the receipts from import 
taxes, pledged for the interest and principal of the debt. 
The British government, participating through the 
"commercial treaty" arrangement, is thus made a 
party to the transaction, though it reaps no profit from 
the doubling of the value of the bonds and the enormous 
profits thus secured. Then, in case the debtor nation 
does not live up to its hard contract to the letter, 
the British fleet is ordered to close the ports, or to bombard 
them, or to seize something as security. "Shylock" 
must have his pound of flesh, if he cannot get 
the money; and he gets the "dear British public" sufficiently 
interested with him to build and maintain the 
greatest fleet in the world to act as his police officers and 
debt-collectors; chiefly with the smaller nations however. 
(The Dutch, French and German money-lenders do 
much of the lending to the large and powerful nations.) 

The policy of the British government, guided by 
these financiers, in harmony with the foregoing "Hazzard 
circular," has been, and yet is, to favor large national 
debts. Thus, for instance, while Britain is per 
capita the wealthiest nation in the world, its debt is the 
largest (except that of France)-$ 1,1 86,790,000. This, 
represented by interest bearing bonds, is largely held 
by the banks of England, Scotland and Ireland, which 
are permitted to issue notes for the amounts they hold, 
—much the same as the National Banks of the United 



States. As giving some idea of the immensity of this 
banking business, take the fact that the United States 
has paid since 1860 of principal debt $1,213,199,050, 
and interest to the enormous sum of $2,676,000,000; 
or a total sum of nearly four billions of dollars. And 
the debt is not half paid yet. Indeed, as is well known, 
it has been considerably increased recently. 

After the United States war of the rebellion, and 
the Franco-Prussian war, British financiers, noting the 
fact that two rich nations (the United States and France) 
were heavily in debt, thought it an opportune time to 
make the breach between gold and silver, and sought 
the cooperation of bankers in other nations, especially 
in the United States and Germany, to have the single 
gold standard adopted, or, if this could not be done, to 
at least stop the coinage of silver at the then recognized 
ratio, about 16 to 1. 

If evidences of such a plot to increase the value of 
gold, and of all debts, by demonetizing silver were entirely 
wanting, common sense would tell us that some 
mighty influence lay behind such a movement. Reason 
would answer, without evidence, "It must have been 
brought about by those who would be benefited by 
such a change, and not by those whom it would injure." 
It would injure the debt-burdened nations— Russia, 
Spain, Italy, China and especially the two that had last 
contracted the heaviest war-debts— the United States 
and France. It would benefit Germany (whose war 
expenses the French were made to pay, and which thus 
at once constituted Germany a creditor nation). It 
would benefit Great Britain above all, and it would benefit 
Holland which also is a creditor nation through its 
rich bankers. 

British financiers, as we have seen, had long tried 
to part gold and silver by refusing to recognize silver 
at home and in the colonies of Canada and Australia; 
but this did not avail: silver, being a standard in the 
vast majority of the nations of the world, was more in 
demand than gold at the 16 to 1 ratio, and continued 
so until 1 874, nearly a year after the conspiracy to ruin 
it had accomplished its work by securing laws prohibiting 
its coinage in Holland, the United States and Germany; 
—in Holland in 1872, in Germany in 1872-1873, 
and in the United States Feb. 12, 1873. The creditor 
nations, as we have seen, had an interest (through 
their moneyed men) in seeking to destroy the money 
value of silver, but all the interests of the United States 
lay in the opposite direction. Not only is she a debtor 
nation, but she is also one of the chief silver producers 
in the world, and as well a producer of the world's 
staples— cotton and wheat— in competition with silver 
standard countries. 

But so potent is the influence of the United States 
in the world's finances that all efforts to degrade silver 
without her aid must have failed; for she is at once 



R2042 : page 230 

the greatest luxury purchaser and the greatest staples 
seller among the nations. Hence it is not surprising 
to learn that,— 

"In 1872, silver being demonetized in Germany, 
England and Holland, a capital of L.100,000 [$500,000] 
was raised, and Ernest Seyd was sent to this country 
with this fund as agent for foreign bond holders to effect 
the same object."* 

The official records of CongressH- under date April 
9, 1872 say,- 

"Ernest Seyd of London, a distinguished writer 
and bullionist, has given great attention to the subject 
of mint and coinage. After having examined the 
first draft of this bill (for the demonetization of silver), 
he made various sensible suggestions, which the committee 
adopted and embodied in the bill." 

Mr. Frederick A. Luckenbach at Denver, Colorado, 
made affidavit that he first became acquainted with Mr. 
E. Seyd in London in 1865, renewing his acquaintance 
almost every year; and "upon each occasion became 
his guest at one or more times, joining his family at 
dinner or other meals." In February, 1874, while at 
dinner at Mr. Seyd's house, the conversation turned 



*The Banker's Magazine, as quoted by Senator Daniels of Virginia 
in a speech before the United States Senate, May 22, 1890. 

+Congressional Globe— speech of Congressman Hooper of Massachusetts 
before the House. 

R2042: page 231 

upon the rumored corruption in the British Parliament, 
and Mr. Seyd then told Mr. Luckenbach that "he 
(Seyd) could relate facts about the corruption of the 
American Congress that would place it far ahead of the 
English Parliament in that line." After dinner Mr. 
Seyd took Mr. Luckenbach aside, and after making him 
pledge his honor not to relate what he was about to 
say, made this statement: 

"I went to America in the winter of 1872-1873, 
authorized to secure, if I could, a bill demonetizing silver. 
It was to the interest of those I represented— the 
governors of the Bank of England— to have it done. 
I took with me L.100,000 sterling, with instructions that 
if it was not sufficient to accomplish the object, to draw 
for another L.100,000, or as much as was necessary." 

This affidavit by Mr. Luckenbach was made after 
the death of Mr. Seyd, on May 6, '92, before the clerk 
of the Supreme Court of Colorado. 

It would be unjust to presume that all the members 
of Congress who assisted in passing that bill knew 
that they were thus perpetrating a great injury upon 



this nation (especially upon its farmers, and upon 
the farmers of every civilized nation). It is probable 
indeed that considerable of the money was spent upon 
a very few; and that the majority were as honest and 
as earnest as many of the good and intelligent people 
who to-day are deluded into crying out for "honest 
money," when they are favoring the very side of the question 
that has robbed and is systematically robbing the 
people by destroying the value of a large share of their 
money (silver) and making the gold of double value- 
doubly hard to obtain. The silver-demonetization bill 
when before Congress was skillfully handled, and its 
real object and intended effect were not appreciated, 
apparently, by many Congressmen, who have so declared. 
Among these are the following prominent 
names: Senators Voorhees, Allison, Beck, Conkling, 
Congressmen Blaine (who at the time was speaker of 
the House), Garfield, Kelly, Cannon, Bright, Holman 
and Burchard. All agree in their testimony given later 
in Congress, that they were not aware that silver had 
been demonetized. 

Senator Beck, in a speech before the Senate, Jan. 
10, 1878, said:- 

"It (the bill demonetizing silver) never was understood 
by either house of Congress. I say that with 
full knowledge of the facts. No newspaper reporter— 
and they are the most vigilant men I ever saw in obtaining 
information— discovered that it had been done." 

Did space permit we could quote similar, forceful 
language from the others. The very title of 
the bill was misleading: it was called, "An Act Revising 
the Laws Relative to the Mint, Assay Officers and 
Coinage of the United States." And President U.S. 
Grant, whose signature made the act a law, it is said, 
did not know of its character, and so declared four years 
after, when the effect began to be apparent. Indeed, 
few but the long-headed "financiers" took much notice 
of specie, as the Nation had not yet resumed specie 
payments, and this was supposed to be a helpful preparatory 
step in that direction. 

We may say that the mechanical and manufacturing 
and money interests of the United States have suffered 
little so far, because their share in the increased 
debts and interest have thus far been largely offset by their 
cheaper food and clothing. But the farmer's ruin 
means the ultimate ruin of the phenomenal prosperity 
of the United States; because our manufacturers depend 
for a market on home consumption, and the farm-workers 
number nearly 8,000,000 of our total laborers. 
If these are poverty stricken, it will injure every business 
except banking and pawnbroking. Further, it is 
conceded by all financiers that a nation's prosperity is 
indicated by the excess of its exports over its imports. 
Farm products constitute over eighty per cent, of the 
United States exports, or over $800,000,000 out of the 
$1,019,573,000 exports of 1894. This means that the 



same quantity of farm products at silver prices (as before 
the demonetization) would bring nearly $800,000,000 
additional capital into the United States annually; 
—enough in two years to more than pay off the national 
debt. But that which would be to the advantage 
of the people would be to the disadvantage of "Shylock," 
who wants debts large, money scarce and interest 
high. 

That the effect would be what it has been was foretold 
by numerous statesmen upon the floors of Congress. 
Some were blind to the issue, and some were 
quieted by self-interest, and some relied upon the advice 
of "financiers," but others spoke valiantly against 
the wrong. The late Hon. James G. Blane said in a 
speech before the United States Senate (1880):— 

"I believe the struggle now going on in this country 
and in other countries for a single gold standard 
would, if successful, produce widespread disaster in and 
throughout the commercial world. The destruction of 
silver as money, and the establishment of gold as the 
sole unit of value, must have a ruinous effect on all 
forms of property except those investments which yield 
a fixed return in money. These would be enormously 
enhanced in value, and would gain a disproportionate 
and unfair advantage over every other species of property. 
If, as the most reliable statistics affirm, there 
are nearly $7,000,000,000 of coin or bullion in the 
world, very equally divided between gold and silver, it 
is impossible to strike silver out of existence as money 
without results that will prove distressing to millions 
and utterly disastrous to tens of thousands. I believe 
gold and silver coin to be the money of the constitution; 
indeed, the money of the American people anterior 
to the constitution, which the great organic law recognized 
as quite independent of its own existence. No 
power was conferred on congress to declare either metal 
should not be money; congress has, therefore, in my 
judgment, no power to demonetize either. If, therefore, 
silver has been demonetized, I am in favor of remonetizing 
it. If its coinage has been prohibited, I am 
in favor of ordering it to be resumed. I am in favor 
of having it enlarged." 

The late Senator Vance said later:— 

"The power of money and its allies throughout 
the world have entered into this conspiracy to perpetuate 
the greatest crime of this or any other age, to 
overthrow one-half of the world's money and thereby 
double their own wealth by enhancing the value of the 
other half which is in their hands. The money changers 
are polluting the temple of our liberties." 

Others also lifted their voice against the wrong 
perpetrated, among them Mr. William McKinley. 

President Cleveland's government recently sent 

R2042 : page 232 



official letters to the United States ministers in foreign 
countries, requesting reports on monetary affairs. The 
report of Mr. Currie, minister to Belgium, has just 
come to hand and is a remarkable showing in harmony 
with the experiences of the people of the United States. 
His report of the reply to his questions given by the 
Hon. Alfonse Allard, Belgian Director of Finance, as 
published in the daily press, runs as follows:— 

"Since 1873 a crisis, consisting in a fall in all prices, 
exists continually, nor does it appear possible to arrest 
its progress. This fall in prices, reacting on wages, is 
now evolving a social and industrial crisis. 

"You asked me why we returned in 1873 to monometalism, 
limping though it be. I can conceive no 
other reason, unless that it was to please a certain class 
of financiers who profited thereby— a class supported 
by theories invented and defended at that time by some 
political economists, notably by members of the Institute 
of France. 

"You ask what influence these monetary measures 
have had in Belgium on industry and wages? Money, 
which was already scarce in 1873, has become still 
scarcer, and that fall in prices which was predicted has 
taken place. The average fall in the price of all the 
products of labor is 50 per cent, since 1873— that of 
cereals over 65 per cent. Industry is no longer remunerative, 
agriculture is ruined, and everybody is clamoring 
for protection by duties, while our ruined citizens 

R2043 : page 232 

think of wars. Such is the sad condition of Europe." 

In a letter to the National Republican League 
(June 11, 1891) Senator J. D. Cameron said:— 

"The single gold standard seems to us to be working 
ruin with a violence that nothing can stand. If this 
influence is to continue for the future at the rate of its 
action during the 20 years since the gold standard took 
possession of the world, some generation, not very remote, 
will see in the broad continent of America only 
a half-dozen overgrown cities keeping guard over a mass 
of capital and lending it out to a population of dependent 
laborers on the mortgage of their growing crops 
and unfinished handiwork. Such sights have been common 
enough in the world's history, but against it we 
all rebel. Rich and poor alike; Republicans, Democrats, 
Populists; labor and capital; churches and colleges 
—all alike, and all in solid good faith, shrink from 
such a future as this." 

English financiers know very well why the farmers 
of the world, and especially the farmers of the United 
States and Canada who export, are suffering; and they 
sometimes confess that it is their own selfishness. For 
instance, we quote from the editorial columns of The 
Financial News (London), April 30, 1894, as follows:— 

"We have frequent diplomatic differences with 



the United States; but, as a rule, there is seldom associated 
with these any sense of animus between the 
peoples of the two countries, and such squabbles pass 
over and are forgotten. But now we are encouraging 
the growth of a feeling that, on a question which affects 
the prosperity of millions of individual Americans, this 
country is inclined to entertain views unfriendly to the 
States. We know, of course, that the unfriendliness 
is accidental, and that our monetary policy is controlled 
by purely selfish considerations— so purely selfish that 
we do not mind seeing India suffering from our action 
much more than America does.... 

"Senator Cameron points a plain moral when he 
remarks that if the United States would venture to cut 
herself adrift from Europe and take outright to silver, 
she would have all America and Asia at her back, and 
would command the markets of both Continents. 'The 
barrier of gold would be more fatal than any barrier 
of a custom-house. The bond of silver would be 
stronger than any bond of free trade.' There can be 
no doubt about it, that if the United States were to 
adopt a silver basis to-morrow, British trade would be 
ruined before the year is out. Every American industry 
would be protected, not only at home, but in 
every other market. Of course the States would suffer 
to a certain extent through having to pay her obligations 
abroad in gold; but the loss on exchange under 
this head would be a mere drop in the bucket compared 
with the profits to be reaped from the markets of South 
America and Asia, to say nothing of Europe. The marvel 
is that the United States has not long ago seized 
the opportunity, and but for the belief that the way of 
England is necessarily the way to commercial success and 
prosperity, undoubtedly it would have been done long 
ago. Now, Americans are awakening to the fact that 
'so long as they narrow their ambition to becoming a 
larger England' they cannot beat us. It has been a 
piece of luck for us that it has never before occurred 
to the Americans to scoop us out of the world's markets 
by going on a silver basis, and it might serve us 
right if, irritated by the contemptuous apathy of our 
Government to the gravity of the silver problem, the 
Americans retaliate by freezing out gold. It could 
easily be done. ...There have not been wanting of 
late, indications of growing irritation with this country 
for its dog-in-the-manger attitude towards a question 
[the Silver question] that is convulsing two continents, 
and gravely compromising the future of the poorer 
States in Europe." 

That the farmers' cry that reward for toil is kept back 
by fraud is general to all gold standard countries— 
to all Christendom— we quote as follows:— 

Under date Sept. 22, '96, the New York World publishes 
a lengthy cable message, signed by leading agricultural 
men of Europe met at Budapest, Hungary, as an 
International Agricultural Congress, addressed to candidate 



W. J. Bryan, saying,— 

"We wish you success in your struggle against 
the domination of the creditor class, which, during the 
past 23 years has secured, both in Europe and America, 
monetary legislation destructive of the prosperity 
of your farmers and others. ...We believe that failing 
such restoration [of silver to money privileges], 
the gold premium throughout all Asia and South America 
will continue to rob the farmer (equally of America 
and Europe) of all rewards for his toil, and that your 
election may avert from Europe serious agrarian and 
social troubles now pending." 

The New York World, under date of Sept. 24, '96, 
publishes the following words of Prince Bismarck to 
Herr von Kardorf, leader of the Free Conservative 
Party in the German Reichstag. Prince Bismarck said;— 

"I am too old to go to school over the currency 
issue, but I recognize that, although I acted in 1873 on 
what I regarded as the best advice, my action was too 
precipitate in view of the results which have followed. 

"The one class that we cannot afford to estrange 

R2043 : page 233 

is the farming class. If they are convinced, and they 
assure you they are convinced, that agricultural depression 
is peculiar to these monetary changes, our government 
must review its position." 

The present extreme depression of silver, and of 
all commodities sold on a silver basis, came very gradually, 
—for two reasons. (1) It required time and 
manipulation to depress silver, a commodity still in 
great demand by more than one-half the world's population. 
(2) Silver-mine owners and others directly interested, 
together with statesmen who foresaw the coming 
evil, pressed their arguments so forcibly in Congress 
that expedients were resorted to by the United 
States Government, such as the Remonetization Act of 
1878, and The Silver Purchasing Act of 1890. But 
expedients were found impracticable. Silver must either 
be a money with full, equal power with gold as legal 
tender, or else it must be considered a merchantable 
commodity like diamonds, wheat, etc., and be subject 
to fluctuations according to supply and demand; and 
when in 1893 the last of these expedients was repealed, 
silver at once dropped to one-half the price of gold, and 
all the evils of its demonetization were felt to their full 
in 1 894, except as the consequent panic may be far-reaching 
progressive and enduring. 

It may seem remarkable that, with these facts before 
them, so few of the great journals and magazines 
have had a word to say on this phase of this subject; 
and this criticism applies specially to so-called Farm 
Journals, supposed to be devoted to the interests of the 
farmer, but really devoted to money-getting through 
their advertising patrons. A sort of explanation of 



their course is found in what is known as "The Buell 
Circular." It is said to have been sent to all the banks 
of the country, and reads as follows:— 

"OCTOBER 9, 1877. 

"Dear Sir:— It is advisable to do all in your power 
to sustain such prominent daily and weekly newspapers, 
especially the agricultural and religious press, as will 
oppose the issuing of greenback paper money, and that 
you will withhold your patronage or favors [discounts, 
etc.] from all applicants who are not willing to oppose 
the Government issue of money. Let the Government 
issue the coin, and the banks the paper money of the 
country, for then we can better protect each other. 

"To repeal the law creating national bank notes, 
or to restore to circulation the Government issue of 
money, will be to provide the people with money, and 
will, therefore, seriously affect your individual profit as 
bankers and lenders. See your Congressman at once, 
and engage him to support our interests, that we may 
control legislation. 

"James Buell, Secretary, 247 Broadway." 

Sixteen days after the date of this circular the 
New York Sun publicly announced that an attempt had 
been made to bribe it in harmony with the suggestions of 
the circular; and four days later the Chicago Inter-Ocean 
exposed an attempt to bribe it to misrepresent along 
the same lines. It published the communication in full, 
including the private letter which we here copy:— 

"The American Bankers' Association. 
"Strictly private. 

"Dear Sir:— Please insert the enclosed printed 
slip as leaded matter on the editorial page of your 
first issue immediately following the receipt of this, and 
send marked copy with bill to 

"Yours truly, James Buell, Secretary." 

It would appear that the farmer has none to look 
out for his interests: it pays to lead him to slaughter, 
or to keep quiet while others lead him. Alas! poor 
selfish, fallen humanity. How much need there is for 
"the Lord, the righteous Judge" to take the Kingdom 
and begin his long -promised reign of righteousness! 

THE FACTS FITTED TO PROPHECY. 



And now, after what may appear a lengthy account 
of this great fraud (but not too lengthy, we believe, to 
prove that it has been a systematic conspiracy to defraud 
the people in the interest of "Shylock"), we come 

R2044 : page 233 

to the connection between these facts and the prophecy 
of the Apostle James (5:1-9), a literal translation of 
which reads thus:— 



"Come now, you rich, weep and lament over those 
miseries of yours which are approaching. Your securities 
have become worthless and your garments have become 
motheaten. Your gold and your silver have become 
rusted; and the rust of them will be for a testimony 
against you, and will consume your bodies like 
fire. You have heaped together treasures for the last 
days. Behold! that reward which you have fraudulently 
withheld from those laborers who harvested your 
fields, cries out; and the loud cries of the reapers have 
entered the ears of the Lord of armies! You have lived 
delicately, in self-indulgence, upon the land and been 
wanton. You have nourished [fed] your hearts in the 
day of [your] slaughter. You [your class] condemned, 
you [your class] murdered the Just One [Christ], and 
he resisted you not." 

"Be you patient, then, brethren, till the presence 
of the Lord [who will adjust matters righteously,— 
lifting up him that is poor and him that hath no helper, 
and taking vengeance on all evil-doers]. Behold the 
husbandman, anticipating the fruit of the earth, waits 
patiently for it— until he shall receive both the 
early and the later harvest.* Be you also patient: 
establish your hearts, because the presence of the Lord 
has approached. Add not to each other's sorrows 
brethren, that ye be not punished [also]: behold the 
Judge is standing at the doors." 

We need not particularize the evidences which 
prove that our day of wealth-accumulation is here graphically 
described, and many of the rich and great of 
this world see distinctly the approach of socialism and 
ultimately of anarchy, which, by overthrowing the 
present social structure, will wreck the fortunes which 
consist of bonds, mortgages, etc., and from fear lead to 
the discarding of rich apparel, and to the secreting of 
wealth. All who are awake can see these things hastening 
toward us, and they are now probably less than 
fifteen years distant. Although we have referred frequently 
to this prophecy during the past twenty-three 
years we have until now felt somewhat perplexed to 
know what mighty question would turn the large 
majority of conservatives into a minority, permitting 
the social order to fall before anarchy as the Scriptures 
clearly indicate: but now all is clear as we witness in 
the affairs of our day the plain fulfilment of this very 
explicit prophecy. The farming element, hitherto the 



*See oldest MSS. 

R2044 : page 234 

bulwark of society, its guarantee against anarchy, is 
suddenly arousing and crying out that it is being robbed 
by legislative enactments; and it is preparing to assert 



its rights. 

Suddenly, as in a moment almost, the entire scene 
began to change: the silver question has overthrown 
old party lines, and is rapidly dividing the people of 
the world into two great classes— (1) the rich and their 
friends and dependents, and (2) the poor and their 
friends and dependents; and amongst the latter the 
farmers are rapidly taking their stand. 

Without as yet clearly realizing the fraud practiced 
on them by "Shylock," the farmers are nevertheless 
impressed that the demonetization of silver has something 
to do with the woes which are causing them to 
cry out. The present political revolution is, therefore, 
by all odds the most important factor yet discerned in 
the division and concentration of the forces for "the 
battle of the great day of God Almighty." 

Thus we find the reason for the Apostle James' 
reference to farmers: "Behold, that reward which you 
["rich men"] have fraudulently withheld from those 
laborers who harvested your fields, cries out; and the 
loud cries of the reapers have entered into the ears of 
the Lord of armies!" Ah, yes! those who labor for 
the world as food-producers are the farmers. And 
now, just at the time to fit the prophecy, they have a 
grievance— a general grievance, to which they are all 
awaking: and as they awake they are crying out as 
the prophecy foretold. And they cry out justly. 
"Shylock" has robbed them by a trick, by a deception, 
by a fraud; by misrepresentation, covertly securing 
the demonetization of silver to his own advantage, and 
to the ruin and slavery of those who produce the food 
by which he subsists. They do not rob the farmer of 
the money, but, as the prophecy says, they "keep 
back" not directly, but "fraudulently," by (unjust 
legislation secured by misrepresentation and fraud) nearly 
one half of the reaper's hire,— represented in the 
present difference between the price of silver and gold 
in his products. 

As usual the burden falls upon the most patient 
and poorest paid class. Consider the necessary clearing, 
breaking, fencing, plowing, harrowing and fertilizing 
to get the soil ready for the crop; then the value 
of the seed, the sowing, the pests, the floods, the 
drouths, the weeds, the machinery, the reaping, the 
threshing, the teams and teaming to get it to market. 
Surely one dollar a bushel for wheat is small enough 
pay for these laborers in the world's harvest fields; 
and surely, when they are defrauded of one-half of this 
by "Shylock's" manipulation of finances they have a 
right to cry out; and surely their cries should enter 
into the ears and find sympathy with all just men, as 
they do enter into the ears of the just and avenging 
Lord of hosts. The city laborer has sympathy if his 
wages fall below $1.50 per day;— but even more sympathy 
is deserved by the small farm owners when the 
price of wheat falls below $ 1 .00 per bushel, while their 



mortgage interest continues at 6 to 10 per cent, until 
their little all is wiped out. 

George K. Holmes, a statistician of note, quoted 
in standard publications, gives the grand total amount 
of mortgages on farms in the United States at $2,209,148,431. 
On this he says the average rate of interest 
is 7-1/3 per cent., making the annual interest charge 
$162,652,944. This means bankruptcy to those who 
sell wheat at 60 cents and cotton at 5 cents, less heavy 
freights. What wonder that these patient, conservative 
"reapers" are uttering "loud cries." 

But this prophecy testifies to far more than we 
have yet noted. This silver-demonetization-fraud, and 
its pinching of the farmers, causing them to take sides 
with the discontented elements of society, is only another 
step in the mobilization of what the Lord denominates 
his great army. This army is so called, not because composed 
of "saints" (for as already shown the "saints," 
the "brethren," are to be patient and not join the discontents), 
but because it is the power, the force, which 
the Lord will use in dashing to pieces the present selfish 
systems, preparatory to the establishment of the 
Millennial Kingdom upon their ruins. 

As we understand this prophecy, these cries of the 
farmers are only beginning, as they are only beginning 
to feel the severe pinch. It will be seen, then, that we do 
not expect that the coming Presidential election will result 
in the remonetizing of silver, the abatement of the 
fraud of "Shylock," and the hushing of the "loud cries" 
of the cultivators of the soil. This prophecy shows 
that all these will continue and increase and lead eventually 
to the climax of anarchy in every civilized land; 
—"a time of trouble such as never was since there was 
a nation"— man's extremity, God's opportunity. 

True, there are many things that at present would 
indicate that the silver party will come into power 
and reestablish silver on a parity with gold. There 
are many reasons for supposing that the unique position 
of this nation amongst the nations of the world, 
as chief importer of luxuries and chief exporter of necessities, 
would enable her, backed by the silver countries, 
to turn the tide for silver against combined Europe 
—while really the majority of Europe is in its favor. 
But we must remember that "Shylock" has great 
power. He largely controls the merchants, manufacturers 
and railroads; they are his debtors and almost 
necessarily his servants and worshipers. All the 
debts of all nations, for instance, represent labor performed, 
and should therefore be represented in money 
circulating amongst the people and seeking investment 
and employing labor in ten thousand branches of industry; 
but "Shylock" has deluded the people's lawmakers 
into believing that such a condition of cheap 
money, low interest and plenty of work would be 
"dangerous" and so the debts of all nations (amounting 
to $27,555,690,000*) have been largely put into 



the shape of interest-bearing bonds. "Shylock," also, 
through his servants, who are the advertising patrons, 
largely controls the press. Also on his side are now 
arrayed the shrewdest politicians of all the old parties; 
and the people are no match for the cunning of those 
wily men. A month more of the political canvass remains, 
and we will not be surprised if shortly before 
election day one or more subtle delusions are brought 
to bear, to alarm or hoodwink the people, who are very 
fearful of making a bad matter worse. Money can buy 
almost anything, and plenty of brains and tongues and 
pens are for sale, in addition to those directly interested 
in "Shylock's" business, or honestly deluded 
by the fraudulent cry of "the honest dollar." 



*From the report of the Director of the United States' Mint for 1894. 

R2044 : page 235 

But even should the silver party win the election 
by so large a majority as to insure the seating of its 
representatives, we must expect that it would only the 
more thoroughly arouse "Shylock" to redoubled 
energy and expenditure, to retain his control of the 
great advantage fraudulently gained over the farmers, 

R2045 : page 235 

and to a large extent over all who belong to the debtor 
class. And he will succeed: the prophecy so indicates. 
Prophecy is not always a statement of what should be; 
it is merely a fore-statement of what will be. Hence 
we may know of a surety that "Shylock" will successfully 
continue to hinder the remonetization of silver, or 
in some equivalent way to specially oppress the farmers 
of the civilized world, UNTIL the fulfilment of the first 
verse of this prophecy,— the weeping and lamenting of 
the rich over the destruction of all their valuables. 
It may be well here to remind our readers again 
that we are not expecting immediate anarchy. We expect 
spurts of business revival on present and still more depressed 
levels, interspersed with more and more frequent 
panicy spasms, labor troubles and expedients, 
until finally, probably between 1908 and 1912, the 
wealthy and luxurious will represent about one per 
cent, and the discontented, hopelessly poor about 
ninety-nine per cent, of the population of "Christendom;" 
and then, while "Shylock" sits upon the 
safety-valve, the great and awful explosion may be expected. 
The interim of time "Shylock" will spend in 
heaping together still greater treasures than he now 
possesses, and in operating his present fraudulent 
financial system or its equivalents, while he hears, unmoved 
by either justice or pity, louder and yet louder 



the cries of the oppressed victims of his greed in every 
nation. Surely, the divine judgment against this class 
is but a just retribution. "Vengeance is mine, I will 
repay, saith the Lord." Yet in wrath the Lord will 
remember mercy; and the weeping and lamenting and 
loss will work out ultimate good, we trust, to many. 



None need be surprised to find the religious teachers, 
the pulpit and the religious press, as well as the 
wealthy pew holders zealously on the side of the fraudulent 
keeping back of the farmer's just dues, and the 
general burdening of the poor by thus doubling all 
debts. The Scriptures clearly indicate (under symbols) 
that in the finale of the conflict, in which society as at 
present constituted will perish, the rulers, financiers, 
and all the worldly great men, and the Roman Catholic 
system as well as Protestant systems, will be together, 
and fall together, and in the conclusion of this "battle" 
between them and the Lord and his army of the poor 
and oppressed of every nation.— See Rev. 19:15-21. 

The following extract from the Asheville, N.C., 
speech of candidate W. J. Bryan indicates that the 
ministers of the various denominations are already 
lining up on "Shylock's" side of this question. He said, 

"How things have changed in the last eighteen 
hundred years. Look at the people who head the gold 
standard propaganda in the United States. Look at 
the bondholding class and the money changers classes, 
the brokerage classes of New York, who are trying to 
fasten a gold standard upon the people of this country, 
not openly, but secretly and in disguise, and then turn 
back eighteen hundred years when the meek and lowly 
Savior threw the same kind of people out of his temple 
because they had made his house a den of thieves. 
And then think that these people come and appeal to 
the ministers of the gospel and the church papers to 
save them from the wrath to come. 

"My friends, when certain ministers of the gospel 
denounce the great mass of the people who stand behind 
free coinage, when the ministers have denounced 
these advocates of free coinage and have taken their 
places upon the side of these great aggregations of wealth, 
I remind them that when the Savior was here it was the 
common people who heard him gladly— the very people 
whom these ministers to-day call anarchists and socialists. 
My friends, when I find— there are not many of 
them, but they are quite conspicuous— when I find 
these men casting their lot upon that side and exhausting 
abusive language in their description of the great 
masses of the people of this country. I feel like saying 
to them that if they will take their chances with Dives, 
I will risk my chances with Lazarus." 

Although reluctant to even seem to dabble in 
politics we have felt it to be our duty to call attention 



to this notable fulfilment of a notable and particularly 
clear and explicit prophecy. Let us all as "brethren" 
rejoice in this, another sign that our "redemption 
[deliverance] draweth nigh." In closing, let us again 
urge upon all the Prophet-Apostle's words: "Be you 
patient, brethren," even though some of you should be 
killed, symbolically, as the Just One, our Master, 
was actually betrayed and killed by the "money-lovers." 
(See John 12:6; Matt. 21:12; Luke 6:24; 
John 11:47-53.) The word here rendered "covetous" 
signifies "money-lovers," as rendered in the Diaglott 
translation. As we see retribution coming upon the 
rich and proud and mighty and hypocritical, let us each 
endeavor that our own lives be honest, humble, Christ-like, 
that we may be spared in this day of exposure of 
sin and of recompensing of evil deeds. 



R2045 : page 235 

SOLOMON ANOINTED KING. 
-OCT. 4.-1 KINGS 1:28-39.- 



THAT Solomon was the Lord's choice among David's sons to succeed 

him upon the throne of Israel is clear from 1 Chron. 22:8,9. 

—"The word of the Lord came to me, saying,. ..Behold, a son 

shall be born to thee who shall be a man of rest: and I will give him 

rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon, 

and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in his days." (See also 

2 Sam. 12:24,25; 1 Chron. 17:11-15; 2 Sam. 7:12-17.) And it 

was in view of the fact that Solomon was the Lord's choice, that David 

assured Bath-sheba, Solomon's mother, that her son should surely inherit 

the Kingdom.— 1 Kings 1:13,30. 

Solomon was the second son of David by Bath-sheba. His name 
signifies "the peaceful," thus commemorating the promise of God concerning 
him. The additional name Jedediah (the beloved of Jehovah) 
seems to have been given by Nathan the prophet as a sign of David's 
forgiveness and restoration to the divine favor (2 Sam. 12:25), as the 
special love thus expressed before the child could know or choose good 
or evil could not have been for his own merit, and therefore must have 
been for his father David's sake, whom God had loved and chosen, and 
of whose posterity was to come the long promised Messiah— King of 
the antitypical Kingdom of God. Hence the names, Solomon (the 

R2045 : page 236 

peaceful) and Jedediah (the beloved of the Lord) indicated that David 
was still the beloved, that he was fully restored to the divine favor, and 
that the promises of God made to him and his posterity still held good. 

Solomon came to the throne at an early age, probably at about 
nineteen or twenty. Of his personal qualifications at this time we 
know but little except from 1 Kings 3:3,— "And Solomon loved the 
Lord, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed 
[unto the Lord] and burnt incense in high places." This was prohibited 



by the Mosaic law (Deut. 12:13,14), but was accepted of God 
until the Temple was built.— See 1 Sam. 9:12; 1 Kings 3:2. 

It was not long, however, until the seductive influences of position, 
power, wealth and general prosperity bore down with telling effect upon 
the character of this favored young man whose future was all aglow 
with promise. His character had never been developed in the school 
of experience, for he was reared in luxury from his youth up; nor were 
his principles put to the test. His principles were not fixed and firm. 
Though he loved God because of what he had seen and heard of his 
goodness to his people and to David his father, and because God loved 
him and had chosen him to be king, yet his heart was not anchored in 
God. He had not learned to love God for his inherent goodness— because 
he is the embodiment and glorious exemplification of righteousness 
and truth. And it is only those who love righteousness, and who 
therefore love God, because he is righteous, who are truly anchored in 
God, and who, consequently, have any stability of character. That 
Solomon was sadly lacking in such love to God and the consequent 
stability of character, his subsequent course soon began to show. 

Yet, though God knew the end and all the intervening steps of his 
career from the beginning, though he foresaw his moral decline and its 
baneful influence upon the nation, still in his own wise purpose he chose 
Solomon to be king over Israel; and the purpose of God in choosing 
him was admirably accomplished, notwithstanding his own degeneracy 

R2046 : page 236 

and the sins into which he led the nation. That purpose and its accomplishment 

will be more clearly understood from our consideration 

of the succeeding lesson. But let us observe here that God did not 

propose always to provide for Israel a king whose reign would afford 

them the largest measure of temporal prosperity. Indeed, when they 

demanded a king and he granted them their desire, he faithfully forewarned 

them of the infringements of kingly power upon the rights and 

liberties of the people. (Read 1 Sam. 8:9-18.) All of this the nation 

experienced in the subsequent years of their history. 

This was not the Lord's idea of government, but it was his foretelling 
of what he foresaw that the imperfect and selfish heart of man 
would do when exalted to power; for he knoweth what is in man. So it was 
in Israel, and so it has been in all the world: selfishness exalted to power 
has always used that power, largely at least, for self-aggrandizement. 

The Lord's instructions to the kings of Israel were, however, to 
the opposite of all this; viz., that the king should study the law of the 
Lord, and put its principles in practice— "that his heart be not lifted up 
above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment 
to the right hand or to the left." (Deut. 17: 18-20.) But no king, 
either of Israel or of any other nation, however wise or good, ever did 
that. All have been more or less inflated with the pride of power, and 
their hearts have been lifted up above their brethren. Even David, the 
beloved of the Lord, succumbed to this baneful influence until, being 
greatly intoxicated with it, he fell into gross sin. The temptations of 
power to our impaired humanity in any position are always to the gratification 
of pride, ambition and self-aggrandizement. The only ruler of 
the world who will fully meet the requirements of the divine law, turning 
not aside to the right hand nor to the left, will be Jehovah's Anointed 
Son, our blessed Lord Jesus, who so loved his (future) subjects that 
he gave his life for them. His heart is never lifted up by pride, though 



God hath highly exalted him and given him a name which is above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of 
things in heaven and things in earth.— Phil. 2:9-11. 

In him there is no scheming for self-aggrandizement, no ambition 
except lovingly and willingly to serve and bless his subjects, and that 
not only in theory, but in a blessed reality fully attested by his great 
sacrifice on their behalf. Though he was rich, for their sakes he became 
poor; though he had everlasting life, yet for their sakes he freely 
gave his life a ransom for theirs. Of him it is written, "Behold, a king 
shall reign in righteousness;" and he is called "the Prince of peace." 
Until his righteous reign is established in the earth the whole creation 
groans and travails in pain, and neither Israel nor the world could enjoy 
the blessings of that peace and prosperity which God designs to give 
through Christ. The reign of Solomon only prefigured this; and, as 
we shall see, the typical peace and prosperity of his reign were very 
hollow and unsatisfactory, yet the brilliant bubble was a speaking type 
of the future glorious reality; and when it had accomplished this mission 
of shadowing forth the glory to be revealed in Christ, the bubble 
burst and the groaning creation continued to groan under the heel of 
the oppressor, and will until he whose right it is shall take the kingdom 
and possess it. 



R2046 : page 236 

SOLOMON'S WISE CHOICE. 
-OCT. 11.- 1 KINGS 3:5-15.- 



IT is important to observe that the text of this lesson is the record of 
a dream. (Vss. 5,15.) The dream was from the Lord. In it the 
Lord suggested the question to Solomon, and also a proper answer to 
the question. Then he expressed his pleasure at the suggested answer, 
and told how he would reward the spirit which it manifested. "And 
Solomon awoke, and behold, it was a dream." Yet in all the subsequent 
years of his reign Solomon realized the blessings mentioned in that dream 
just as surely as if the suggested prayer had been actually his, and, indeed, 
we may assume that upon awaking Solomon endorsed the wise 
prayer of his dream, although his subsequent course as a king does not 
indicate that those noble sentiments always actuated him. God was 
using Solomon as a type, and his reign was in some sense to prefigure 
the glorious reign of Christ, "the Prince of peace." 

Starting with unusually bright prospects— with a future all aglow 
with the promises of God, if he would faithfully walk uprightly before 
him, with the counsel, instruction and assistance of his father David and 
of the prophet Nathan, early placed upon the throne of Israel and in 
favor with all the people, amply provided with abundant treasure for 
the great work of building the temple and commissioned of God to do it, 
we see him neglecting the instruction of the Lord suggested in the prayer 
of his dream; and, overcome by the temptations of power, he is seen 
perverting the blessings of God to selfish ends. Instead of wisely and 
justly considering the best interests of the nation and humbly remembering 
that he was elevated to the kingly office for the purpose of serving 
his brethren, Solomon became the oppressor of his people, while he 
indulged himself in more than heart could wish. 



But while his wealth and magnificence attracted the attention of 
the world, his policy toward the nation finally led to the disruption of 
the kingdom under his son and successor, Rehoboam; for though "the 
king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones," they 
were not in possession of the masses of the people, who felt oppressed, 
but were displayed in the follies of royalty,— in magnificent palaces for 
himself and his heathen wives, and in gardens and raiment and chariots 
and soldiers, etc.— See 1 Kings 12:4. 

His career ended in the glory of an unhealthy temporal prosperity. 
Yet it served well the purpose of God in foreshadowing the higher and 
real glory of Christ's Kingdom. It was the glory of Christ's Kingdom 
to which special reference was undoubtedly made in Solomon's inspired 
dream. In so far as that dream was fulfilled in Solomon and 
his reign it prefigured the glorious and peaceful reign of David's greater 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. The prayer suggested in the vision was 
indeed the attitude of his heart. He truly sought the wisdom of Jehovah 
for the blessing of his dominion; and to this end he cheerfully submitted 
himself to the divine will in all things. It was this disposition 
of heart in our Lord Jesus, that pleased the Father, who therefore gave 
to him the wise and understanding heart, and has added also riches 
and honor of which the riches and honors of Solomon were typical. And 
as there was none like him before him, so there shall be none after him. 
"His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom." He truly shall be the 
"Prince of peace;" and in the beginning of his reign the glorious spiritual 
temple of God, the Church (which Solomon's magnificent temple foreshadowed), 
shall be completed, and filled with the glory of the Lord. 



page 237 
VOL. XVII. OCTOBER 15, 1896. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 238 

View from the Watch Tower 239 

Hope of Another Chance 240 

Dr. Talmage's Views With Comments 

Questions of General Interest 248 

Solomon's Wealth and Wisdom 250 

The Proverbs of Solomon 250 

The Temple Which Solomon Built 251 

The Temple Dedicated 252 

page 238 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST.. 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 



SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE SILVER QUESTION IN PROPHECY. 

Our Oct. 1st issue, devoted chiefly to the exposition of James 5:1-8, 
has had a very great demand. We printed twenty thousand copies, 
but they are nearly gone, orders are coming in for extras from one 
copy to two hundred, and the supply will soon be gone. If the orders 
continue, it is proposed to reset that article for a TOWER Extra 
and in it give the leading article of this issue— "Hope of 
a Second Chance." 



TRACTS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. 



Do not forget that we have plenty of foreign as well as plenty of 
English tracts and that sample copies for free distribution are sent in 
any quantity to all TOWER subscribers. 

Our latest tracts are "Do the Scriptures Teach that Eternal Torment 
is the Wages of Sin?" translated into German (No. 34) and into 
Hollandish or Dutch (No. 33), and "Why are Ye the Last to Welcome 
Back the King," translated into Swedish (No. 35). 



R2046 : page 239 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



WE noted not long since that Hon. W. E. Gladstone 
had addressed a letter to the Pope, setting 
forth the claims of the Church of England to recognition 
as a sister Church to that of Rome and others 
styled "Catholic;" pointing out its claims to Apostolic 
succession through its bishops, and hence the validity 
of the ordinations of its clergy; and urging that such 
a recognition would greatly open the way to a reunion 
of Christendom. We pointed out at the time that this 
feature of the religious union would fail because, while 
the Book of Revelation clearly points out a federation 
of Protestants as the "Image," it as clearly distinguishes 



between this "Image" and the original "Beast" 
—Papacy— while showing that they will be considerably 
in fellowship.— Rev. 13:15-17. 

The Pope submitted the question to his advisors, 
and now gives forth as the final, infallible and never 
changeable decision of the Roman Church on this subject, 
in effect, that neither the Church of England nor 
the ordinations of her clerics can be recognized; that 
the only way back to the "Mother" is through repentance 
and conversion. 

Here is a peculiar case: the daughter recognizes 
the mother, and the mother the daughter, and the whole 
world is witness to the family resemblance; but the 
mother dare not acknowledge the daughter for fear of 
criminating herself; for she and all the other daughters 

R2047 : page 239 

are illegitimate. Certainly: the true Church is a virgin, 
and the Church of Rome poses as the true, virgin 
Church of Christ.— Compare Rev. 17:5 and 2 Cor. 11:2; 
Eph. 5:27. 

This decision will probably carry some "high-church" 
Episcopalians formally into Romanism, but 
it marks clearly the division between the two sides of 
the great "scroll" which is shortly to roll together. 
-Rev. 6:14; Isa. 34:4. 



How fortunate for the humble that the Lord has 
given no earthly church patents! Each denomination 
would like to claim such divine favor. The Church of 
Rome has long claimed this exclusive patent right, and 
has supported the claim with other "great swelling 
words" and blasphemies, while overawing human judgment 
by the numbers of her ignorant devotees. The 
other systems were so inclined at first, but lately have 
contented themselves with the claim that God gives 
letters patent to all denominations which they recognize 
as "Evangelical" or "Orthodox;" i.e., all denominations 
professing to believe, (1) that the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Spirit are three in manifestation and yet "one in 
person, and equal in power and glory" (quite contrary 
both to reason and Scripture); (2) that eternal life is 
not a gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and 
immortality not a special prize to be sought after by faithful 
obedience, but, on the contrary, a natural quality 
appertaining to every man; in consequence of which 
(3) all who do not experience conversion to God before 
their death are hopelessly lost, and will be tormented 
forever.— Compare Rom. 2:7; 6:23; 1 Tim. 6:16; 
John 10:29; 13:16; 14:28. 

Hence Protestants sometimes say, and often give 
the impression, that salvation is dependent upon membership 



R2047 : page 240 

in some church— Protestant, Roman, Greek, 
Armenian, or almost any other human organization. 
But it is seldom that we see anything so extreme as 
the following, clipped from the Detroit Weekly Tribune, 
July 15, '96,- 

" At the recent meeting of the Episcopal Division 
Convention of Maine the Rev. Arthur B. Papineau referred 
to Christians outside the Episcopal Church as 
'heathen.' 'We are the Catholic Church,' he said, 
'opposed to Romanism on the one hand and Protestantism 
on the other. We must tell them that outside of 
this church there is no salvation.'" 

Thanks be to God for the opening of our eyes by 
the eyesalve from his Word, by which we can see clearly 
that the one Church is not a human organization, 
nor in anywise dependent upon human organizations, 
either for ultimate salvation or for present spiritual 
sustenance. This one, true Church includes all who 
during this Gospel age, upon the basis or foundation 
of justification (through repentance, and faith in the 
precious blood of Christ), have made with God a covenant 
of full consecration, and who by God's grace are 
seeking to perform that covenant. These are the "members 
in particular of the body of Christ"— the "jewels," 
the "living stones," the "royal priesthood." Wherever 
they may be (within or outside of human organizations), 
"the Lord knoweth them that are his," and 
calleth and leadeth forth his own sheep.— Rev. 18:4. 



Taking note of the fact that earthly princes are 
not very generally supporting Papal claims, the Pope 
by a recent Encyclical has changed the order for prayers, 
and Romanists will no longer pray as formerly for 
princes. Instead, prayer will be offered for the liberty 
of the Church (of Rome) and for peace and union 
among Christian nations. 

The full liberty of the Church of Rome would 
mean the liberty of the leopard beast (Rev. 13), and as 
of yore would mean no personal liberty, but a great 
destruction amongst the true sheep and lambs of the 
true Shepherd— the only Head and Lord of the one 
true Church. 



The Roman Catholic Church, realizing that its influence 
in Hungary has of late been on the wane, and 
that religious as well as political independence are on the 
increase there, has decided to take steps to maintain and 
increase its hold upon the rights and liberties of the 
people. A Vienna journal, the Vaterland, publishes 
the programme proposed. We give a few of the 



points, as follows:— 

Catholic Societies are to be formed. The religious 
teachers in the colleges are to be watched that they establish 
the students in the Roman Catholic faith. Secular 
teachers must see that their teachings are in the spirit 
of Catholicism, and the bishops are to insist upon the 
right (?) of selecting secular as well as religious textbooks. 
Newspapers favorable to Roman Catholicism 
are to be started and patronized, and bishops shall oversee 
with greater diligence the morals and habits of 
the lower clergy. 

The European press professes to see in this a stern 
battle; believing that the liberal and patriotic Hungarians 
will resist the more heroically. The Frankfurter 
Zeitung, a usually careful and well informed journal, 
says:— 

"Strictly to carry out the injunctions of this decree 
would divide Hungary into two camps engaged in 
a life-and-death struggle with each other; namely, a 
Catholic-Rumanian party and a Hungarian-Protestant 
party. Every single item in the decree is fraught with 
danger to the state and to Protestantism in Hungary. 
Even that point which seems the most harmless, namely, 
the injunction that bishops are to watch over the 
lives and morals of their priests, means much for Hungary. 
Clerical fanaticism has hitherto not been thriving 
very noticeably in Hungary, because the priests 
have heretofore not been hindered by their liberal congregations 
from living with their wives and children. 
Cases are known where Catholic priests have not hesitated 
to appear on the streets with their wives and children, 
and no particular offense was taken." 



R2047 : page 240 

HOPE OF ANOTHER CHANCE. 



EXTRACTS FROM DR. TALMAGE'S SERMON AT 
WASHINGTON CITY, AUG. 9, '96, WITH COMMENTS. 



"IF the tree fall toward the south, or toward the 
north, in the place where the tree falleth, there 
it shall be."-Eccl. 11:3. 

"There is a hovering hope in the minds of a vast 
multitude of people that there will be an opportunity 
in the next world of correcting the mistakes of this. 
The object of my sermon is to show you that common 
sense declares with the text that such an expectation is 
chimerical. 'If the tree fall toward the south, or toward 
the north, in the place where the tree falleth, 



there it shall be.' 

(1) "There are those who say that if the impenitent 
and unforgiven man enters the next world and sees the 
disaster, as a result of that disaster he will turn, the 
distress the cause of his reformation; but we have ten 
thousand instances all around about us of people who 
have done wrong and disaster suddenly came upon 
them— did the disaster heal them? No, they went on. 
There is a man flung of dissipations. His nerves are 
all a jangle. From crown of head to sole of foot he is 
one aching, rasping, crucifying torture. Where is he? 
He is in hell on earth. Does it stop him? Ah! no. 

R2047 : page 241 

After a while delirium tremens pours out upon his pillow 

a whole jungle of hissing reptiles. His screams horrify 

the neighbors as he dashes out of bed crying: Take 

these things off me!' He is drinking down the comfort 

of his family, the education of his children, their prospects 

for this life and perhaps their prospects for the 

life to come. Pale and convalescent he sits up. Physician 

says to him: 'Now, my good fellow, I am going 

to have a plain talk with you. If you ever have an attack 

of this kind again you will die. I can't save you, 

and all the doctors in creation can't save you.' The 

patient gets up, starts out, goes the same round of dissipation 

and is down again; but this time medicines do 

not touch his case. Consultations of physicians say 

there is no hope. Death ends the scene. 

"Pain does not reform. Suffering does not cure. 
What is true in regard to one sin is true in regard to 
all sins, and yet men are expecting in the next life there 
will be opportunity for purgatorial regeneration. Take 
up the printed reports of the prisons of the United 
States and find that the vast majority of the criminals 
were there before, some for two times, three times, four 
times, six times. Punished again and again, but they 
go right on. Millions of incidents and instances working 
the other way, and yet men think that in the next 
world punishment will work out for them salvable effects. 
Why, you and I cannot imagine any worse torture 
from another world than we have seen men in in 
this world, and without any salutary consequence. 

(2) "Furthermore, the prospect of reformation in 
another world is more improbable than here. Do you 
not realize the fact that a man starts in this world with 
the innocence of infancy? In the other case, starting 
in the other world, he starts with the accumulated bad 
habits of a lifetime. Is it not to be expected that you 
could build a better ship out of new timber than out of 
an old hulk that has been ground up in the breakers? 
If starting with comparative innocency the man does 
not become godly, is it possible that starting with sin 

R2048 : page 241 



a seraph can be evoluted? Is there not more prospect 
that a sculptor will make a finer statue out of a block 
of pure, white Parian marble than out of a black rock 
that has been cracked and twisted and split and scarred 
with the storms of a half century? 

"'But,' say some people, 'we ought to have another 
chance in the next world because our life here is 
so very brief.' 

(3) "My friends, do you know what made the 
ancient deluge a necessity? It was the longevity of the 
antediluvians. They were worse in the second century 
than in the first, and worse when they got three hundred 
years old, and worse at four hundred, and worse 

at five hundred, and worse at six hundred, and worse 
at eight hundred; until the world had to be washed 
and scoured and scrubbed and soaked and sunk and 
anchored a whole month under water before it was fit 
for decent people to live in. I have seen many pictures 
of old Time with his scythe to cut, but I never saw any 
picture of Time with a chest of medicines to heal. 

"If eight hundred years of life time could not cure 
the antediluvians of their iniquity, I undertake to say 
that all the ages of eternity would be only prolongation 
of depravity. 

(4) "'But,' says some one, 'in the next life the 

evil surroundings will be withdrawn, and good influences 
will be substituted, and hence, expurgation, sublimation, 
glorification.' But you must remember that 
the righteous, all their sins forgiven, pass right up into 
a beatific state, not needing any other chance, that will 
leave all those who have never been forgiven, and who 
were impenitent, alone, alone! and where are the salvable 
influences to come from? Can it be that Dr. Duff, who 
spent his whole life in pointing the Hindoos to heaven, 
and Dr. Abeel, who spent his life in evangelizing China, 
and that Judson, who spent his life in preaching the 
gospel to Burmah— can it be expected that they will be 
sent down from some celestial missionary society to educate 
and to save those who wasted their earthly existence? 
No. We are told distinctly that all missionary 
and evangelistic influences will be ended forever, and 
the good, having passed up to their beatific state, all the 
morally bankrupt will be together; and where are the 
salvable influences to come from? Will a specked or 
bad apple put in a barrel of diseased apples make the 
other apples good? Will one who is down be able to 
lift others up? 

"If a man in this world was surrounded with temptation, 
in the next world (all the righteous having 
passed up into the beatific state), the association will be 
more deteriorating, depreciating and down. You would 
not send a man to a cholera or yellow fever hospital for 
his health, and the great lazaretto of the future, in 
which are gathered the diseased and the plague-struck, 
will be a poor place for moral recovery. 



"I wonder what is the curriculum in the College 
Inferno, where a man having been prepared by enough 
sin, enters and goes up from freshman of iniquity to 
sophomore of abomination, and on up, from sophomore 
to junior, and from junior to senior, and day of graduation 
comes, and the diploma is signed by Satan, the 
president, and all the professional demoniacs attest the 
fact that the candidate has been a sufficient time 
under their drill, and then enters heaven. Pandemonium, 
a preparatory school for celestial admission! Ah, 
my friends, while Satan and his cohorts have fitted a 
vast multitude for ruin, they never fitted one soul for 
happiness— never. 

"You see this idea lifts this world from an unimportant 
way station to a platform of stupendous issues, 
and makes all eternity whirl around this hour. Oh, 
my soul! my soul! Only one trial, and all the preparation 
for that trial to be made in this world, or never 
made at all. Oh, my soul! my soul! You see this 
piles up all the emphasis and all the climaxes and all 
the destinies into this life. No other chance. Oh, how 
that intensifies the value and the importance of this 
chance. Alexander and his army used to come around 
a city and they would kindle a great light, with the 
understanding that as long as that light was burning 
the city might surrender, and all would be well, but if 
they let that light go out, then the battering rams 
would swing against the walls and there would come 
disaster and demolition. Oh, my friends, all you and 
I need to do to prepare for eternal safety is just to surrender 
to the King and Conqueror, Christ. Surrender 
hearts, surrender life, surrender everything. The great 
light keeps burning, light kindled by the wood of the 
Cross, light flaming up against the dark night of our 
sin and sorrow. Oh, let us surrender before the light 
goes out, and with it our last opportunity of making 

R2048 : page 242 

our peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." 

COMMENTS ON THE FOREGOING. 



We publish the foregoing, because, weak as it is, and 
easily answered by those who have in mind the Scripture 
teachings, it is nevertheless the strongest presentation of 
that side of the subject that has yet come under our observation; 
and we desire to give, for the benefit of the 
uninstructed, a proper answer to such reasonings. 

First, then, that there may be no mistake, let us 
say that we fully endorse the statement that whoever 
hears the message of divine grace should make haste 
immediately to respond;— to accept justification by faith 
in the precious blood, and to present himself with every 



talent a living sacrifice in God's service; and that there 
will never be another chance provided for any who have 
enjoyed a full chance in the present life and have despised 
it. But we cannot agree that Mr. Talmage or 
any other man is competent to decide which of mankind 
have had, and which have not had, a full opportunity. 
Only the appointed Judge is either authorized 
or capable of deciding this question.— John 5:22. 

However, we can say nothing further in harmony 
with the discourse: on the contrary, we must condemn all 
of its reasonings as sophistical and wholly unscriptural. 

The only excuse that can be offered for the selection 
of so mis-fit a text for such a subject, by a man of 
Mr. Talmage's ability, is, that he felt that he must 
have some text, and this one came as near as any to be 
found in the Bible, which could be made in any degree 
to hint that the only chance for gaining everlasting life 
is the present life. 

Those who will turn to the Scriptures and examine 
this text with its context will find nothing whatever to 
justify the interpretation given it by Mr. Talmage. 
Yet probably not one in a thousand of those who heard 
or read the discourse turned to and read the scripture 
cited as authority for all the weighty conclusions based 
on it. Alas! there is far too much confidence reposed 
in human teachers who frequently are far from faithful 
"oracles of God." 

(1) The text has not the remotest reference to human 
probation. There is nothing to indicate that it refers 
to mankind at all. It merely points out that we may 
know that inanimate things act under nature's laws- 
clouds full of water drop it upon the earth; a tree, 
whichever way it falls, is powerless to change or move 
its position. If any lesson or comparison to man were 
instituted it would be that so man falls helpless in 
death, and that "there is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest" 
(Eccl. 9:10); but we see no comparison to man 
in the verse or its context. 

The poor drunkard who finally becomes such a 
slave to his appetite that he loses all self-control, and 
battles in vain to regain his freedom, is used as a proof 
that experiences are not reformatory, whereas every 
person knows that some of the most valuable lessons 
we learn are lessons of experience, so that it has become 
a recognized proverb that "a burned child dreads 
the fire." The fact is that morphine, opium, nicotine 
and other drugs obtain such a mastery over their subjects 
that often the latter weep and strive for freedom 
in vain, and would welcome gladly any deliverance,— 
Keely Cures, or what not? 

All that can be said against such slaves of appetite 
the Apostle Paul declares to be true in some measure 
of all sinners. He says (Rom. 7:14-25): "For I know 
that in me (that is, in my [fallen] flesh) dwelleth no 
good thing: for to will is present with me, but how to 



perform I find not: but the evil which I would not, 
that I do....O wretched man that I am [as all by 
heredity are], who shall deliver me from this dead body 
[this body which my will cannot fully control, and with 
which there is a constant battle]?" Then comes the 
answer, that God has appointed Christ to be our deliverer 
—"I thank God [there is deliverance from this 
slavery] through Jesus Christ our Lord." 

The fact then, attested by our experience and by 
God's Word, is that we all are slaves of Satan, sin and 
death, and all need a Savior. We who have already 
found Christ as our Savior may well rejoice; but by 
what authority can we declare that his power to save, 
to deliver from Satan, sin and death is limited to the 
"few there be that find" the narrow way in the present 
age? Quite to the contrary, the Scriptures, while 
plainly declaring, "Blessed are your eyes, for they 
see," declare none the less explicitly that the time is 
coming when all the sin-blinded eyes shall be opened; 
and that Christ, the true light, shall yet lighten "every 
man that cometh into the world." (John 1:9.) The 
eye of faith thus grasps firmly the promises of God's 
Word,— that the knowledge of the Lord shall yet fill 
the whole earth, that "all the families of the earth" 
shall ultimately be "blessed" with the knowledge of 
the "good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto 

R2049 : page 242 

all people," "every creature," even "those that are 
in their graves," who shall come forth to hear it. 
Moreover, the Scriptures explain how it comes 
that the majority of mankind are now blinded and deceived, 
saying, "The god of this world [Satan] hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them." (2 Cor. 4:4.) And 
those whose eyes are not thus blinded by sin and superstition 
are alone the favored "drawn" by the Father 
to Christ. These, upon accepting Christ, are translated 
"out of darkness into his marvelous light." This 

R2049 : page 243 

the Apostle expresses when addressing those whose 
eyes of understanding have been opened, saying, "That 
ye. ..may be able to comprehend with all saints 
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; 
and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge 
[mere human understanding]."— Eph. 3:18,19. 

This special class now called, chosen, and found 
faithful, are called "God's elect." God is choosing 
them for a purpose,— a good purpose, a grand purpose, 
a holy purpose. He is not choosing this "little flock" 
to sit in glory and (as described by Jonathan Edwards) 
to look over the battlements of heaven and see the great 



mass of humanity in eternal torment and to praise God 
for their own deliverance from such a fate; but he is 
electing them in order that through them, with Christ 
Jesus, as the elect and foreordained "Seed of Abraham," 
"all the families of the earth [shall] be blessed." 

The Apostle points out the very slaves of sin, mentioned 
by Mr. Talmage, groaning under the weight of 
the yoke which the great task -master, Sin, has imposed 
upon them, but, so far from seeing no hope for such, 
he declares, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 
in pain together until now [not in despair and hopelessly, 
but] waiting for the manifestation of the sons 
of God [for their deliverance]." (Rom. 8:19,22.) 
The whole creation is not waiting intelligently, for "the 
god of this world has blinded their minds;" but they 
are ignorantly and blindly waiting, groaning and hoping 
for the "Golden age" and life elixirs of which 
the world's poets have long sung; all of which hopes 
are far inferior to the wonderful Millennial blessings 
which God has promised shall be ushered in, when the 
elect number of the "royal priesthood," the "sons of 
God," now making their calling and election sure by 
conformity to the predestinated conditions of joint-heirship, 
shall have been "changed" and manifested 
in glory. --Rom. 8:29,17,18. 

The Apostle distinctly states this, saying, "The 
creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage of 
corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God." 
That he does not here refer to the Church, the saints, 
but to mankind in general, is evident from the context; 
for he turns then to believers and declares, "And not 
only they [the world] but ourselves also [the elect 
Church— the seed of Abraham, through whom "they" 
are to be delivered, after "we" have been "glorified" 
as the sons of God, we,] which have the firstfruits of 
the spirit, even we groan within ourselves, waiting for 
the adoption [the full recognition of our sonship], to 
wit, the redemption [deliverance] of our body"— the 
body of Christ, the Church, in the first resurrection. 

Ah, yes! We agree that pain and punishment 
cannot lift men out of sin and reconcile them to God. 
It is for this very reason that a Savior was sent. If a law 
and obedience to it and punishments could have reformed 
mankind, no doubt God would have chosen that 
way. (Gal. 3:21.) But what the law could not do, 
and what pain and sorrow could not do (Rom. 8:3), 
God proposes to do through Christ. (Rom. 7:24,25.) 
He proposes a glorious deliverance— the binding of Satan 
(Rev. 20:2), the opening of the blind eyes (Isa. 29:18; 
35:5) and the helping of all who will accept 
his grace back to all that was lost in Adam and redeemed 
by the Second Adam. (Luke 19:10.) It is 
for this purpose to give a universal blessed opportunity 
for life, that Christ died for all— redeemed all. It is 
for this purpose that the Kingdom of Heaven on earth has 
been promised, repeatedly, through the holy apostles 



and prophets— for which, as Christ's joint-heirs, the 
Church of "overcomers" is being selected. (Matt. 6:10.) 
Under that Millennial Kingdom (whose kings 
and priests will be invisible) the deliverance of the 
groaning creation will be effected and the incorrigible 
destroyed in the second death. 

(2) Mr. Talmage's reasoning is strangely out of 
harmony with his Catechism, as well as his Bible, respecting 
the "innocency of infancy." He seems to 

forget that all of Adam's posterity are "born in sin 

and shapen in iniquity," and "prone to sin as the 

sparks to fly upward." He fails to take notice of prenatal 

influences upon character; and the Bible reference 

to it in the statement that by one man's disobedience 

sin and its results entered the world (Rom. 5:12), and 

its approval of the human proverb, "The fathers ate a 

sour grape [of sin] and the children's teeth are set on 

edge." But Mr. Talmage and all other sensible people 

know that either depravity or weakness of character 

are born in every child; and that many criminals were 

so low-born that it is almost impossible for them to pursue 

a righteous course under the present Satan-blinded 

and sin-abounding conditions. 

No, although purity and goodness should be cultivated 
from infancy, the hope of the world does not lie 
in the purity of infancy and the avoidance of sin; for 
then none would be saved.— "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." The hope of humanity is in Christ 
—in what he did at Calvary in paying the ransom-price 
for the sins of the whole world; in what he is doing 
now in selecting the royal priesthood for the great future 
work of restitution, during the Millennium.— See 
Acts 3:19-21. 

(3) Mr. Talmage argues truly that the Antediluvians 
were wicked, and that eight hundred years of experience 
did not make them clean from sin, but led to 

greater depravity. We agree that the course of sin 
has always been downward, and always will be. Noah's 
preaching was not expected to avert the flood any more 
than Moses' law was intended by God to deliver Israel 

R2049 : page 244 

from sin. As by the deeds of the law no flesh could 
be justified and saved, so by the preaching of Noah no 
flesh could be justified and saved. All the lessons of 
the past were intended to establish and enforce the fact 
that there is but one remedy for sin, the great sin-offering 
"finished" at Calvary. In the merit of that sacrifice 
Christ, the Redeemer, is fully authorized to begin 
the reign of Grace which shall not be powerless as was 
the reign of the Law; nor baneful as was the reign of 
sin and death, but mighty through God for the overthrow 
of the reign of Sin and Death, the deliverance 
of the groaning creation from their bondage, the blessing 
of "all the families of the earth" with the offer 



and opportunity of eternal life, and the final overthrow 
with "everlasting destruction" of all wilful sinners 
in the Second Death. 

(4) Rejecting the Scriptural proposition, that the 
Church is being selected from the world for the purpose 
of blessing, instructing, ruling and judging the world 
during its Millennial "day of judgment," Mr. Talmage 
assumes without any Scriptural warrant that the judgment 
of the world will end with this age with the coming 
of the Judge to the throne, and that then earth's 
billions will be sentenced without having known that 
they were on trial or that there is hope for them (Eph. 2:12; 
2 Cor. 4:4), and that then this great multitude 
will be given over to the instruction of Satan and his 
under demons. Not only is such a view unreasonable, 
but there is no Scripture to this effect, while there are 
many quite to the contrary,— showing that in the end 
of this age Satan shall be bound that "he may deceive 
the nations no more" for a thousand years; that then 
Christ and the glorified Church shall reign in righteousness, 
that "his reign shall be glorious" (Isa. 24:23) 
and shall witness the complete overthrow of sin 
and every enemy of righteousness; for Christ must 
"reign until he shall have put all enemies under his feet." 
(1 Cor. 15:25-28.) The same lesson is also clearly 
taught in our Lord's prayer: "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
Where, then, is the basis for Mr. Talmage's suggestion 
of a College Inferno of which Satan is the President 
and the under demons professors to have charge of the 
race? Truly, that would be a hopeless condition. But 
the Scriptures cited, and to be cited, prove that God's 
plan is the reverse of this,— to take the race completely 
out of the hands of "the Prince of this world" and to 
place it in "the world to come" absolutely under the 
control of the Prince of Light, "the Lord, the righteous 
Judge," who with his glorified Church will constitute 
a "Royal Priesthood," prepared by trials and temptations 
to sympathize with and assist the poor, degraded 
but blood-bought race: to bless them with an accurate 
knowledge of the truth and "times of restitution of all 
things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the 
holy prophets."— Acts 3:19-21. 

But who are "the righteous" of whom Mr. Talmage 
speaks so confidently, saying,— "Remember that 
the righteous, all their sins forgiven, pass right up into 
a beatific state?" Who are these? Are they few or 
many? How came they to have their sins forgiven? 
These important questions are all passed over in silence 
by Mr. T. Not a mention in the sermon of the fact 
that all were sinners, and that the penalty of all was 
paid by Christ Jesus, our Redeemer, and that the only 
ones whose sins are blotted out are those who by faith 
in the great sacrifice, and repentance from sins, and 
consecration to God have been adopted into God's family. 



R2050 : page 244 

But those whom he describes are Scripturally 
termed the "elect" Church, the royal priesthood, the 
approved heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord and Redeemer who will prove faithful unto 
death. These are those of whom the Lord spoke, saying, 
—"Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good 
pleasure to give you the Kingdom." They are not the 
great multitudes of inconsistent professors, but the few 
known unto the Lord and dear to him as the apple of 
his eye, "a peculiar people, zealous of good works," who 
lay down their lives in his service. (See Psa. 50:5; 
Mai. 3:17.) And if this be true, and if, as Mr. T. declares, 
all others are to be given over hopelessly to the 
care of devils, it is an awful, a more horrible thought 
probably than Mr. T. meant to convey. 

Yet where is the escape from his dilemma of his 
own and not of Scriptural construction? Can any 
claim that sinners are saints, that bad people are good, 
that the unrighteous are righteous, that unbelievers are 
justified? Not more than one in ten of professing 
Christians will lay claim to the foregoing Scriptural description 
of the "righteous,"— those believing in Christ 
implicitly, fully consecrated to God's service, and seeking 
to "walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit." 
How then, we ask, could we expect that the "little 
flock" that will "pass right up into a beatific state" will 
be more than a mere handful of the 1,500,000,000 now 
living or of the more than 50,000,000,000 that have died? 

DR. TALMAGE'S DIFFERENT VIEW. 



But Mr. Talmage can reason very differently about 
another chance for some, when he so desires ! About 
two years ago he preached a sermon, published broadcast, 
in which he took the other side of the subject, 
but got equally far away from the true plan of God, 
the true gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

He said in substance,— 

I have no sympathy with the thought that a mere 
handful of humanity will be saved and that the vast 
host of our race will be lost. I have no share in the 
belief that our Lord Jesus Christ is going to suffer a 

R2050 : page 245 

crushing defeat, and that Satan is going to gain a victory 
by which he will carry off nearly all the spoils, 
and hell be peopled a thousand to one more than heaven. 
I believe that there will be a larger number saved than 
lost, and I will tell you how I reckon it. First, we have 
the fact that one half of our race dies in infancy. I 
hold that all of these will go to heaven because innocent 



of sin. Secondly, we know that a vast majority of 
the adult heathen have never seen "the true light," 
have died in ignorance, and therefore will not be punished 
as intelligent wilful sinners, but will be saved. 
Thirdly, we have a large class whose mental acumen is 
insufficient, who are non compos mentis, including the 
insane, idiotic and simple, who could not be sent to 
eternal torment because of their misfortunes, and hence 
must also be taken to heaven. Thus the larger proportion 
of our race will reach heaven, and the few, comparatively, 
suffer eternal torment. 

We will state our objections to this unscriptural 
theory, then proceed to contrast it with Mr. T's latest 
deliverance, and finally show the Scriptural presentation 
in contrast with both; remarking by the way that 
Mr. Talmage, Presbyterian as he is, seems to have lost 
all of his Calvinistic theology, as he ignores entirely the 
distinction between elect and non-elect infants and 
heathen. We are glad to note this. But we object to 

THIS GOSPEL OF SALVATION BY INNOCENCE. 



(1) It is not true that infants, idiots, etc., are innocent 
of sin, so that they would be salvable on account 
of innocence; for, although they have committed no 
wilful, personal sins, they are nevertheless members of 
the race of Adam and sharers in the condemnation of 
original sin. As it is written, "By one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners." "By the offence 
of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation." 
"By one man's offense death reigned [over 
all]." "By one man [in whom all sinned] sin entered 
into the world and death by [as the result of] sin; and 
so death passed upon all men."— Rom. 5:12,17,18,19. 

This proposition being true, that none are innocent, 
but all are under condemnation, it follows that 
Mr. Talmage's billions of infants, heathen, etc., can 
be no more justified by their ignorance than by their 
works. (Rom. 3:20.) There is only one way of escape 
from the "condemnation" that rests on the whole 
world; namely, by justification, through faith in the 
Redeemer and his sin-offering of himself. "There is 
no other name given under heaven or among men whereby 
we must be saved," and the salvation is through 
knowledge, faith and obedience, and not through ignorance 
or incapacity or imperfect works. If Mr. T's 
theory be correct, it is a great mistake on God's part 
that all who are not idiots do not die in infancy; that 
thus all might get into heaven. According to this process 
of reasoning, the preaching of Christ, so far from 
being "good tidings," is bad tidings; because if all died 
in ignorance, in heathenism, all would then be saved. 

SAVAGES AND MANIACS TAKEN TO HEAVEN. 



(2) But we object to Mr. Talmage's gospel on another 
score. If heaven were made the receptacle of the 
heathen, savages, barbarians, the idiotic, simple, insane 
and infants, it would cease to be heaven to a considerable 
extent, and become a pandemonium. Mr. T. 
will no doubt admit that the billions of ignorant, imbecile 
and degraded, whom he describes as the vast majority 
of the heavenly throng, have never formed characters, 
and that they will need to do so before they 
would be fit companions for saints whose characters are 
formed after the divine pattern. And since each infant, 
as it develops, will become a free moral agent, what 
assurance have we in this theory that after all several 
billions of these infants, heathen, etc., would not choose 
disobedience, sin, rather than obedience, righteousness, 
and raise up an insurrection in heaven worse than has 
ever been known on earth? Verily, if the plan presented 
in the Scriptures were not much more reasonable 
than this theory, we would have serious grounds for 
questioning its being the divine plan, which must surely 
display divine wisdom. 

Should Mr. Talmage attempt to make his theory 
more reasonable by claiming that the billions of heathen, 
idiots, infants, etc., would be changed instantly and 
miraculously and made perfect beings, fit for heaven, 
we would object that if such were the divine plan, and 
if development of character by contact with trial and 
temptation were unimportant, it would impeach the divine 
wisdom and love and justice for having permitted six 
thousand years of sin and death and the loss thereby 
of some; for according to the theory we are criticizing 
all this was unnecessary— worse than useless. If Mr. 
T. were not yet convinced we would quote his text at 
the head of this article, "In the place where the tree 
falleth, there it shall be," and applying it Scrip turally 
would urge that it teaches that no change of 
character takes place in the grave. It is in agreement 
with the Scripture which declares, "There is no work, 
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, 
whither thou goest." The earliest and only opportunity 
after death to gain knowledge and to form character 
will be when "All that are in the graves shall hear 
the voice of the Son of Man and come forth." 

Here, then, we have the two extremes of Mr. T's 
view, (a) He assumes to decide that there can be 
only one chance of gaining everlasting life;— that all 
who do not enter the "strait gate" and walk the "narrow 
way" are hopelessly lost, (b) Yet remembering 
the Lord's words, "Few there be that find it [the strait 
gate]," he next determines (contrary alike to reason 
and Scripture) that the vast majority (who do not get 

R2050 : page 246 



a proper chance in this life) must go to heaven, and 
get their chance there. Indeed, Mr. Talmage seems 
ready to claim that the free agency of the "vast majority" 
will be abrogated, and that the savages, idiots and 
infants will be declared "predestinated" and "elect" 
beyond their own power to dissent from or alter their 
conditions. What a medley! What incongruity! What 
inconsistency! A logician, following Mr. T., would 
pretty surely be led either to "Universalism" or to ignore 
the "redemption which is in Christ Jesus" and 
trust solely to his own righteousness. But now contrast 

THE SCRIPTURAL PRESENTATION OF THE DIVINE PLAN. 



As we have already shown, the Scriptures clearly 
teach that all men are under divine condemnation, 
wholly irrespective of their own deeds: all were "born 
in sin," all inherited our father Adam's condemnation 
and share in the blight of sin and death which came 
upon him, and through him, by heredity, upon all men. 
"The fathers ate the sour grape [of sin], and the children's 
teeth are set on edge." (Rom. 5:12; Jer. 31:29; 
Ezek. 18:2,3.) None could get rid of this condemnation, 
—neither the Jew by his knowledge of the 
Law and possession of the oracles of God, nor the Gentile 
in his ignorance. (Rom. 3:9,10,19,23.) All 
were unworthy of eternal life; and the race as a whole 
had been in this pitiable condition for four thousand 
years, when God in great mercy had compassion on all 
and sent "a Savior, and a great one," not of the Jew only, 
but also of the Gentile, who, until then, was left "without 
God, and having no hope."— Isa. 19:20; Eph. 2:12. 

The salvation contemplated in God's plan was not 
merely a reform— a salvation from some of the evil consequences 
of the fall— but a salvation unto the uttermost, 
of all who come unto God by Christ. To make 
it comprehensive, available to all, Jesus Christ, by the 
grace of God, tasted death for every man. He "gave 

R205 1 : page 246 

himself a ransom [a corresponding price] for all, to be 
testified in due time.— Heb. 7:25; 2:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

Thus the redemptive sacrifice is seen to have been 
for the benefit, not only of those living when it was 
made and their progeny since, but also for the billions 
who had previously died "without God and having no 
hope,"— all of whom went down into "sheol," "hades;" 
the great prisonhouse of death;— everlasting death, everlasting 
destruction, and not everlasting torment,* being 
the wages of sin under the divine law. (Rom. 6:23; 
Gen. 2: 17.) But it is one thing that the penalty 
for all mankind has been paid, life for life (Jesus' life 



for Adam's life-Rom. 5:12,17,18,19), and that Jehovah 

God has accepted that ransom price, and manifested 

his acceptance, both by the resurrection of our 

Lord Jesus from the dead and by the descent of the holy 

spirit at Pentecost (Rom. 1:4; Acts 2:33,34); 

quite another thing will be the salvation or deliverance 

from death of the redeemed ones,— the deliverance of 

the dead and dying creation from the bondage of corruption 

—the bondage of death as well as of sin. 

Hence the necessity for the second coming of our 
Savior. He came the first time as a sin-offering to pay 
our ransom price, and bought us with his own precious 
blood,— his life; but he comes a second time, not as a 
sin-offering, but "unto salvation,"— to save or deliver 
from sin and death all whom he redeemed at his first 
advent, or as many of them as shall wish for salvation 
upon his terms, when they shall be brought to "an accurate 
knowledge of the truth" "in due time." 

This salvation reaches no one until the end of the 
Gospel age, except "believers" who (in a reckoned sense) 
grasp "the hope of salvation" and anticipate it by faith. 
The apostles declare that we are "heirs of salvation," 
and point us to the fact that it "shall be brought unto" 
us "at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ," at his second advent; and tell us that "now is 
our salvation nearer than when we first believed," and 
that meantime we are "kept by the power of God 
through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the 
last time." (See Rom. 13:11; 1 Thes. 5:8; Heb. 1:14; 
1 Pet. 1:5,13; Heb. 9:28.) The completion of 

SALVATION IS CALLED "RESURRECTION" 



—and thus is divided into two parts: "the first resurrection," 

including our Lord Jesus and all the overcomers 

of this Gospel age, "members of his body," is 

the chief, the highest, the most desirable; and none except 

the overcomers who have walked with their Lord 

in the narrow way of self-denial and suffering for righteousness' 

sake can have part in it: it is a rising up to 

life upon the spirit plane, and can be attained only by 

those "made partakers of the divine nature." (Rev. 20:6; 

2 Pet. 1:4; Phil. 3:10,11.) These only are being 

called, chosen and proved during this Gospel age. 

These victors, the faithful, the "overcomers," will constitute 

the Royal Priesthood after the order of Melchizedeck 

(of which the Lord Jesus is the Head or Chief 

Priest), which is to "reign on the earth" as God's 

Kingdom, to order the affairs of men and bring to all 

the great salvation purchased by our Lord when he 

gave himself "a ransom for all."— 1 Pet. 2:9,10. 

The salvation to be offered to the world in general 
is termed a "resurrection by judgment"— a rising up 
to the perfection of life through a judgment or disciplinary 



process during the Millennium. It includes 
mankind,— the so-called "living" (but really "dying," 
of whom God speaks as "dead," because the sentence 
of death stands against them until they accept Christ 
Jesus as their Savior) as well as "all that are in the 



*See WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 80 pp. 10 cents. 

R2051 : page 247 

graves" who "shall hear the voice of the Son of Man 
and come forth [—awaken from the sleep of Adamic 
death, which would have been an "eternal sleep" except 
for Christ's sacrifice]." These billions will be 
"judged," granted a trial, during the Millennium, and 
those found worthy of everlasting life will get it at the 
close of the Millennium, and all unworthy of it will 
be cut off from life in "the second death"— "everlasting 
destruction." 

The awakening from Adamic death will not be 
resurrection in the full sense; but rather a preparation 
for resurrection (Greek anastasis) which applies to all 
the steps to be taken upward toward perfection of life — 
the high plane from which all fell in Adam. As the 
little flock of this Gospel age passes reckonedly "from 
death unto life" by the acceptance of Christ, so all the 
world during the Millennium will be brought to a 
knowledge of God and Christ, but only those who accept 
Christ as their Savior, and the New Covenant 
with God through him, are reckoned as having any life 
(John 3:36); and with these it is only a beginning of 
the resurrection, or raising up process, which will not 
be perfected until the thousand years are finished. 

It is a resurrection of judgment (i.e., by judgments); 
because reward and discipline will be the process by 
which the lessons of righteousness will be enforced and 
characters developed. The good physician, who so 
loved the sinners as to lay down his life for them, will 
be the Chief of the kings and priests who will instruct, 
govern, "judge" the world in righteousness; and this 
guarantees that everything will be done that can be 
done to help out of sin into righteousness and eternal 
life all who choose to seek life upon God's terms. 

But, although obedience to the laws of Christ's 
Kingdom will be enforced, no man's free moral agency 
will be interfered with: it will be true of those who 
then know of and fail to gain life, as it is true of some 
now, "Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have 
life." (John 5:40.) Those who will refuse to make 
any progress, or even to start, are mentioned by the 
prophet Isaiah (65:17-20) who, describing the Millennial 
condition, says, "The sinner a hundred years old 
shall be accursed [cut off from life]," though dying at 
that age he would be but as an infant. By complying 



with the laws of that time he might live at least to the 
close of the Millennial age. 

Under the rule of that age— the reward of progress 
and deliverance from weaknesses, mental, physical and 
moral, will be given to the obedient, and "stripes," 
reproofs, etc., will be inflicted for wrong doing and 
failure to progress. It is evident, therefore, that the 
close of the Millennium will not only find all men fully 
informed, and the knowledge of the Lord filling the 
whole earth and all outwardly obedient, but, as we 
might expect, it will find some who will have partially 
misused their opportunities, whose hearts, wills, will 
not be fully submitted to the Lord's will; and the separation 
and destruction of these as "goats" from the 
others, "sheep," is properly the last act of that Judgment 
age, as represented in Rev. 20:7-10. 

"ALL THE WICKED WILL GOD DESTROY." 

The whole population of the world will then be 
"as the sand of the sea," and all will be subjected to 
a final test of loyalty to God. For a thousand years 
they will have had experiences in every way favorable, 
and, Satan being bound, they will have had no special 
temptations to disloyalty to God; and it will be but 
proper that a test of loyalty should be made which will 
manifest to all, which are at heart loyal to the Lord, 
and which are still selfish, self-willed and disloyal. 
That test will be crucial: no excuse or allowance can 
be made for any there, because all will then have 
had all the experience, knowledge and help which infinite 
wisdom and love have seen proper to provide;— all 
that could be of service in forming character. The result 
of this final trial will be the destruction of Satan 
and all who have any sympathy with sin, in the Second 
death— "everlasting destruction," symbolically pictured 
as a "lake of fire and brimstone," the antitype 
of the Valley of Hinnom (Gehenna) outside the walls 
of the typical Jerusalem; so also in Matt. 25:31-33,41,46. 
There "fire" is symbolic as well as the 
"sheep" and the "goats;" and as in Revelation signifies 
—"the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the Second 
death." The punishment for sin as declared by 
Scripture is not everlasting torment, but everlasting 
death. "The wages of sin is death!" "The soul that 
sinneth [wilfully], it shall die!" The wilful evil doers, 
after rejecting the opportunities of the New Covenant, 
shall be "punished with everlasting destruction from the 
presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power." 

The proportionate numbers of those who shall pass 
this final trial successfully and enter into life everlasting, 
—beyond all sighing, crying and dying,— is not 
even hinted at; nor is the number or the proportion of 
any consequence when we are assured, (1) that the 
saved will include every member of Adam's race (condemned 
in Adam but redeemed by the great "ransom 



for all") who, upon full opportunity, chooses to "take 
of the water of life freely" in God's appointed way; 
and (2) that the lost are only such as infinite wisdom 
sees to be incorrigible, and who, thus "punished with 
everlasting destruction," shall be no more. 

Now what have we seen?— a second chance? Nay 
verily; except it be argued that Adam's original trial 
was a first chance which brought the sentence of death 
—condemnation upon all the race; and that the ransom 
paid by Christ secures another (an individual) chance 

R2051 : page 248 

for each member of the race. We have seen in this 
great divine plan one, but only one, individual chance, or 
trial, for each member of the redeemed race. Those who 
have enjoyed a full chance in this Gospel age and have 
wilfully rejected Christ we cannot expect will get another 
chance to reject and crucify him (Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31); 
but all who have not yet had a full chance 
are guaranteed a full chance, a fair and favorable trial, 
"in due time," by virtue of the "ransom for all." 

R2052 : page 248 

We conclude that God's plan is much more reasonable 
than Mr. Talmage's plan. It saves no one in ignorance 
and sin, it overrides no one's free agency; its 
provisions take hold of every creature of Adam's race, 
all are treated impartially, none are to be saved under 
it except those who become copies of God's dear Son, 
our Lord Jesus; none are to be lost for lack of full opportunity 
to attain that character. In God's plan every 
condition and arrangement is found that sanctified 
reason could desire; and the various parts fit together 
perfectly, attesting its divine authorship. But of the 
many false theories of salvation and their originators, 
God says,— "My thoughts are not your thoughts, 
neither are your ways my ways, ...For as the heavens 
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than 
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." 

O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God! And his grace, who hath measured 
its fullness in Christ? 



R2052 : page 248 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question. What do you mean by the expressions 
"earthly phase" and "spiritual phase," in relation to 
the Kingdom? (MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., page 288.) 



Answer. There is only one kingdom per se; and 
that is, the Church; but it will have servants and representatives 
which to the world will be its kingdom or 
direct government. Though all will be instructed to 
recognize the overruling spiritual Kingdom of Christ 
and the Church and the still superior Kingdom of the 
Heavenly Father, yet this spiritual phase will be represented 
by the Patriarchs and other overcomers of past 
ages who will constitute the "earthly phase" of the 
Kingdom. (Luke 13:28; Heb. 11:39,40.) The "great 
company" do not belong to the Kingdom at all. They 
will be associated in some way not explained, but will 
not be part of the Kingdom real, nor yet of the earthly 
or representative Kingdom. 

Question. Is the Church a part of the atonement 
sacrifice? If so, why is our Lord Jesus only referred 
to as the "Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of 
the world?"-l John 2:2; 4:10; 1 Tim. 2:6. 

Answer. The atonement is based upon the sacrifice 
made by the high priest, who "offered up himself." 
The Church's share in the atonement is a reckoned 
one. In the same sense that the Church is reckoned 
as the body of Christ, so its sacrifices are reckoned as 
being joined with that of Christ, and are so represented 
or typified in the sacrifices of the Day of Atonement. 
So, as accepted members of the body of Christ, 
we throughout the Gospel Age "fill up that which is 
behind of the afflictions of Christ." The sufferings of 
Christ are reckoned as continuing so long as we, his 
Church, reckonedly members of his body, his flesh and 
his bones, are suffering. The merit in God's sight as 
the ransom lay in the sacrifice which our Lord Jesus 
offered. Ours is merely incidental, and reckonedly 
accepted as a part, in order that we might be granted 
a share also in the rewards. 

Question. What is the difference between "ransom," 
"propitiation" and "atonement?" 

Answer. The ransom is the corresponding price, 
and was paid by our Lord by the giving of his life. 
The propitiation was accomplished when he ascended 
up on high, appeared in the presence of God on our 
behalf and presented as for us and in payment of our 
penalty his death as our ransom. The atonement is the 
result of the offering of the ransom and its acceptance 
by God as a propitiation or satisfaction. It has a secondary 
feature or bearing upon us, when we realize the 
fact that so far as the divine law is concerned an atonement 
has been made; and if we are rightly exercised 
thereby, it will lead us to a condition of harmony 
of mind with God and to a desire to please and serve 
him, which is the human side of the at-one-ment. 

Question. In what sense does the Apostle (Heb. 6:1) 
advise the Church to leave "the [first] principles of the 
doctrines of Christ;" does he mean that the practice of 
baptism, etc., should be abandoned? 

Answer. The Jews had washings or baptisms under 



the Law, but they had nothing to do with Christian 
baptism. Every time a Jew washed his hands he 
performed a baptism. But it is not the washings under 
the Law to which the Apostle Paul refers. He does 
not say, leave baptisms because they are part of the 
Law, with which Christians have nothing to do. 
If he is so interpreted with reference to baptism, the 
same argument would apply to the other doctrines 
mentioned in the same connection; namely, repentance 
from dead works (all works are dead if without faith), 
faith in God, laying on of hands, resurrection of the 
dead and eternal judgment. Surely, we are not to understand 
that we should cease to believe in or practice 

R2052 : page 249 

repentance and faith; neither should we cease to believe 
in and practice baptism. What the Apostle is trying 
to show is, that we should not have to learn all of these 
things over and over again. He was reproving the 
Hebrews addressed, because, when they ought to have 
been teachers (chapter 5:12), they required somebody 
to teach them the first principles (the first principles 
mentioned in chapter 6:1,2). They should have understood 
all of these things, and been able to teach 
them; and while continuing to believe in these they 
should have been adding to their knowledge of the 
Word and plan of God; and not only so, but they should 
remember that it is not only correct doctrines on these 
subjects that are necessary to our full development as 
followers of Christ, but in addition the graces of Christian 
character; the doctrines being only a means to an 
end, and not the end itself. Therefore he says, Leaving 
the first principles, let us go on to perfection— let 
us cultivate our characters and endeavor to grow more 
and more like our Lord. 

In the same way a child, when it goes to school, 
first learns the multiplication table, how to add and 
subtract and divide. These are the foundation principles 
of mathematics; and yet we would think a child 
either very stupid or careless in his studies to remain 
several years learning these first principles; and we 
would say that it ought to leave the first principles and 
go on to other things; by which we would not mean 
that it should forget these first principles or consider 
them errors or something to be despised, but that it 
should remember them and use them and add to them 
the higher branches. 

For a full treatment of the subject of Baptism see 
TOWER, June 15, '93. 

Question. In the TOWER for Sept. 15, '96, page 
222, you say, "If the powers that be should ever compel 
us to vote, it would be our duty to act with the side 
most nearly approved by our consciences." Can any earthly 
power compel us to be disloyal to our King? Let us 
ever bear in mind that no person can have any power 



at all against us, except it be given from heaven, and 

that God is not going to give any person power to compel 

his children to violate their consciences rather than 

be thrown out of work. Many have been drafted 

and fought in time of war against their wills; but he 

who has laid down his life, given it up for Christ and 

the Gospel will never take it back again to destroy the 

life of his fellow-man, or in any way to please man. 

"If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure 

in him." Let God take care of the sacrifice, while 

we fulfil it. Called out of the world, dead to the world, 

how can we heed the threats of the world? Dead to sin, 

how can we use our members as instruments of unrighteousness 

unto sin? "His servants ye are to whom 

ye render yourselves servants to obey." Our salvation 

depends on our faith in God and our loyalty to him. 

Many will talk of their faith and courage until it 
comes to the test; then their courage often fails. Too 
many begin the life of sacrifice without considering the 
cost, and with too many it is a failure. 

Another writes:— I cannot see why we should 
permit them to compel us, especially in the voting part, 
to act against our conscience at all. Shall the body of 
Christ do wrong at the behest of the powers that be? 

Answer. These two readers have totally misunderstood 
the answer to which they refer; and since 
others may have misunderstood similarly, and to guard 
against error on so vital a point, we answer these 
publicly. 

If laws should be passed commanding every man 
of twenty-one years to vote at election time, as has already 
been proposed in the Ohio legislature, it would 
not mean a violation of the writer's conscience to obey 
this law, although we prefer to have nothing to do with 
electing the rulers of this world and would be unwilling 
to shed blood to maintain them in office, should 
such a crisis ever arise. In this connection we should 
but follow the Lord's direction, If any man compel 
thee to go a mile, go with him.— Matt. 5:41. 

But if ever compelled by law to vote, we may be 
sure that we will not be compelled by law to vote for 
any particular person or party. Therefore, should it 
become our duty by law to vote, we would be obliged 
to use our judgments as between parties, platforms and 
candidates. We would find none of these in all respects 
up to our ideal and standard; and hence some 
would vote one way, while others, equally conscientious, 

R2053 : page 249 

would vote another way. We might better have said, that 

in such an event it would be the duty of each to vote according 

to his conscientious judgment;— for principles 

and men most nearly in line with his conception of wisdom 

and righteousness; using his full liberty to cross 

off the names of any or all candidates, if not approved, 



and of substituting any names he may approve. 

Conscience is never to be violated, and the above 
remarks of the objectors are fully endorsed. They 
merely misunderstood our meaning. 

Question. The word "body" found in Lev. 21:11, 
is from the Hebrew Nephesh, which is so many 
times translated "soul." Would it be proper to substitute 
the word "soul" for "body" in this text? See 
statement in Oct. 15, '95, Tower to the effect that it is 
not proper to say a "dead soul." 

Answer. This text more critically rendered would 
read, "Neither shall he go in to any living creature 
[soul] after death." The Hebrew language is "poor," 
and many words must serve many shades of thought 
each. Hence, "any dead body" is equivalent to "any 
body [soul] dead; i.e., any living creature [soul] after 
death." The same is true of Num. 6:6; 19:13; Hag. 2:13. 



R2053 : page 250 

SOLOMON'S WEALTH AND WISDOM. 

-OCT. 18.-1 KINGS 4:25-34.- 

IF, as already shown, the wealth of Solomon and his 
peaceful reign prefigured the glory and peace of 
Christ's Millennial reign, so also Solomon's wisdom 
prefigured the all-comprehensive wisdom of Christ. 
And as representatives of many nations came to hear 
Solomon, so when the Kingdom is the Lord's, and he 
is governor among the nations, all the ends of the 
earth shall remember and turn unto him, as the Prophet 
declares. They will say, "Come, let us go up to 
the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of 
Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will 
walk in his paths."— Isa. 2:3. 

It is well to remember that the wisdom of Solomon 
which attracted the attention and admiration of the 
world (Vss. 29-34), was not the heavenly wisdom, not 
spiritual understanding such as is now enjoined upon 
the saints, which can only be spiritually discerned (1 Cor. 2:8-14), 
and which is never popular with the 

world. Solomon's wisdom was but an imperfect realization 
of the wise and understanding heart suggested in 
his dream-prayer (1 Kings 3:9), which will find its full 
realization in Solomon's antitype. 

It was Solomon's worldly or secular wisdom which 
impressed the world. By nature and through God's 
providential blessings in making of him a type, Solomon's 
mental faculties were large and well developed; 
and these he exercised in many directions with marked 
success;— as a statesman, judge and financier. The 
statement that his wisdom excelled that of the Chaldeans, 
etc., seems to imply that his wisdom was along 



the line of the sciences and philosophies popular with 
them. But although "he spake 3,000 proverbs, and 
his songs were 1005," they were not all deemed of the 
Lord worthy of a place amongst the sacred 
Scriptures. 

The heavenly wisdom of the books of Ecclesiastes, 
Proverbs and Solomon's Song we accept as of divine 
direction, as were the words of the prophets who frequently 
wrote things they did not comprehend.— 
IPet. 1:10-12. 



R2053 : page 250 

THE PROVERBS OF SOLOMON. 

-OCT. 25.-PROVERBS 1:1-19.- 

page 250 

THE Book of Proverbs was not written nor prepared 
by Solomon in its present form. Apparently quite 
a number of the proverbs for which he was celebrated 
were uncollected until a number of years after his death. 
The book as a whole divides itself into five portions. 

I. Chapters 1 to 9, discourses on Wisdom, which 
is personified. 

II. Chapter 10 to 22:16, Solomonic proverbs. These 
are recollections of epigrams. 

III. Chapter 22:17 to 24:34, the words of the Wise. 

IV. Chapters 25 to 29, King Hezekiah's collection 
of Solomonic proverbs. 

V. Chapters 30 and 31, Words of Agar, Words of 
Lemuel, and an alphabetical acrostic on The Virtuous 
Wife. These last two chapters, it will be noticed, do 
not claim to be Solomon's proverbs, but were evidently 
thought by the editor to contain sufficient wisdom to 
be worthy to be classed with the Proverbs of Solomon. 
Nor is such a procedure on the part of the editor out of 
harmony with modern usage; for instance, if we 

take up the latest Revised Webster's Unabridged Dictionary, 
we will find it to contain a large number of 
words and definitions of which Mr. Webster neither 
wrote nor knew in his day. 

The Book of Proverbs contains very much that 
is recognized as wisdom by all who have understanding, 
whether worldings or Christians; but, as already 
suggested, the Proverbs do not deal with the heavenly 
wisdom which is foolishness with men and often runs 
counter to that which would be the best of earthly policy. 
It deals with wisdom from the earthly standpoint, and 
not from the standpoint of self-sacrifice in preparation 
for joint-heirship with Christ in the heavenly kingdom. 

R2053 : page 250 



Nevertheless, although the Proverbs were not prophecies, 
like the writings of Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc., we may 
well esteem them to have been supernaturally prepared 
inasmuch as Solomon was granted a supernatural wisdom, 
in order, as we have seen, that he might represent 
or prefigure Christ Jesus, our Lord, the "greater 
than Solomon." The propriety of respecting the Proverbs 
as inspired is shown in the fact that several quotations 
from them appear in the New Testament writings. 
Compare the following: Prov. 1:16 with Rom. 3:15; 
Prov. 3:7 with Rom. 12:16; Prov. 3:11,12 with Heb. 12:5,6; 
Prov. 3:34 with James 4:6 and 1 Peter 5:5; 
Prov. 10:12 with 1 Pet. 4:8; Prov. 11:31 with 1 Pet. 4:18; 
Prov. 20:9 with 1 John 1:8; Prov. 25:7 
with Luke 14:10; Prov. 25:21,22 with Rom. 12:20; 
Prov. 26:1 1 with 2 Pet. 2:22. Furthermore, our Lord 
and the Apostles referred to the Jew's sacred Scriptures 
as a whole as divinely inspired, making no exception of 
Solomon's writings contained therein, which were, however, 
but a portion of his three thousand proverbs. 

In this lesson the first six verses tell the object of 
the Proverbs to be for instruction, especially of the young 
and unlearned; to teach them true wisdom, appreciation 
of justice, of righteous dealing and equity in general. 

Verse 5 points out that the instructions are not 
merely for the youth; that no matter how wise a man 
may be, he will still have opportunity for increasing 
his wisdom, and that a teachable attitude of heart and 
a desire to know the truth are necessary to progress in 
wisdom, and that a teachable attitude of heart and 
a desire to know the truth are necessary to progress in 
wisdom. How profitable it would be to Christian people 
if this lesson of verse 5 were very generally applied by 
them! They would no longer be satisfied with a mere 
acceptance of creeds of the past, but would be going to 
the fountain head of wisdom, the Divine Revelation. 
They would no longer be saying practically, if not by 
words, We need and care nothing for the Divine plan 
of salvation; but, like the Bereans of old, they would be 
searching the Scriptures daily, that they might more 
perfectly understand the Divine plan. 

The first clause of verse 7 is a quotation from one 
of his father David's Psalms (111:10), and is a gem of 
wisdom. If the word "fear" be given the sense of 
reverence, the passage will be better understood. The 

R2053 : page 25 1 

reverence of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge. 
They who say in their hearts there is no God are certainly 
stupidly foolish. They have failed to learn the 
very first lesson of wisdom. Reverence for the Lord is 
one of the first essentials in approaching his Word as a 
student: God's revelation looked at from any other 
standpoint than that of reverence will not yield its blessings 



to the searcher. One of the peculiarities of our 
day, and particularly pointed out by the Apostle Paul 
(2 Tim. 3:1-5), is the lack of reverence which manifests 
itself, not only in the world, but also amongst 
those associated as believers and in their families. The 
general tendency is toward headiness, high mindedness, 
arrogance, self-consciousness, disobedience. All of these 
come under the head of lack of reverence for God and 
for the order and arrangement which he has established. 
The present irreverence is undoubtedly the result of 
the general awakening from the darkness and superstition 
of the dark ages,— when the great adversary brought 
in such teachings as produced a distressing fear of the 
Almighty, based upon misrepresentations of his character 
and plan. These were received with credulity, 
from human sources, without proving by the Scriptures, 
to which the Apostle exhorted. As mankind 
awakes from this superstition, as a pendulum vibrates 
from one extreme to the other, so human sentiment, 
finding that it has been too prejudiced and too fearful 
in the past, now goes to the opposite extreme of doubt, 
skepticism, infidelity, irreverence for all the experiences 
of the past as well as irreverence for God and his 
Word. As this spirit progresses and influences a wider 
and wider circle in Christendom, it is preparing the 
way for the great climax of skepticism and irreverence 
which will end in the overthrow of all law and order 
and the disregard of all the experiences of the past and 
the wisdom of God's Word, in the anarchy and confusion 
with which this age will close,— in preparation, 
however, for the establishment of the Kingdom of 
righteousness in the hands of Christ and the Church. 

Verses 8 and 9 point out, by the symbols of a 
wreath and a chain (used in ancient times as marks of 
honor and respect), that the way to true prosperity lies 
through obedience to parents, and in general would direct 
us to learn wisdom from the experiences of those 
who have gone before in life's pathway. The fact that 
we to-day are living in an age of peculiar progress in 
knowledge and invention, superior in many respects to 
anything with which the ancients were acquainted, will 
not lead a wise man utterly to ignore the experiences 
of the past, nor to consider himself, because favorably 
circumstanced, as superior in mental ability to many of 
times past. Our day is known as the "brain age," and 
many are unduly puffed up and do not consider that 
the brain capacity of the present time is not greater 
than that of past times, but that merely the opportunities 
for the acquisition of knowledge are superior. The 
wisest and best men to-day quote the wisdom of the 
past, not only in the Proverbs of Solomon and the words 

R2054: page 251 

of the Lord and the Apostles and the Psalms of David 
and the Law given by Moses, but also in the words of 



Shakespeare. 

Verses 10-19 were apparently intended as guards 
against the youthful tendency to brigandage more common 
in ancient times than now, because to-day, with 
the advantages of telegraph and telephone, it is more 
easy to apprehend and punish highway robbers than 
ever before. But the lesson of these verses can be applied 
to our day with still greater force. There are to-day 
different inducements held out, but on much the 
same line. First, financial brigandage: the inducement 
to join in business ventures which would dishonestly 
rob others by misrepresentation, by swindling advertisements, 
by fraudulent deceptions, trickery, etc. 
Second, we are coming into a time when there will be 
more of a temptation to a social brigandage with inducements 
held out and hopes of gain and common interest 
by combining for the passage of laws which would 
do violence to the liberties and interests of others. And 
ultimately there will be inducements to revolution, disorder, 
anarchy, in the hope of getting by violence the 
property of others. 

The last clause of verse 18 points out that those 
who follow such a course will surely bring calamity 
upon themselves. 

Verse 19 shows that the principles here set forth 
are applicable to all who are greedy of gain and willing 
to sacrifice the lives or interests of others to obtain it. 
The words of the Apostle apply here with special force: 
"They that will [to] be rich fall into temptation and 
a snare [of the adversary]."— 1 Tim. 6:9. 

page 25 1 

For further thoughts on Solomon's writings see 
TOWER, Apr. 15, '93, pages 121-127. 



R2054: page 251 

THE TEMPLE WHICH SOLOMON BUILT. 

-NOVEMBER l.-l KINGS 5:1-12.- 

page 25 1 

THE important point of this lesson is very slightly 
related to, or expressed by, the verses chosen 
above. 

R2054: page 251 

The temple built by Solomon did not cover the 
largest area of ground, nor was it the most lofty and 
massive structure of ancient times. Many of the ancient 
temples were superior in these respects; yet this temple 



was probably richer in its ornamentation and more costly 
than any of the others, because of the large amount 
of gold used in its construction. The building itself 
was of white limestone, which in the sunlight would 
very strongly resemble white marble. The stone necessary 
for its construction abounds in the vicinity of the 
temple itself; indeed, under the city of Jerusalem are 
large caverns known as "Solomon's Quarries," from 
which it is supposed that the stones for the temple were 
quarried. Some very large stones, more or less imperfect, 
and possibly for that reason not used, are still to 
be seen in these quarries. The beams, inner walls, 
doors and roof of the temple were constructed of cedar 
and red sandalwood. These were all (roof included) 
completely overlaid with gold— not merely gilded with 
gold leaf, such as is now used, but covered with plates 
of gold about an eighth of an inch thick, which were 
fastened on with gold nails and bestudded with precious 
stones of various kinds. 

R2054 : page 252 

The fact that some of the stones bear Phoenecian 
marks has led some to suppose that part of the stone 
for the temple was imported; but we think it more probable 
that Phoenecian workmen were employed in quarrying, 
stonedressing, etc., and used such marks as they 
were in the habit of using in their own country. So 
far as the record shows, only the timber, including 
"fir" for scaffolding, was imported; the cedar coming 
from Lebanon. The country of Palestine did not afford 
such timber as was necessary. 

The apostles (in the New Testament), in referring 
to the Church, spoke of it as represented in the stones 
of which the temple was constructed, each member of 
the Church being a "living stone," and their faith and 
character being represented in the gold, silver and precious 
stones of the temple's adornment; but the wood 
of the temple is not used to symbolize Christians or 
their faith and character, because wood is perishable. 
The Apostle indicates that "wood, hay and stubble" 
have no place in the true temple, the Church (1 Cor. 3:12); 
and as we consider Solomon's temple, we find 
that the wood was merely used as a filler, that the symbol 
was the gold which covered the wood. The wood 
was merely used because of the impossibility of collecting 
such an immense quantity of gold as would have 
been necessary to make the roof and inner walls and 
doors of solid gold. In this view of the matter, the 
typical proprieties of Solomon's temple are preserved; 
symbolically it was of stone and gold only. 

Not only were the materials of the temple typical, 
but the fact that many of these materials were gathered 
together before Solomon's reign was also typical, and 
in addition the peculiar preparation and fitting of the 
stones, etc. Each was shaped and fitted and marked 



for its particular place before the construction began. 

So in the antitype: each member of the true temple of 

God, which the greater than Solomon is about to construct 

—the glorious Church and Kingdom— each living 

stone, is fitted and prepared by the chiseling, polishing, 

etc., in the quarry of this present life, and thus 

prepared for the particular place which he is to occupy 

in the future development of God's great plan. And 

as, when the various stones and parts had all been prepared, 

the construction of Solomon's temple was speedily 

and noiselessly executed, "without the sound of a 

hammer," so, when all the living stones of the antitypical 

temple have been made ready under the supervision 

of the antitypical Solomon, this true temple of 

God will come together quickly, without noise or confusion, 

in the "first resurrection" of the "blessed and 

page 252 

holy" on whom the second death has no power. 

For the typical significance of other features of the 
Tabernacle and Temple see our issue of May 15, page 
113 and TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 



R2054 : page 252 

THE TEMPLE DEDICATED. 

-NOVEMBER 8.-1 KINGS 8:54-63.- 

THE first verse of this lesson draws our attention 
to the prayer of Solomon in connection with the 
dedicating of the temple to God and his worship. Not 
only does the construction of the temple give evidence 
of Solomon's earnestness toward God and his desire to 
walk in the ways of wisdom, but now that its construction 
is finished his prayer and its dedication bear testimony 
to the same. His faith toward God and his 
humility of heart are everywhere manifested, not only 
in the words of his address in prayer, but also in his 
attitude upon his knees before the Lord, and in the 
sight of the people, with his hands spread up to heaven. 
It is a beautiful picture, and suggests to us the importance 
of not only having good desires, but also of permitting 
those desires to occupy our time, thoughts and 
attention fully; for during all the period of the construction 
of this great temple for the Lord, we may 
suppose that Solomon was kept very actively engaged 
as the chief supervisor of its construction; and we may 
reasonably suppose that during this time he was a most 
model ruler, walking in the reverence of the Lord. 
Well would it have been for him had his time always 
been similarly well filled with works for the glory of 
God, or for the good of God's people. It was after 



this great work had been accomplished, that he began 
selfishly to turn his thoughts to self-gratification, which 
ultimately led him into devious paths, which were far 
from wise, according to the expression of his own 
proverbs. 

Verses 55-61 give Solomon's address to the people 
—a benediction and exhortation combined. In this, as 
in his prayer, Solomon shows great modesty, as well as 
zeal for the Lord and for righteousness; for he included 
himself as well as all the people in the exhortation, 
"Let him not leave us nor forsake us." 

Verses 62 and 63 give some conception of the importance 
of this occasion in the estimation of the whole 
nation— as indicated by the enormous sacrifice offered. 

It was following the dedicatory prayer and the offering 
of the sacrifices that God accepted the temple 
and manifested that acceptance by causing the shekinah 
glory to shine upon the Mercy Seat in the Most Holy, 
thus indicating a transfer of the Divine presence with 
Israel, from the Tabernacle (the temporary, movable 
place of worship) to this, as the permanent place for 
the manifestation of God's presence in the midst of the 
people. The typical features of this will be readily 
discerned by all. As the shekinah glory in the Tabernacle 
represented God's presence with Israel, accompanying 
their wilderness journey and difficulties, so 
now the anti-type of this is God's presence with the 
Church of the Gospel age in its present temporary or 
tabernacle condition; and so the coming of the divine 
glory upon the completed temple represented the future 
glory of the Church when its living stones shall have 
been brought together, when that which is perfect 
shall have come. The glory in the Tabernacle was 
merely a foretaste and illustration of the greater 
glory of the temple; and so in the Church's experience, 
the present indwelling of the Holy spirit in God's 
Church is only the "first fruits of the spirit," in comparison 
to the fullness of the spirit which will be ours 
when the temple of God shall have been completed, 
glorified, filled with his spirit. 



page 253 
VOL. XVII. NOVEMBER 1, 1896. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 254 

View from the Tower 255 

Poem: Cowper's View of 

Restitution Glory 257 

The Authority of Divine Truth 257 

"He Giveth Quietness" 259 

Questions of General Interest 260 

God's Blessing Upon Solomon 261 

Rewards of Obedience 262 

Encouraging Letters 264 

page 254 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? 

THIS pamphlet of 80 pages, a special issue of the OLD THEOLOGY 
QUARTERLY, examines every text of Scripture in which the word 
"hell" is found, and related passages. Extra copies furnished to subscribers 
at ten cents each, or seventy-five cents per dozen, or six dollars 
per hundred,— postpaid. 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

Many of the truths of the Gospel were "preached beforehand" 
in the types and shadows of the Jewish economy. In the service of 
the tabernacle in the wilderness were embodied the principles of the 
entire plan of salvation, based upon the sacrifice of Christ, as represented 



in the bullock whose blood, sprinkled upon the mercy seat, 
made atonement. 

The significance of each article in the tabernacle, as well as of the 
sacrifices made therein, is set forth in TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF 
BETTER SACRIFICES, a pamphlet of 104 pages, leatherette bound 
illustrated. Price 10 cents, postpaid; 75 cents per dozen. 



POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This volume contains a very choice selection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too common, erroneous, 
hymn-book theology: 494 pages, good print, cloth binding only. It is 
the Gospel of the Kingdom in verse, by the pens of many of God's dear 
saints of all centuries. It is a companion to MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
sells at the same price as the cloth-bound volumes. It is designed to 
lead the mind aright in meditation and worship. 



ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, Arch St., Allegheny 
Pa. Friends will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every Sunday at 3 P.M. 



R2056 : page 255 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



WE are asked to give some expression on the 
"Eastern Question"— the persecution of Armenian 
Christians, etc., over which the civilized world 
has for some time been agitated. We have avoided the 
topic hitherto because we have seen nothing therein 
specially related to prophecy; and because we aim to 
review only such features of worldly news as are directly 
or indirectly related to prophecy. 

By many students of prophecy (especially Second Adventists) 
Turkey's extinction has long been looked for as 
the great event incident to the collapse of the present order 
of things: it has been expected and predicted 
repeatedly during the past fifty years. Every commotion 
in Turkey revives these expectations in the minds 
of some. 

Our chief interest in Turkey centers in the fact 
that she holds control of Palestine and at present does 
not permit its re-settlement by Jews. This embargo 
must be broken before the severity of the great time of 
trouble, to permit the return of great numbers of Jews, 
and with considerable wealth, out of all nations. (Ezek. 38:8-12-16.) 
This seems to us to indicate that Palestine 



will be released from Turkish oppression and that 
the Jews will be persecuted and driven out of various 
countries before the great climax of trouble; and hence 
our expectation is a further dismemberment of Turkey, 
shortly, and not an immediate general European war. 

That Turkey occupies an important place in 
European politics is very true and very apparent; and 
that the settlement of her affairs is likely eventually to 
involve serious consequences to the peace of Europe and 
the general "balance of power" is also evident. But, 
expecting that the crisis of this world's affairs will not 
be reached before 1910, we are not looking for anything 
phenomenal in or from Turkey, at present. Whatever, 
therefore, may be done by the European powers 
to restore order and to protect the Armenians, it will 
not, we believe, immediately involve Europe in the 
much feared general war. 

The true situation is understood by few except the 
statesmen of Europe, and their patriotism, as well as 
the proprieties of their positions, prevent them explaining 
the true situation to the people. Indeed, 
the British are the only people whose rulers need to, or 
do, take the sentiments of the people much into account; 
and the British public are controlled, more than they 
are generally aware, through the leading journals. 
Diplomatic and financial questions are admittedly abstruse; 
even great journals take their theories and 
policies from a very few leaders of thought; and public 
sentiment is "waked up" for effect, or "quieted," according 
to the exigencies of the case as seen by the 
leaders to be valuable or injurious to their foreign 
policy. 

European national politics are like a game of chess 
in which each nation is a player for its own interests, 
which, if not directly involved in the present move, 
would at least be affected by it and involved in the 
next move. To the casual observer Turkey is an effete, 
rotten, semi-barbarous kingdom in whose destruction 
all civilized nations should rejoice. But statesmen look 
beyond and ask, What shall be instead of Turkey? If 
the land could be submerged and made part of the sea 
it would solve the difficulty. But as this cannot be 

R2056 : page 256 

done, some other government must take the place of 
the Ottoman. The people of Turkey are not superior 
to their present government, and a republic would be 
impossible;— it would also be objectionable to autocracy. 
But a government of some kind it must have; and that 
is the difficult problem with statesmen; for the governments 
they represent have conflicting ideas and selfish 
interests to be served. 

For many years Russia has coveted Turkey— particularly 
because of its remarkable seaport at Constantinople; 
which probably is the finest in the world. But 



Great Britain and all the powers of Europe have for 
years feared their great Northeastern neighbor under 
autocratic sway, and have been more or less anxious to 
cooperate for his restraint. Thus the Crimean war 
was the intervention of the English, French and Sardinian 
combined forces to protect Turkey from Russia; 
—not for love of Turkey, but from fear and jealousy 
of Russia. The resultant treaty stipulations prohibited 
Russia's maintenance of a fleet in the Black sea, 
and hence crippled her influence in the Mediterranean. 
Again, when Turkish atrocities against the Bulgarian 
Christians offered Russia in 1877 a favorable pretext 
for attacking Turkey, Great Britain encouraged the 
war for the cause of humanity and Christianity; but 
when, after a year's war at cost of life and treasure, 
Russia triumphed and her army invested Constantinople, 
the British government threatened war, moved 
her fleets and the Indian army, and, supported by 
Austria, compelled the Treaty of Berlin, at which Lord 
Beaconsfield presided and dictated the terms. 

Now, the whole situation is different. France, 
Germany and Austria begin to see that in times past 
they served as cat's paws for England, whose chief interest 
has been the protection of her empire in India. 
They see that she has purchased the Suez Canal and 
taken possession of Egypt in pursuance of this policy. 
They see, now, what English statesmen saw long ago, 
that the great war most to be feared is an industrial 
war of nations, and that England has seized for colonies 
and commercial or trade feeders the most valuable 
centers of the uncivilized world. Now, so far from putting 
themselves under English leadership, the other nations 
are more jealous of England than fearful of Russia; and 
they would be glad to see England undertake to chastise 
Turkey, while they would improve the opportunity 
to extend their spheres of influence in Africa. 

English statesmen are amongst the shrewdest in 
the world and are well aware that a war with Turkey 
would be a long and expensive one, which they dare 
not close except in victory, and that when victory had 
been gained the other nations would see that it was as 
fruitless and unprofitable to England as the war of 
1877 and 1878 was to Russia. And, meantime, Russia 
would advance upon India, France upon Egypt, and 
Germany would establish an African colony in conjunction 
with the Dutch in the Transvaal. 

Russia and Austria could easily settle the Turkish 
question by taking possession and dividing her territory, 
although the Turks could and would make a stout 
resistance; but meantime England might succeed in 
exciting France as well as Italy to jealousy and repeat 
the threat of war at the last moment. This is probably 
the only reason why Russia and Austria do not take 
possession of Turkey at once. 

It will be claimed, perhaps, that the leading English 
journals express the desire that Russia should take 



possession, and declare that England would not only not 

oppose but would disinterestedly approve such a step 

for humanity's sake. This is true; but the Czar well 

knows that the English journals and the English government 

are not the same; and we are quite sure that 

he will receive no such assurances from the government. 

But why not? Ah! that is the weighty factor 

in this Turkish business that is always secreted by the 

English government;— "Shylock" has a word to say in 

all British governmental matters. Like all pawnbrokers 

he has a dark back office; but from that back office 

the outward moves are very generally directed. 

"Shylock" remembers that "the unspeakable Turk" 

owes him a national debt of over seven hundred millions 

of dollars ($700,000,000), and that, however badly 

he may abuse Christians, he pays a heavy interest and 

with considerable promptness; and he reasons that if 

the "sick man" dies, the interest and debt will both 

become a total loss. "Shylock" will not let this come 

to pass except as a last resort. And he has immense 

influence with British statesmen— although he must 

remain out of sight to the public, who, if they knew 

that he is the adviser and shaper of public policy, 

would not be so easily controlled by their statesmen. 

That Russia and Great Britain are likely to come 
into conflict before the full end of Gentile Times we 
believe; and that their struggle is noted in Scripture 
we think probable. Possibly it will yet be seen to be 
somehow associated with the prophecy of Ezekiel 39th 
chapter. Russia is great and powerful numerically, 
by location and because of her autocracy. England 
is great intellectually and financially. As liberty-lovers, 
as civilized beings, and above all as Christians, 
our sympathies must be closer to England than to 
despotic Russia, although we cannot close our eyes to 
England's faults, nor deny that the root of many of 
them is selfishness. "The love of money is a root 
of all evil." 

Russia's rise to influence has been phenomenal. 
She is to-day the leading power of Europe, and under 
her leadership are Germany, France and Austria. The 

R2056 : page 257 

four at the four corners of Europe, so to speak, seem 

to give a better temporary guarantee for a few year's 

peace than Europe has had for some time. Meantime, 

realizing that the time is short and the work given us 

to do important, according to the King's command, 

let us be found using present opportunities with diligence, 

knowing that the "night" of trouble, wherein 

no man can work, hasteth greatly. "Let us lay 

aside every weight, and the sin that doth so easily beset, 

and run with patience the race set before us." 



The Roman Catholics and Greek Catholics are not 
very fully in accord nor much disposed to unite, judging 
from the following telegram to the press:— 

R2057 : page 257 

"St. Petersburg, Oct. 25.— Father Tolstoi, of the 
Greek Church, recently deposed from the priest's functions 
because he refused to clear himself of an accusation 
that he had been converted to Catholicism, has 
been arrested at Moscow and taken to Nijni, where he 
was condemned by a church tribunal to seven years' 
banishment from St. Petersburg and Moscow and was 
forbidden to hold any state office for twenty years." 



R2057 : page 257 

COWPER'S VIEW OF RESTITUTION GLORY. 



"Oh, scenes surpassing fable, and yet true, 
Scenes of accomplished bliss! which, who can see, 
Though but in distant prospect, and not feel 
His soul refreshed with foretaste of the joy? 

"Rivers of gladness water all the earth, 

And clothe all climes with beauty; the reproach 

Of barrenness is past. The fruitful field 

Laughs with abundance; and the land once lean, 

Or fertile only in its own disgrace, 

Exults to see its thistly curse repealed. 

The various seasons woven into one, 

And that one season an eternal spring, 

The garden fears no blight, and needs no fence, 

For there is none to covet: all are full. 

The lion and the libbard and the bear 

Graze with the fearless flocks; all bask at noon 

Together, or all gambol in the shade 

Of the same grove, and drink one common stream. 

Antipathies are none. No foe to man 

Lurks in the serpent now; the mother sees, 

And smiles to see, her infant's playful hand 

Stretched forth to dally with the crested worm, 

To stroke his azure neck, or to receive 

The lambent homage of his arrowy tongue. 

All creatures worship man, and all mankind 

One Lord, one Father. 

"Error has no place; 
That creeping pestilence is driven away, 
The breath of heaven has chased it. In the heart 
No passion touches a discordant sting, 
But all is harmony and love. Disease 



Is not: the pure and uncontaminate blood 
Holds its due course, nor fears the frost of age. 
One song employs all nations, and all cry, 
'Worthy the Lamb, for He was slain for us!' 
The dwellers in the vales and on the rocks 
Shout to each other, and the mountain tops 
From distant mountains catch the flying joy; 
Till, nation after nation taught the strain, 
Earth rolls the rapturous hosanna round. 

"Behold the measure of the promise filled; 
See Salem built, the labor of a God! 
Bright as the sun the sacred city shines; 
All kingdoms and all princes of the earth 
Flock to that light; the glory of all lands 
Flows into her; unbounded is her joy, 
And endless her increase. Thy rams are there, 
Nebaioth, and the flocks of Kedar, there 
The looms of Ormus, and the mines of Ind, 
And Saba's spicy groves pay tribute there. 
Praise is in all her gates; upon her walls, 
And in her streets, and in her spacious courts, 
Is heard salvation. Eastern Java there 
Kneels with the native of the farthest West, 
And Ethiopia spreads abroad the hand, 
And worships. Her report has travelled forth 
Into all lands. From every clime they come 
To see thy beauty and to share thy joy, 
O Zion! an assembly such as earth 
Saw never, such as heaven stoops down to see.' 



R2057 : page 257 

THE AUTHORITY OF DIVINE TRUTH. 



"And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that 
they which see not might see, and that they which see might 
be made blind."— John 9:39. 

DIVINE truth comes to us with all the authority 
of its divine Author. With a gentle dignity 
consistent with its noble character it urges its 
claims upon the reason, the judgment and the conscience 
of men, and then leaves them, as free moral 
agents, to accept or reject its claims. Its true messengers 
also come with the same moral force of inherent 
worth, rather than with noisy demonstrations or "lying 
wonders," such as are used by the powers of darkness to 
attract idle curiosity into the snares of Satan. They 
come imbued with the spirit of the authoritative message 
they bear— the spirit of holiness and truth. 
Thus our Lord Jesus, the great chief Messenger of 



the divine covenant, was holy, harmless, undefiled and 
separate from sinners; the prophets were holy men who 
spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy spirit; 

R2057 : page 258 

and the apostles were holy men chosen of God and 

charged with the divine testimony. So also all of those 

called of God to preach the good tidings have this 

anointing of the holy spirit of God (Isa. 61:1-3; Luke 4:16-21) 

as their necessary preparation for this service, 

and without this anointing they are but as sounding 

brass and tinkling cymbals, having no commission from 

God to declare his truth. To any who, without the 

divine anointing, presumptuously take it upon themselves 

to handle the testimonies of God, attempting to 

expound them to others, "God saith, What hast thou 

to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest 

take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction 

and castest my words behind thee!" (Psa. 50:16,17.) 

Only those who have the anointing of the 

spirit of truth have any commission from God to preach 

the truth to others. And indeed only such can do it; 

for others, not being willing to admit its full sway and 

authority in their own hearts, yet anxious to justify 

themselves before men, will pervert the truth, deceiving 

and being deceived, wresting the Scriptures to their 

own destruction. 

Divine truth, flowing from the pure fountain of 
truth, God himself, who is all light, and in whom is no 
darkness at all (1 John 1:5), coming to us through 
the appointed channel of God's Word and declared by 
his faithful servants imbued with his spirit, comes 
with a moral and logical power proving its authority 
and enforcing it with an emphasis which carries 
warning with it, and which plainly says, "Take heed 
how ye hear."— Luke 8:18. 

The message of divine truth conveyed to us through 
our Lord Jesus and his holy apostles and prophets, and 
from time to time, as meat in due season, called to our 
attention by such members of the anointed body as God 
hath set in the Church to be pastors and teachers, and 
even by the feebler members of the body, are not therefore 
subjects for mere idle consideration and human 
speculation and dispute: they are not common themes 
for reckless handling with irreverent hands: they 
are the eternal principles of truth and righteousness. 
They are the oracles of God and the principles of his 
holy law by which every man must be judged as worthy 
or unworthy of eternal life. They come, with a quiet 
insistence, demanding our candid, serious, careful consideration 
of their claims upon us in view of the fact 
of a coming judgment in which these principles of truth 
and righteousness shall surely triumph and prove a 
savor of life unto life or of death unto death to men, 
according as they are obedient or disobedient to their 



authority. 

It was to establish these principles of judgment, and 
to acquaint men with them, as well as to redeem them from 
the sentence of the first judgment of the race in Eden, that 
Jesus came into this world. (John 5:24; 20:30,31.) Yet 
this judgment, while it begins in a measure with every 
man as soon as he begins to comprehend the divine testimony, 
is not, in the case of the world in general, to 
reach its final decision until the time appointed for the 
world's judgment, the Millennial age; for at his first advent 
Jesus said, "I came not to judge the world, but to 
save the world. He that rejecteth me and receiveth not 
my words hath one that judgeth him: the word that I 
have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day" 
—the day of final reckoning, the Millennial or Judgment 
day.-John 12:46-48. 

In view of these considerations what folly is it for 
any man blindly to ignore or foolishly tamper with and 
pervert or reject the authority of divine truth! On the 
other hand, how grateful to God we should be for his 
goodness in making known to us the principles of his 
law, the testimonies of his Word, by which we are to 
be judged. And how anxious we should be that our 
understanding of those principles of judgment should 
be clear and free from any bias of human prejudice 
which might blind our eyes to truths of such solemn import. 
As the Psalmist says, "The judgments of the Lord 
[expressed by his holy apostles and prophets] are true 
and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they 
than gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than 

R2058 : page 258 

honey and the honeycomb. Moreover by them is thy 
servant warned; and in keeping of them there is great 
reward."— Psa. 19:9-11. 

The above statement of our Lord was called out by 
the contrast presented in the conduct of the Pharisees 
and of the blind man to whom sight had been given. 
The miracle gave unmistakable evidence of divine power 
manifested through Christ, and was a testimony to the 
truth of his claim to the Messiahship. The Pharisees, 
perceiving the logical deduction from the admission of 
the fact, and unwilling to admit the authority of a 
teacher greater than themselves, rejected even this undeniable 
testimony, and cast the man out of the synagogue, 
because he confessed the truth. 

In this miracle our Lord had clearly taught the 
great truth that God was with him, and that he was 
indeed all that he claimed to be— the fulfilment of the 
law and the prophets, the long promised Messiah. These 
Pharisees, tho feeling the force of this testimony, nevertheless 
harbored so much envy and hatred in their hearts 
that it blinded them to the truth. But not so was 
it with the young man upon whose sightless eyes the 
miracle had been wrought. Envy, hatred and the spirit 



of rivalry were absent from his mind, and wonder and 
gratitude prompted him to reason out the logical deductions 
from this marvelous fact. In his course we 
observe the steps of obedient and increasing faith and 
the results so blessed and so different from those to 

R2058 : page 259 

which the course of the Pharisees led. The act of hopeful 

obedience (based doubtless upon what he had heard 

of Jesus previously), in following the simple directions 

to go and wash his clay-anointed eyes in the pool of 

Siloam, was rewarded by immediate sight, although the 

man had been born blind; this blessing, gratefully 

realized, increased faith; the testimony of obedient, 

grateful faith, in the face of opposition, brought the 

reward of persecution; and persecution, accepted in 

preference to the approval of men upon terms of unrighteousness 

—of stifled conviction and ingratitudes- 
brought the reward of the clearer revelation of Him 
who was the hope of Israel and the world. And not 
only so, but this realization that Jesus was indeed the 
very Christ promised of God, and expected for four 
thousand years, came to the formerly blind man with 
this additional element of joy, that he had been specially 
favored and blessed by him. 

Here we see in strong contrast the spirit of obedience 
on the part of the young man who received sight, 
and the spirit of disobedience and rebellion on the part 
of the Pharisees. In the one case the authority of 
truth was despised and its light rejected, the darkness 
being preferred because their deeds were evil; while in 
the other its authority was received and appreciated 
and from its blessed testimony were drawn the precious 
lessons of faith, obedience, gratitude, humility, fortitude 
and loving reverence. Thus, the same truth 
which blinded one enlightened and blessed the other. 
And so truth is always, as Paul tells us, a savor of life 
unto life, or of death unto death. It is only those who 
receive the truth into good and honest hearts that are 
rewarded with its blessed fruitage.— 2 Cor. 2:14-16. 

Let every man, therefore, take heed how he hears 
the testimony of God: let him not be of those who receive 
it into a heart filled with selfishness or a spirit 
of vain glory or pride or irreverence or ingratitude; 
so that it may not have the blinding effect that it had 
upon the Pharisees, or the hardening effect it had upon 
them and upon Pharaoh, who thereby ten times precipitated 
upon himself and his people the plagues of 
divine wrath, which finally culminated in the destruction 
in the Red sea. But with a pure heart, a good 
and honest heart, let us receive with meekness the engrafted 
word, which is able to save our souls.— 
James 1:21,22. 

It is well for all the Lord's people ever to bear in 
mind that the present age, the present life, is our judgment 



day. Let us see to it that we conduct ourselves 
with that prudence and godly sincerity so befitting so 
solemn and momentous a time, and also that we come 
to the consideration of the divine testimony with that 
reverence and humility which insure the enlightening, 
and guard against the blinding, effects. Well indeed 
would it be for the world if they too would consider 
that "the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good;" and that "God shall bring 
every work into judgment with every secret thing, 
whether it be good, or whether it be evil;" and that 
"there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, 
neither hid that shall not be known."— Prov. 15:3; 
Eccl. 12:14; Luke 12:2,3. 

This judgment in the case of the Lord's consecrated 
people culminates with the present life, and in the 
case of the world it will culminate in the age to come. 
There is, however, a judgment of the world as nations 
(not as individuals) which culminates in the present 
age. Thus, for instance, there was the national judgment 
of Israel which condemned them to blindness and 
to an overthrow, as unworthy of the continued favor of 
God. So also upon nominal spiritual Israel, the nations 
of Christendom, the judgment of God is also to blindness 
and to an overthrow in a great time of trouble. "Take 
heed how ye hear" the teachings of God's Word! 
M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2058 : page 259 

"HE GIVETH QUIETNESS." 

'"WHEN he giveth quietness, who then can 
make trouble?' And who but he, the 
'God of all comfort,' can give quietness in the midst of 
tumults which rise upon the soul like sudden storms 
upon the sea? Like ocean mariners in peril, we cry 
unto him, and he bringeth us to the desired haven- 
blessed haven— of quietness and peace in God. 
"What is the cry which brings this answer of 
peace? It is not a prayer that all occasion for disturbance 
shall be removed, for it is not always the divine 
will to bring peace to the human spirit in that way; it 
is not always the best way. But there is a cry which 
never fails to bring the quietness in which none can 
'make trouble.' It is a prayer for sweet, trustful, loving 
acquiescence in the will of God. 

'"May thy will, not mine, be done; 

May thy will and mine be one; 

Peace I ask— but peace must be, 

Lord, in being one with Thee.' 
"What is it which disturbs my spirit? Is it anxiety 
about my work, my finances, my reputation, my 
friends? Suppose my Father in heaven should hear 



my prayer and remove every apparent cause for unrest 
in regard to one or all of these matters to-day. That 
would not give settled peace, for in a life so full 
of uncertainties as this, new occasions of anxiety would 
probably arise to-morrow. 

"But if I say, 'Lord, let each one of these matters 
which concern my peace of mind so closely be under 
thy control; order all entirely according to thy will, for 
thou art my Father and my Friend; thy will is that 

R2058 : page 260 

thy children should have the very best in all things; 
and thou knowest what is best for me,' what a place of 
rest is that! How the sense of too heavy responsibility 
rolls off; how the distracting care is shifted from 
the heart too weak to bear it to the strong shoulder 
upon which the government of all things rightfully and 
easily rests. 

"If this experience of a meek and quiet spirit, 
which is in the sight of God of great price, is not realized 
at once, we must not be discouraged. It is not 
only of a great price as to value, but it often costs a 
great price to gain it. 

"It follows successive battles, often repeated self-surrender, 
and multiplied trials in which the unfailing 
care and love of God have been clearly manifested. We 
were watching the sea waves under the northeast wind; 
how disturbed and dark they were! Suddenly, with a 
fierceness that seemed cruel, the rain fell in torrents, 
and the unresisting waters grew perfectly calm as under 
an overwhelming surprise. When the storm had passed, 
the setting sun shone gloriously, and the quieted waters 
were beautiful in colors of rose and gold. 

"Nature has its spiritual correspondences. Surprise 
comes upon surprise, sudden, overwhelming. The 
spirit which once tossed restlessly in chafing winds of 
lesser trials sinks in sweet submission under heavier 
griefs. We learn that even in the storm God was, and 
at last his conscious love, his abiding presence, his unvarying 
peace— the beauty of Godlikeness— glorify the 
character and life." —Selected. 



R2058 : page 260 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question. How can we reconcile with the love and 
justice of God the selection of the consecrated believers 
of the Gospel age only to be the bride of Christ, and 
not the overcomers of all ages? 

Answer. To those who for many years have been 



under the impression that all of the human family who 
will be saved will be saved to the same plane it is natural 
that the "diversity" (See Eph. 3:10,11-Diaglott) of 
God's creation should be difficult to receive. But this 
does not alter God's plan. The attitude of our hearts 
should be that of hearty acquiescence in what we see to 
be taught in God's Word; and we must ever remember 
the Apostle's words, "Who art thou that repliest 

R2059 : page 260 

against God?" "Hath not the potter power over the 
clay to make one vessel unto honor and another vessel 
unto less honor?" What if the fish should say that 
it is unjust for them to be confined to the waters? And 
what if the birds should object to their environment 
and wish to be as the fleet footed hare or the graceful 
deer? And what if the king of the forest should insist 
that it is unjust that he was not made man? What confusion 
there would be in creation! And is it more consistent 
for men to wish to be angels, when God never 
intended them to be such? And why, since God has 
invited only a special few to be heirs of the Kingdom, 
should it be taken as a slight to others of mankind not 
to be invited? God has not arranged to injure any of 
his creatures. He has blessings in store for them all, 
but he reserves the right to bestow upon each one such 
a blessing as his wisdom dictates. If we were to go on 
the street and from a dozen newsboys select three to 
whom to give a dollar each, would we be injuring the 
nine to whom we gave nothing? But if we should do 
an injury to any of them, we would be guilty of wrong 
doing. So God has a right to select the recipients of 
his favors. All that we have is of grace. We have 
merited nothing. And "the gifts and callings of God 
are without repentance." On this point we advise that 
you read again MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap. 10. 

To the Church of this Gospel age only, God has 
offered through Christ a new, a spiritual, nature; they 
alone are invited to become "partakers of the divine 
nature." The highest offer to others is restitution to 
the perfection of human nature lost in Eden through 
disobedience. 

Question. If Noah was 600 years old when the 
flood came (Gen. 7:6,11), was he not 601 years old 
when the water was dried up (since the flood covered the 
earth one year and ten days)? 

Answer. In the 600th year of Noah's life (Gen. 7:11), 
he was 599 years old. In his 601st year, the 
first month and first day (Gen. 8:13), he was not 601 
years old but just beginning his 601st year; consequently 
up to that date he had lived 600 full years. 

Question. What will be the standing of the world 
in the Millennial age before they believe in Christ, and 
in case they never come into harmony during that age? 
Some argue that a man cannot be tried for life until 



he has life. 

Answer. Before they believe in Christ, men are 
in the attitude of condemned beings. (John 3:18.) We 
all have been condemned on account of father Adam's 
sin, and the only name given under heaven or among 
men whereby we can be saved is the name of Jesus. 
God can be "just and yet the justifier of him that believeth 
in Jesus; but he cannot justly be the justifier of 
any one who does not believe in Jesus. (Rom. 3:26.) 
Therefore we conclude that any person who has not the 
Son has not life; indeed, shall not see life; but the wrath 
of God (death, inherited from Adam) abides on him; 
he is condemned ALREADY; and this is the condemnation, 
that light came into the world, and he wickedly 
loved darkness rather than light.— John 3:36; 1 John 5:12; 
John 3:18; 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:4; John 3:19. 

As for the teaching that "a man cannot be tried 
for life until he has life," we do not know a single 

R2059 : page 261 

statement of Scripture to that effect; but we do know, 
and have quoted above, positive evidence to the contrary. 

No man is on trial individually until brought 
to a knowledge of Christ and his sacrifice and the opportunity 
of reconciliation with God through him. And 
this knowledge of the true light, we are informed, must 
eventually reach every member of Adam's race. If, 
when he receives this knowledge, he accepts the grace 
of God and the terms of the New Covenant, his trial 
for life everlasting under its terms begins: if he rejects 
the offer his original condemnation to death continues 
and is approved by his own conduct in refusing this 
grace of God in Christ. 

There are two stages of trial for life set forth in 
this Gospel age, and similarly there will be two stages 
of trial set before the world in the next age. The first 
stage of trial now is to come to a knowledge of the fact 
that we are sinners, under divine sentence, and that 
Christ has been appointed Mediator of a New Covenant, 
under which God is willing to receive us, and 
under which we may be reconciled to God and gain 
everlasting life, etc. If we refuse to use this knowledge 
and to enter into the New Covenant privileges, 
we thus reject justification;— choose to remain under 
condemnation, not choosing to take the steps necessary 
to escape it. If we do accept the favor of the New 
Covenant, we then begin our trial and discipline and 
have the assurance that if obedient to the great High 
Priest we shall be enabled to run the race for life successfully 
and win the prize of life everlasting. 

So with the world in the Millennial age. They 
must all come to an accurate knowledge of the truth. 
(1 Tim. 2:4.) Those who then decide to reject Christ 
will be deciding to remain under sentence of death, and 
"shall not see life." Those who then act upon the 



knowledge and accept Christ will be reckonedly justified 
to life and will begin a trial for life, to determine 
whether they are worthy of everlasting life. The trial 
will be according to development of character and will 
close with the end of the Millennial age; and all not 
having attained acceptable characters before that time 
"will be destroyed from among the people"— that none 
but perfect beings may pass into the perfect conditions 
beyond the Millennium. 



R2059 : page 261 

GOD'S BLESSING UPON SOLOMON. 

-NOVEMBER 15.-1 KINGS 9:1-9.- 

"The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and 
he addeth no sorrow with it."— Prov. 10:22. 



GOD'S second revealing of himself to Solomon, 

recorded in this lesson, occurred twenty-four 

years after he had become king, when he had reached 

the forty-fourth year of his age. He began the building 

of the temple in the fourth year of his reign. Its construction 

occupied seven years, and after finishing it he 

built his own palace, which took thirteen years. (1 Kings 7:1.) 

During this long period of twenty-four 

years Solomon was occupied not only with these great 

works, but in general in cultivating trade with neighboring 

countries, repairing his cities, etc., etc. He had 

just reached the period, we may suppose, where he was 

"in all his glory." His fame had spread throughout 

the world. He had become wealthy and had cultivated 

luxurious tastes, which in turn had increased the expenses 

of his government and, if prosecuted further, 

would lead to the oppression of his people with burdensome 

taxes. In the language of the first verse of 

the lesson, Solomon had reached the place where he 

was able to gratify his every desire. He had reached 

the critical point of danger; for, without question, 

great prosperity is much more dangerous than moderate 

competency. 

Up to this point of time, we may reasonably infer, 
Solomon's course at least in a general way had the divine 
approval. He had accepted the prayer of his dream 
as the sentiment of his heart. He had been seeking 
for wisdom and to a considerable extent had been walking 
in her way and had received the promised blessings 
of affluence and fame. But now he had reached the 
danger point: He had come to a parting of the ways. 
One way would lead onward in humble reverence for God 
and a continuous seeking for Divine wisdom and guidance 
for the management of the kingdom and a seeking 
more and more for the elevation of the people, their 



prosperity, happiness and cultivation in mental, moral 
and religious directions. The other way opening before 
Solomon would lead onward to pride, folly, self-gratification, 
the oppression of his people and by setting 
before them a bad example of royal profligacy, 
licentiousness, extravagance, carelessness of religious 
obligations and charity for false religions. 

At this juncture the Lord appeared to Solomon as 
before at Gibeon; that is, in a dream (1 Kings 3:5); 
and an account of the Lord's words spoken in that 
dream is given in this lesson. The Lord's words imply 
his approval of Solomon's course up to this time, indicating 
that he had accepted the prayer of Solomon's 
first dream as Solomon's prayer, that he had accepted 
the temple built to his name, not only outwardly but in 
reality, as implied by the words: "Mine eyes and mine 
heart shall be there perpetually." The Lord then proceeds 
to set before Solomon a view of the right and the 
wrong paths which lay before him, counselling him to 

R2059 : page 262 

choose the path of wisdom and righteousness as his 
father David had done. This reference to David shows 
us that the Lord was not expecting absolute perfection 
of David or Solomon, or any of the fallen race, but that 
he was seeking and would appreciate the heart intentions 
of those who sought to serve him and who, even 
though falteringly, sought to walk in his way. 

The outcome of both paths is particularly stated: 
the path of obedience would not only establish the kingdom 
in his own hands, but insure it in the line of his 
posterity, even as it was promised to David. In this 
promise God shows that he has reference not merely to 
the immediate descendants of Solomon and David, but 
that his particular reference is to Christ, the great 
King, the antitype of Solomon, whose Kingdom shall 
be an everlasting Kingdom, and all people shall serve 
and obey him. As God promised to David that Christ 
should come of his seed, so here he proposes the same 
to Solomon, that if Solomon would hearken to his words 
and walk in his way, the Messiah should come through 
his posterity. But on the other hand, the choosing of 
the wrong course now would mean disaster not only to 

R2060 : page 262 

Solomon and his greatness but to Israel and its national 
prosperity, and to the temple which was a delight to 
Solomon and a wonder to the world. 

We all know the sequel: We know that Solomon 
chose the wrong path, that he chose self-gratification; 
and thus, although noted as the wise man, he is also 
noted as having determined his course unwisely and 
the "high" house which he had built to the Lord, that 
is, the notable house in the eyes of the world, did become 



a by-word. It was robbed of its treasures and 
profaned; and the world knows to-day that the Lord's 
displeasure against Israel and his rejection of them for 
a time was the result of their rejection of him, and that 
this in part at least was induced by Solomon's choice 
of the wrong course; and that the high places which 
he established for the worship of false religions to please 
his wives and their heathen relatives, became snares to 
the people of Israel and continued to have an idolatrous 
and ungodly, sinful tendency for centuries; until God 
cast them out of their land, overthrew their typical 
kingdom and temporarily gave a lease of earthly dominion 
to the Gentile nations, to last until the time for 
his establishment of the antitypical Kingdom in the 
hands of the greater than Solomon and through the 
instrumentality of the true Israel of God;— until the 
time for the building of the true, spiritual, antitypical 
temple of which Christ and his Church are the "living 
stones" as well as the "royal priesthood."— Eph. 2:21; 
2 Cor. 6:16. 

As a matter of fact, our Lord Jesus did not come 
through Solomon's line, but through that of his brother 
Nathan, in whose lineal descent was Mary, the mother 
of Jesus. (See Luke 3:31.) Only the legal heirship 
came through Solomon, through his descendant Joseph, 
the legal father of Jesus. (See Matt. 1:7,16.) That 
the line of genealogy given in Matt. 1 is not that of 
Mary, our Lord's mother, according to the flesh, is conclusively 
shown by a comparison of Matt. 1:11,12, 
with Jer. 22:30. 

The practical suggestions of this lesson are applicable 
to all of the Lord's people, for although none of 
us of the Gospel age are called to be typical kings with 
typical grandeur and wealth and wisdom, as was Solomon, 
but on the contrary are called to occupy humble 
positions, not many great or wise or learned being chosen 
and called, nevertheless, before each of us continually 
appear two ways, the one the way of divine favor, 
spiritual blessing and light, the other the way of self-gratification, 
divine displeasure and condemnation. The 
choice which we are called upon to make is even more 
important than that which was placed before Solomon. 
The question with him was whether or not Messiah, 
according to the flesh, should come in the line of his 
posterity. The question with us is whether or not we 
shall make our calling and election sure as joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, our Lord, in the Kingdom and glory 
of which Solomon's was but a type. The resolution of 
each one should be that with humility he will accept the 
divine favor, seek to walk in the divine way— in the footsteps 
of Jesus— and by obedience, humility and love seek 
to make his calling and election sure, as one of the kings 
and priests of the antitypical Kingdom.— Rev. 5:10. 



R2060 : page 262 

REWARDS OF OBEDIENCE. 

--NOVEMBER 22.-PROV. 3:1-17.- 

"In all thy ways acknowledge him, and 
he shall direct thy paths."— Prov. 3:6. 

IN this lesson Wisdom personified stands as an instructor 
and offers good counsel to such as have 
an ear to hear and a desire to obey her. 

(1) "Wisdom is justified of her children." They 
show their parentage, and reflect their mother's likeness. 
But to this end Wisdom's laws and commandments 
must be carefully heeded. Wisdom's laws are 

divine laws, expressed not only in the Scriptures, but 
also in the laws of nature. "The children of the light" 
should walk in the light in reference to physical as well 
as spiritual matters— health, food, cleanliness, clothing, 
etc. 

R2060 : page 263 

(2) No one of ordinary perception can fail to note 
that a wise and moderate course in life in obedience to 
the divine laws is beneficial with respect to the life 
which now is, and also that which is to come. True, 
many in the prime of life and health do not give heed 
to Wisdom's voice; true, many who do give heed are 

such as are already greatly impaired, having either inherited 
weaknesses and frailties from the un-wisdom 
of their parents (beginning with Adam and Eve) or 
having neglected the voice of Wisdom until retribution 
overtook them. But even for the impaired the counsel 
of Wisdom is profitable, as many have proved, and 
brings with it more of peace than can be found in any 
other way. 

(3) How grand the counsel of this verse! How 
wise, and how necessary to a large development of 
heart, are the graces here mentioned— mercy and truth! 
No one is truly great who is mean, spiteful, vindictive. 
Mercy towards others, implying consideration for their 
failings and sufferings, is an ennobling grace, a part of 
the image of God, too largely lost by many. Truth 
here stands for sincerity, pureness and uprightness of 
dealing in all our affairs. Who could be a true nobleman 
without this quality? Much more is it necessary 

to every true Christian. 

"Bind them about thy neck" signifies that these 
are to be esteemed as jewels and ornaments of character 
carefully guarded from loss and always in sights- 
delightsome things. And not only should they be manifest 
to all as outward graces, but they should be written 
or engraven in our hearts. Nobility of character, God-likeness, 
was a part of man's original endowment, and 



was written in his very heart, nature, constitution; but 
Adamic sin and its resultant separation from God, and 
now six thousand years of degradation, have well nigh 
obliterated this original divine law from the heart of 
humanity. So to fallen man in general, the evil and 
selfish and resentful suggestions present themselves, 
instead of mercy and sincerity. But the child of God, 
the child of Wisdom, is to retrace and engrave again 
upon the tablets of the heart (that is, in his very character) 
these graces so generally obliterated. This work 
is at the present time being followed only by those who 
are in the school of Christ,— the "little flock." But 
by and by the school of Christ will be enlarged; and 
these who are now pupils will be associated with the 
great Master as teachers and instructors of the Word; 
and then the whole world will be called upon to rewrite 
in their hearts the original law of righteousness. 
And all who appreciate the opportunity will be assisted 
in so doing by the Lord and his servants; as it is written. 
-Jer. 31:33,34. 

(4) Such characters are sure to be pleasing in the 

sight of God, and are acknowledged even by such persons 
as are children of darkness and hate the light, 
and would say all manner of evil falsely against the 
children of the light. 

(5) Every matured child of God must learn well 
and appreciate the sentiment of this verse. Experience 
has taught him the imperfection of his own judgment 
in many things, and the fallibility of all human counsel; 
and he has learned and is still learning to trust the 
Lord implicitly. In order thus to trust the Lord, a 
knowledge of his Word and the plan of salvation which 
it reveals are very important; they inspire trust and 
confidence, not only in the ability and wisdom of God, 
but also in his justice and love. 

(6) It is not only proper that God's children 
should trust him in their hearts, but also that they 
should confess and acknowledge him as their Lord and 
Master in all of their affairs. Such as are careful thus 

to acknowledge the Lord have the assurance that he will 
direct their paths. Their paths will not be directed in 
ways most congenial to the fallen nature: nor do they 
wish for this; for, as already seen, they are desiring 
and seeking mercy and truth, as outward charms, and 
also as deeply graven inward principles. 

(7) Nothing is more dangerous to the child of 

God than self-conceit: it blocks the way to true progress 
and reformation of heart, and hinders true usefulness 
to others, and especially usefulness in God's 
service; for his Word declares, "God resisteth the 
proud, but showeth his favor unto the humble." 

Instead of self confidence, Wisdom dictates a distrustfulness 
of self, remembering its weaknesses and 
imperfections, and correspondingly the greater reverence 
for God and reliance upon him, which more than 
anything else will strengthen and enable us to depart 



from the evil of our fallen estate. 

(8) "Health [or vigor] to thy muscles and marrow 
to thy bones," as a figurative expression, would 

seem to signify general vitality, vigor of mind and body, 
which certainly are among the blessed results of that 
proper reverence for the Lord which leads us to depart 
from sin in thought, word and deed. 

(9) Whatever we possess should be made to contribute 
its part in God's service. Whether our substance 
consists of a rich endowment of talent, or education, 

or influence, its first fruits, its results, should go to the 
service of our gracious heavenly Father, as our Lord 
said: "Seek ye first [chiefly, to serve] the Kingdom 
of heaven." 

(10) Whatever our substance, if faithful in its use 

and in consecrating its best to the cause of God, a blessing 
will result to us. During the Jewish age God's 
covenant with that people was to the effect that faithfulness 
to him and his laws would bring them temporal 

R2061 : page 263 

prosperity; and the same rule will be in force during 

R2061 : page 264 

the Millennial age; as it is written, "In his days [the 
Millennial age] shall the righteous flourish," but "evil 
doers shall be cut off." (Psa. 72:7; 37:9.) This rule 
does not apply during this Gospel age, however: the 
meek do not now inherit the earth, nor the righteous 
in general. Now the proud are prosperous, "Yea, they 
that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt 
God are even delivered." (Mai. 3:15.) Not only our 
Lord Jesus and the apostles, who honored God with 
the first-fruits of their being, but also many of the 
household of faith since, have not had overflowing 
barns and wine presses. Chiefly they have been "the 
poor of this world, rich in faith;" yet, nevertheless, 
they have had the finest of the wheat, the purest of 
the oil and the best of the wine, as represented in their 
spiritual nourishment and enrichment. 

(11,12) The trials and difficulties of this present 
life are not to be esteemed as marks of divine disfavor, 
if we have become children of God, children of Wisdom, 
under the provided conditions of the New Covenant. 
We are to remember the promise of our Father, 
that "All things work together for good to them that 
love God, to the called ones according to his purpose." 
(Rom. 8:28.) Reproofs, trials, disciplines should be reminders 
to us that we are not perfect, that we still have 
need of the mercy of God in Christ, even with our best 
efforts; and should lead us to greater diligence in "perfecting 
holiness in the fear [reverence] of the Lord." 
-2 Cor. 7:1. 

(13-17) Wisdom and understanding are not exactly 



synonymous terms. Wisdom describes more particularly 

the perception of right and wrong principles 

and their results and the propriety of following these. 

Knowledge or understanding relates more particularly 

to the information and building up of judgment and character, 

as the result of obedience to the voice of Wisdom. 

It is a great blessing and privilege indeed to find 
Wisdom, for few there be that find her in this present 
time. Wisdom is the light which cometh from above. 
She is the truth. Her grand exemplification among 
men was "the man Christ Jesus," our Lord, "the true 
Light." Light from above, Wisdom, is still in the world, 
as represented in the divine Word; but to the majority 
it is unseen, unknown; as it is written, "The God of 
this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not." Thank God for the assurance that in due time 
all the blind eyes shall be opened, and that then the 
true light, the true wisdom from above, shall lighten 
every man! Then all will see the truth, and all will 
hear the voice of Wisdom, the voice of God, the voice 
of Christ, the voice of the Church, and be privileged 
to drink at the fountain of Wisdom and knowledge, 
and, if they will be obedient, to obtain the full measure 
of divine favor and blessing as represented in the offer 
of everlasting life.— See Rev. 22:17. 

But, alas! although but few find Wisdom now, 
still fewer heed her voice and purchase the true knowledge 
and its precious blessings as she directs. Nothing 
else that can be bought is so valuable. Under Wisdom's 
direction now not only the silver of truth may be obtained, 
but the divine nature, as symbolized by gold, 
and graces of character, as symbolized in precious stones. 
All these may now be secured by obedience to her voice 
—and more; for "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
nor hath entered into the heart of man the things that 
God has in reservation for them that love him,"— including 
everlasting life, heavenly riches, honor, joy 
and peace. 



page 264 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



Minnesota. 

DEAR BROTHER:— I wish to present a few thoughts called up 
recently by reading in DAWN, Vol. III., pages 228, 363, etc., the statement 
that the Scriptures do not indicate, so far as seen, the exact date 
of the exaltation of the last members of the "little flock" and the 
"closing of the door." 

During '94 and '95 I spent some time in studying Revelation for 
my personal development, but was unable to come to any conclusions as 
to the "day"-year of Babylon's destruction. (Chap. 18:8.) Later I 



was referred by Sister Townsend to Hos. 5:7. 

Note in connection Zech. 1 1, which refers particularly to the Jewish 
rejection of Jesus. We know that the Jewish house was left desolate 
in A.D. 33 and that to the Autumn of A.D. 36 special favor was 
confined to the individuals of that nation. As Israel is referred to in 
prophecy as Israel— the whole house; Judah— the two tribes; and 
Ephraim— the ten tribes, it occurred to me that "the three shepherds" 
(Zech. 1 1:8) were the priesthood of the nation, as a whole and in its 
two later divisions— the whole Aaronic line. One month (30 years) for 
their cutting off would bring us to the Autumn of A.D. 66. 

From history we find that just at this time (at least not later than 
early in A.D. 67) a band of Jewish rioters displaced the Royal and Legal 
Priesthood and polluted the temple; hence the Aaronic Priesthood 
was there literally ended, though rejected previously, when the sacrifice 
of Christ displaced the sacrifices of the Law. 

Finding its literal fulfilment thus upon Fleshly Israel, it is not difficult 
to see how it is with Spiritual Israel (Babylon, Ephraim, Ariel, 
etc.), which is also represented as divided into three parts.— Rev. 16:19. 

Hos. 5:7 speaks of "strange children" of Israel and says Jehovah 
withdrew himself from them entirely. "Now shall a month devour them 
with their portions [belongings]." The antitype of cast-off Israel is the 
nominal Christian Church (Babylon), and the corresponding date to 
Jehovah's withdrawal from Israel in A.D. 36 is 1881. 1881 plus 30 
equals 1911, when Babylon shall be entirely "devoured" or destroyed. 

In DAWN, Vol. III., we see how the Pyramid indicates Oct. 1910 
as the [probable] date when the last members of the "little flock" shall 
be changed and accounted worthy to escape the severity of the trouble. 
The saints are warned, "Come out of her,. ..that ye receive not of her 
plagues" (Rev. 18:4); for (verse 8) "her plagues shall come in one day 
[year], and she shall be utterly burned"— destroyed in that, her last 
day, ending Oct. 191 1 and beginning Oct. 1910, thus corroborating the 
Pyramid's testimony. 

The shortness and suddenness of her destruction are indicated by 
Isa. 47:9; 10:17 and Rev. 16:17-21, as plainly shown in DAWN. 

Thus the dates 1910 and 1911 seem clearly marked. I have attempted 
to give briefly the main thoughts, just enough to enable you 
to grasp the idea. Yours in fellowship, C. H. DICKINSON. 



A returned missionary writes us as follows:— 

New York. 

TO THE AUTHOR OF MILLENNIAL DAWN. DEAR SIR:-A friend 
gave me the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. I have been greatly 
interested and profited by it, reading it with Bible in hand to note 
references. 

As a missionary of twenty years in China, there are times when I 
cannot look at that dreadful diagram of the condition of the world. 
Having been in the chief great heathen fields of the world, and seen 
the darkness (yea, felt it), and this nearly 2,000 years after Christ's 
coming, with all my assurance that Christ shall have his rightful inheritance, 
and all my enthusiasm in the work, yet often my heart has 
failed within me, at the magnitude of the work yet to be accomplished. 
Your rendering of the matter brings me comfort, appeals to my reason 
and faith, and yet does not "cut the nerve of missions." 



I want volumes II. and III. of DAWN, also TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 
Kindly also send me sample copy of your paper. Mrs. 



page 265 

VOL. XVII. NOVEMBER 15, 1896. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 266 

View from the Tower 267 

Future Probation 269 

Mr. Dimbleby and Mr. Totten 

Heard From 271 

Sealed Unto the Day of Redemption 272 

"Hell No Part of Divine Revelation" 274 

Splitting Things Fine 275 

"Unauthorized Workers" 276 

Questions of General Interest 277 

The Fame of Solomon 277 

Solomon's Sin 279 

page 266 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2061 : page 267 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



OUR October 1. issue pointed out that according 
to the prophecy of the Apostle James the recent 
election would fail to relieve the "reapers." The results 



have corroborated the prophecy. Earnest and 

honest men were on both sides of the contention, and 

the tremendous efforts against silver carried the day. 

The majority saw that, while the "fraud" was easy to introduce, 

it would be difficult to expel; that at least one 

year of great financial depression must result, before 

legislation could be secured which would restore silver 

to its former relationship and equal privileges with 

gold; and having greater confidence in Shylock's assertions 

than in their own judgment, they chose the 

immediate better and ignored the future and thus helped 

fulfill prophecy. 

The managers of the successful party declare that 
now bimetallism will be established by international 
agreement, and that thus agriculturalists will be relieved. 
But taking the divine Word for our guide, we 
do not expect relief for the "reapers" in any form. 
Rather, their burden will increase, and their cry, already 
begun, will grow louder, and eventually place 
many of those formerly law abiding amongst the lawless. 

There is every indication that the next year or 
two may be quite prosperous, because of the shortage 
of merchandise incident to the past three years of depression; 
but eventually prices for labor and for goods 
will gravitate toward still lower levels, barring wars, 
famines, etc. 



Notwithstanding the outward harmony maintained 
by the Church of Rome, she has her own internal disorders 
in every quarter. In Italy her conflict is with 
the Government; in Russia it is with the Greek Church; 
in Great Britain it is with the Church of England; in 
France it is with the Masons; and in this land of liberty 
it is with freedom's institutions and progressive ideas, 
especially with free schools. 

In the French republic the papal influence until lately 
has always been with the monarchical parties (as a threat 
this is now being reversed); in Italy it is thrown against 
monarchical parties, and the people of Italy who, to 
the number of about probably five million voters, have 
for years, at the command of the Pope, refrained from 
voting are now to use their votes to embarrass the Government 
and in favor of republican institutions. In the 
United States, for some years back, the Papal policy 
has been extremely liberal (for it); Cardinal Gibbons, 
Archbishop Ireland and Bishop Keane have been leaders 
in an attempt to form a liberal, American-Papal policy. 
For a time they succeeded. The Council of Baltimore 
permitted Roman Catholics in the United States to 
read the Bible, Protestants were no longer to be treated 
as heretics, whose end was a hopeless eternity in 
hell and anguish, but as "separated brethren," many 
of whom were honest and, like Romanists, would go to 
Purgatory, but being without beads or prayers to Mary 



or masses, holy candles and the like, they would be 
obliged to stay longer in Purgatory than would faithful 
Romanists; but the under-surface intrigue of the 
Jesuitical party has finally triumphed, and the whole 
policy of the Papacy is to be made more conservative. 
The infallible Pope is not left to himself, but is assisted 
by advisers and counselors, whose mouthpiece he 

R2061 : page 268 

really is; and Protestants will no longer be permitted 
to go to "Purgatory," but will be sent directly and 
forever to "Hell." 

This change of policy is noticeable in the Encyclical 
dealing with the Anglican question— no special desire 
being manifested to conciliate the Church of England, 
but rather the reverse. More recently Bishop 
Keane has been removed from the Chancellorship or 
Presidency of the Washington City (Roman Catholic) 
College. And now it is reported that Archbishop Ireland 
is in disfavor at Rome and will suffer degradation 
in some manner. Probably Cardinal Gibbons, who has 
been very cautious, may be permitted to continue for 
some time, if he continues tongue-tied. 

Without much doubt fear lies at the bottom of 
this policy. The Italian prelates hold control of the 
Papacy, and intend to hold it. They no doubt realize 
that the Anglo-Saxon race is the more brilliant and 
would out-shine them and eventually capture the control 
of their system; hence they do not desire union 
with the Church of England, lest it should turn out 
that Papacy had joined the Church of England and not 
the Anglicans joined the Church of Rome. And the 
Pope has been obliged to yield to their pressure, which 
is manifesting itself here in the United States also, and 
has already declared against any further cooperation 
with Protestants in any future Parliaments of Religion. 

This change of policy on the part of Rome should 
not be understood to signify antagonism and hostilities 
between Romanists and Protestants: it does, however, 
corroborate the Scriptural testimony to which we have 
frequently called attention,— that the two will never 
unite in one system; that the coming Protestant federation 
will be distinct from Catholicism and that, while 
treating each other with respect and in many matters 
cooperating, the two parties will really be in opposition 
as the two sides of the great "scroll" (Rev. 6:14; 
Isa. 34:4) down to the time of their mutual and sudden 
collapse. 

The situation as respects the United States is well 
set forth in the following extracts from prominent 
journals:— 

The Western Watchman (Roman Catholic, St. 
Louis) says:— 

"Tell the truth. Rome removed Bishop Keane. 
Cardinal Satolli advised the measure. The Germans 



had nothing to do with it. Rome did not want the 

young priests of America to be taught Pelagianism. 

The advocates of the doctrine that any form of Protestantism 

is better than no religion at all, claim Cardinals 

Manning and Newman for their contention. Neither 

R2062 : page 268 

of the English cardinals was regarded as a theologian 
in Rome, and at the time of their death neither enjoyed 
the slightest influence in Rome. Pelagianism must be 
stamped out. Man is in the supernatural order and 
whether pagan or Christian is obliged to tend to his 
supernatural end. Grace is an aid to that end. The 
church is a guide to that end. Protestantism is a siren. 
It sings to the seafarer and allures him to the breakers. 
Protestantism is the enemy of God; of God's truth; of 
God's church. It is not better than nothing, because 
good for nothing." 
The Christian Standard (Disciples, Cincinnati) says: 
"The virtual deposition of Bishop Keane from the 
Catholic University at Washington, D.C., is taken to 
mean that the ultramontane policy is to prevail in Roman 
Catholic affairs in this country, rather than the 
liberal policy voiced by Archbishop Ireland. No doubt 
there is a genuine fear in the highest circles of papal 
authority that the so-called liberal policy advanced by 
certain ecclesiastics of this country means rather the 
making of Americans out of Catholics, than of Catholics 
out of Americans." 
The Mid-Continent (Presbyterian, St. Louis) says: 
"With all its outward show of smoothness the 
Roman Catholic machinery suffers many a jolt. The 
vigorous protest over the removal of Bishop Keane, the 
late executive head of the Catholic University at Washington, 
is ajar that threatens to work much confusion. 
...It brings to a point of issue the opposing 
American factions; those who believe that in America 
Romanism must adapt itself somewhat to environment, 
that it must be 'liberalized;' and those who stand for 
the Romanism of Spain and Italy on this side the sea. 
Keane, with Gibbons and Ireland, stand for this progressive 
movement. Corrigan of New York, Wigger 
and Schroeder stand for ultra-conservatism. The removal 
of Keane, with all its crafty explanations, is, of 
course, the ban of Rome placed upon that 
progressiveness." 

The Western Christian Advocate (Methodist, Cincinnati) 
says:— 

"The removal of Bishop Keane from the rectorship 
of the Catholic University at Washington might 
ordinarily pass for an unimportant piece of Catholic 
domestic economy, not to be noticed by the outside 
world. But his removal because of his adherence to 
the liberal elements of Catholicism, represented by 
Archbishop Ireland, and as a result of the plottings of 



the clerical or Jesuitical section, at once make it a matter 
of momentous significance." 

A Washington correspondent of the Boston Transcript 
gives the following as the "true inwardness" of 
the present situation:— 

"There are two distinct classes in the Catholic 
Church. One class is made up of the Orders— the 
Jesuits, Augustinians, Paulists, Dominicans and others. 
The other class is made up of the general rank and 
file of the clergy, who have attached themselves to no 
particular Order. Each order attends to some particular 
line of work, the Jesuits to teaching, other Orders 
to missionary work, others to charity, etc. Gradually 
the Orders have drawn away from the clergy who are 
outside of the Orders. The two classes may be illustrated 
by the Catholic University and the Georgetown 
University, both leading Catholic institutions here in 
Washington. The Catholic University is conducted 
by the secular clergy, that is, by those outside of the 

R2062 : page 269 

Orders; while Georgetown University is conducted by 
the Jesuits, or those attached to the Orders. 

"From the arrival of Satolli this latent antagonism 
between the Orders and the 'seculars' began to develop. 
The seculars had in their ranks such conspicuous men 
as Archbishop Ireland and Bishop Keane. Moreover, 
the seculars had become identified with a progressive 
and advanced policy which sought to send Catholic 
children to public schools instead of parochial schools. 
On the other hand, the Orders, conspicuously the Jesuits, 
represented the old adherence to Catholic colleges, 
Catholic schools, and to the religious training which 
they regarded as more essential than the intellectual 
training of a child. Naturally, therefore, there was 
much comment when Satolli took up his residence at 
the Catholic University, where he was the guest of 
Bishop Keane. It was regarded among ecclesiastics as 
settling that the Pope's representative had cast his influence 
with the seculars and against the Orders. It 
was a proud day for Archbishop Ireland and the many 
others who, with him, had been urging the advanced 
and liberal policy. But this satisfaction changed unexpectedly 
when Satolli took his leave of Bishop Keane 
and established permanent quarters for the papal legation 
in the remote Eastern section of Washington, 
within a Jesuit parish. It was the parish of St. Aloysius, 
with Father Gillespie at its head. He is a scholarly 
Jesuit, and his adherence to the doctrine of parochial 
education is shown by Gonzaga College, which he is 
expanding to the dimensions of a great seat of learning. 
Thus Satolli was suddenly transferred from the 
seculars to the Orders. From that time, Satolli made 
most of his public appearances at the Jesuit church, 
and the Jesuits were his most intimate and most constant 



associates." 

This correspondent, noting the appointment of 
Mgr. Martinelli (Italian) as successor to Mgr. Satolli 
as papal Ablegate in the United States, continues:— 

"Martinelli is of the Augustinians, an Order 
marked for its austerities. His choice, therefore, is even 
more conspicuous as a recognition of the Orders than 
would have been the choice of a Jesuit. The head of 
an Order is placed in a position over seculars as well 
as Orders. There is no doubt, however, that the judicial 
temperament of Martinelli will save him from an 
undue preference to the Orders. At the same time the 
Orders are entrenched, while Archbishop Ireland and 
the other seculars see their power waning." 



The New York Tribune of Nov. 5, says editorially: 

"For more than a quarter of a century the Catholics 
in Italy have been debarred by order of the Church 
from taking any part in Parliamentary elections. To 
what extent these commands of the Vatican have been 
obeyed may be gathered from the fact that in a country 
of practically universal suffrage, where the adult 
male population numbers according to the latest census 
considerably over 10,000,000, not more than 1,600,000 
have ever yet cast their votes at the polls at any general 
election.... 

"The Pope, having found no disposition on the 
part of the present Italian dynasty to come to an understanding 
either with regard to the temporalities of the 
Papacy, or upon any other subject, has wisely decided 
to throw in his lot with the republic, as being the form 
of the Government of the future. With that prescience 
which sometimes comes to men on the border of the 
grave, he apparently foresees that the days of the monarchical 
system not alone in Italy, but in all other 
parts of the world, are drawing to a close, and accordingly 
he is maneuvering the sails of the church so as 
to adapt them to the wind of democracy. That is why 
he has just astounded the Catholic world by appointing 
as Nuncio to Paris a prelate entirely devoid of diplomatic 
experience, whose only recommendation is that 
he is an ardent Republican; that is why he professes 
such unbounded admiration for America and American 
institutions, and that also is the reason why the Catholic 
electors, now for the first time sent to the polls, are 
openly recommended by the Vatican to disassociate 
themselves from the cause of the monarchy and to prepare 
to accept another form of government— that is to 
say, a republic... 

"Should one of these days the ruined, starving 
and overtaxed population rise up in its despair to overthrow 
a dynasty that has transformed Italy from the 
fairest and gladdest country in Europe into the saddest, 
it will be found that the Papacy will have weathered 



this as so many previous storms, and that with all sail 
set to the democratic wind it is riding safely on the 
stormy waves of the revolution." 

To our understanding the present Italian government 
is the seventh head of the "beast" (Rev. 17:9-11) 
which has continued "a short space," represented 
in the present monarch and his father Victor Immanuel. 
According to this prophecy Rome will never have 
another head— the eighth condition will be the beast 
without a head,— either a republic or anarchy. If a republic, 
we shall shortly expect anarchy, "perdition." 

All the signs of our time corroborate prophecy and 
bid us lift up our heads and rejoice that our redemption 
draweth nigh. 



R2062 : page 269 

FUTURE PROBATION. 



A contemporary says:— 

"ONE seemingly plausible argument in favor of 

a future probation is the alleged fact that a 

large percentage of the race are cut down in infancy by 

the scythe of death before accepting or rejecting the 

offers of salvation; and this is coupled with the claim 

that faith is essential to salvation in all cases. At first 

glance, this surface claim may be deemed reliable; but 

candid reflection will spoil it in a moment. 

" 1 . While there is death among children in this 
age, the theory of probation in the next age insists 
that there will also be death among children born in 
that age: so those children dying there, will as really 

R2062 : page 270 

be entitled to another age of probation as those who die 

R2063 : page 270 

in this age; and so on indefinitely. This proves too 
much or proves nothing. 

"2. While faith is required in adults, unaccountable 
infants are never placed under that law: 'Of such 
is the kingdom of heaven.' We cannot go back of this 
divine rule: 'Thy children shall come again.'" 

(1) This is poor logic as well as poor exposition 
of Scripture. If it were true that all children dying in 
infancy are saved eternally without a future trial or 
risk of the Second Death, it would follow that Herod 
of old, who slew so many infants, was the greatest, the 
most successful missionary of his day; for he made sure 
work of it. If the writer of the above believes what he 



says, he should follow the example of some who, becoming 
mentally unbalanced under such false teachings, 
have killed their children "to insure their going to 
heaven," as they expressed it. If this writer's theory 
be true, laws should be passed to hinder physicians 
from exerting their skill to keep alive young children, 
because they thus more than double the number which 
reach maturity, and according to this theory are keeping 
many from reaching eternal bliss. According to 
this theory infanticide, instead of being punished, should 
be encouraged by rewards and premiums; and no doubt 
such false and irrational teachings as the above quotation 
do act as a premium, and encourage the mentally 
and physically weak and depraved. 

The theory is illogical, further, in that it presupposes 
that God is acting irrationally, in placing millions 
on millions of human beings under present conditions 
for no reason or useful purpose; because, if there be no 
necessity for the development of character by experience 
and trials, so that a blank is more desirable in 
God's esteem than the painstaking and tear-washed, 
though imperfect, page of Christian character, it would 
seem very cruel and loveless, if nothing worse, on God's 
part, to expose so many millions to the buffetings of 
the world, the flesh and the devil;— especially with the 
foreknowledge that "few there be that find" the strait 
gate and narrow way in "this present evil world." 

As to the Scripture passage cited: We hold that 
it is here and frequently given a false interpretation. 
We hold that our Lord did not mean to be understood 
that the blank of childish character is the ideal standard 
of God's Kingdom. Another of the Evangelists 
tells that our Lord, coming to his disciples, found them 
disputing as to which of them should be considered 
greatest or chief, and that he, setting a child in their 
midst as a sample of guilelessness and humility, told 
them that, unless they became as a little child, they 
should have no share in the Kingdom;— not as a little 
child in stature, nor in blankness of undeveloped character, 
but in humility, simplicity, guilelessness. "Of 
such [like] is the Kingdom of heaven." As the Apostle 
urged, "Be not children in knowledge [character], 
howbeit in malice be ye children." (1 Cor. 14:20.) 
And this evidently covers the point of our Lord's remarks 
about children, as understood by the Apostles; 
for surely they never expressed such ideas as we are 
here criticizing. 

Our Lord frequently spoke of his followers as 
"children," "little children" and "little ones." See 
the following instances: John 13:33; Matt. 10:42; 18:6,10,14; 
Mark 9:42; Luke 17:2. These were the 
"little ones" in malice and pride and in the world's estimate, 
among whom there would not be many great 
or wise or learned, according to the course of this world; 
—these were to overcome the world by faith and faithfulness, 
even unto death; and as "overcomers" were 



to share Christ's throne as heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that they would 
suffer with him that they might also be glorified together. 
-Rom. 8:17. 

The promise concerning Rachel's children is mentioned 
as a proof that they will have no trial, but are 
saved; however, a reference to the prophet's words 
(Jer. 31:16,17) shows that in this Scripture, also, the 
writer has made a misapplication; for so far from the 
children being saved or in the Kingdom, the prophet 
declares, "they shall come again from the land of the 
enemy"— the general prison-house of death. They 
shall indeed come therefrom, thank God! Our Lord 
Jesus gave himself a ransom for ALL, and hence in due 
time, as our Lord declared, "All that are in the graves 
shall hear his voice and come forth;" some to the first 
resurrection and some unto a "resurrection by judgment;"* 
—and then "they that hear [obey, see Acts 3:22,23] 
shall live"— everlastingly.— John 5:25,28,29. 

(2) Faith in the promise of God, that Christ and 
the Church constitute the true Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29), 
and that in and by this Seed, according to 
the Lord's promise, "all the families of the earth shall 
be blessed;" and that it is for this purpose that the 
Kingdom— the Millennial Kingdom— is to be given to 
Christ and the overcoming Church (Rev. 2:26,27; 
1 Cor. 15:25), makes no claim such as this writer suggests, 
namely, that infants will die during the Millennial 
age as now. 

On the contrary, it claims in the words of the 
Prophet Isaiah (65:17-20) when describing the new 
heavens and new earth conditions, that "There shall 
be no more thence an infant of days,... for as a lad 
shall one die a hundred years old; and as a sinner shall 
he be accursed who (dieth) a hundred years old." 

This is in agreement with the Scriptural assurances 
that, when the Kingdom of God is established in 



*See our issue of Oct. 15, page 246, and our issue of Aug. 15, '95, 
for explanation of "Resurrection by Judgment." 

R2063 : page 271 

the earth, the high-way of life will be made clear and 
open to all (Isa. 35:8), and that only such as wilfully 
refuse to walk therein shall die at all, and they the 
Second Death; from which there is no resurrection, no 
recovery, provided. "Every soul which will not hear 
[obey] that prophet [the great prophet, Christ Jesus 
the head and the Church his body,— the antitype of 
Moses] shall be destroyed from among the people."— 
Acts 3:23. 

Thank God for a good hope, a Scriptural hope, a 
reasonable and logical hope,— for the Church now a 



high calling to a joint-heirship in the Kingdom with 
immortality; and for "whosoever will" of "all the 
families of the earth," when in due time the grace of 
God shall be extended to them, a restitution of all that 
was lost in Adam. And, let us not forget it, "He that 
[truly] hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even 
as he [Christ, his redeemer and exemplar] is pure." 



R2063 : page 271 
MR. DIMBLEBY AND MR. TOTTEN HEARD FROM. 



IN our issue of May 15th we called attention to the 
pretentious claims of some teachers to give a 
"Bible chronology," though really they merely attempt 
to force the Bible's time-records into harmony 
with the secular records, which are admittedly broken, 
pieced and wholly uncertain. We showed, moreover, 
that the claim that any chronology from Adam to Christ 
can be proved by astronomy down to the fraction of a 
minute, or in any degree, is purest nonsense; because, 
although eclipses, etc., past or future, can be calculated 
by astronomy, no facts of Bible history and chronology 
are so stated as to permit astronomy to be applied 
to them; and no other chronological history goes 
back connectedly or reasonably half way— 3,000 years. 
We also pointed out years of miscalculation in their 
minute-exact "proofs." 

Furthermore, we called attention to the foundationless 
predictions of Mr. Totten concerning the period 
from 1892 to 1899, all of which, up to the present 
date, are of course absolute failures. The holy spirit 
was not withdrawn in the Spring of 1892, the predicted 
man-Antichrist did not arise then and deceive the 
Jews into worshiping him and building him a temple at 
Jerusalem, he did not sit as God in that temple in 1895; 
Mr. Totten and his faithful followers were not taken 
up to heaven at that date; and his man-Antichrist has 
not been holding high carnival on earth and fulfilling 
Rev. 13:15-17, and consequently he will not continue 
the carnival and complete it in the spring of 1899. 

We have since heard from Mr. Dimbleby, who 
writes in a kindly manner, which is convincing that, 
notwithstanding his errors, his intentions are good. 
He claims that he used cycles, transits, etc., in a manner 
common to all astronomers. We are ready to admit 
probably all that Mr. Dimbleby would claim on 
this line: our contention is, and the verdict of all unbiased 
astronomers would be, that these cycles cannot 
be used as measures of history unless there be astronomical 
facts noted in the history. If Genesis told the 
exact location of the stars, or if it very particularly described 



an eclipse, its very minute, etc., when Adam 

was created, then astronomy would measure the chronology; 

or if such a minute record were given in the account 

of the end of the flood, when Noah entered the 

601st year of his age, we could locate that date and use 

the Bible history back of that to Adam. But Mr. Totten's 

absurd claims about "Joshua's long day" (which 

neither Mr. Dimbleby nor any other astronomer could 

endorse) furnishes not one shred of evidence upon which 

to base an astronomic calculation. There are absolutely no 

astronomical facts noted in Bible history; consequently 

astronomy can neither prove nor disprove Bible 

chronology. 

Mr. Dimbleby notes our criticism of the slip of his 
pencil implied in his statement that 2520 solar years 
exactly correspond to 2595 lunar years. He claims 
that in our showing of a difference of over five years 
we neglected some fractions. We reply, that we took 
his statement of 354 days to a lunar year as the basis 
of our calculation, supposing that he had so calculated. 
Mr. Dimbleby's tract reads thus: "A Solar Year is 
365-1/4 days. A Lunar Year is 354 days." But, allowing 
for all the fractions, Mr. Dimbleby is two years 
and one hundred and nineteen days astray,— entirely 

R2064: page 271 

too much for an astronomical "proof," exact to 
the minute. 

We will here give our calculations:— 

A lunar-year (354 days, 8 hours, 48 minutes and 
36.04 seconds) reduced contains 30,617,316.04 seconds. 

A solar-year (365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 
46 seconds) contains 31,556,926 seconds. 

In 2520 solar-years there are therefore 79,523,453,520 
seconds; and this number divided by 30,617,316.04 
(the seconds of a lunar-year) shows that 2597 
lunar-years, 119 days, 36 minutes and 4.12 seconds 
are the equivalent of 2520 solar-years and not exactly 
2595 years, as Mr. Dimbleby stated. 

Mr. Dimbleby wrote in good spirit. Without endeavoring 
further to urge the exactness of his chronological 
beliefs, he rejoiced with us that the end of 
all things pertaining to "this present evil world" is 
near; and that the Kingdom of God is at hand; and expressed 

R2064 : page 272 

the hope that we should soon stand shoulder 

to shoulder in the Kingdom; a hope which we heartily 

share. 

We have also heard from Mr. Totten, but evidently 
he wrote in a very different spirit, what is unworthy 
of a reply: He endeavors to draw attention away from 
his errors, which we have pointed out, by making a 
furious attack upon the Bible Chronology which we 



present, interlarding it with sarcasm and personal 
abuse. We have no disposition to contend along lines 
of personal abuse, seeing the Lord has given us more 
important work to do. 

The Bible chronology of MILLENNIAL DAWN rejects 
all the claimed outside corrections of the Bible, 
and makes no attempt at minute-exactness, but accepts 
the Bible record, wherein we trust that the Lord has 
provided a true chronology whose laps and shorts balance 
each other; indeed, we have found none other so 
clearly stated. 

We force this chronology upon no one, and make 
no absurd and deceptive claims concerning it. Those 
who come to the Word of God in simplicity and sincerity, 
disentangled from preconceived ideas, find in it a 
very substantial basis for faith respecting the times and 
seasons of the divine plan of the ages;— especially when 
they observe that it is abundantly and beautifully corroborated 
by the prophecies, the Jubilees, Israel's 
Double, the Times of the Gentiles, the Days of 
Waiting, the signs of the times; all harmonious and 
easily understood by even the "common people" of 
the consecrated class, who hear gladly. And these God 
evidently intended should hear and be assured by proofs 
within the range of their comprehension. We submit 
the chapter and verse for every figure down to the end 
of the seventy years desolation of the land in the first 
year of Cyrus— the well established and generally 
accepted date, B.C. 536.* 

Mr. Totten neither denies nor acknowledges his 
gross errors and false predictions;+ unless it be in the 
words,— "We shall not.. .attempt to explain the occasional 
presence of dead flies in some of the early samples 
of our ointment." The dead flies (untruths) he indirectly 
and very unjustly lays to the charge of Mr. Dimbleby, 
and still he refuses to pick out even those flies admitted 
to be dead. The fact is that these "dead flies" 
(errors) are the very essence of his compound, and if all 
were taken out, nothing of the "Totten Ointment" 
would remain.— See Eccl. 10:1. 

Following our rule, we made no personal attack 
upon Mr. Totten: we merely obeyed our conscience as 
to duty in calling the attention of the Lord's people to 
those "dead flies;" because some, not noticing the 
"flies" (errors) nor the bad odor (bad spirit), were in 
danger of using Totten's "ointment"— "as advertised" 
—as the eyesalve commended by the Lord in Rev. 3:18. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. II., chapter 2. 
+See our issue of May 15, '96. 



R2064 : page 272 



SEALED UNTO THE DAY OF REDEMPTION. 



"After that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, 
which is the earnest [the pledge] of our inheritance until the redemption 
[Greek— apolutrosis, a loosing away or deliverance.— See also 
Luke 21:28; Rom. 8:23.] of the purchased possession." "Grieve 
not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the 
day of redemption [deliverance]."— Eph. 1:13,14; 4:30. 

THE expression, "sealed unto the day of deliverance," 

carries with it the idea that at an appointed 

day all of the sealed ones will be delivered. And 

the Apostle further emphasizes this thought when he 

speaks of the sealing as an earnest or pledge of our inheritance 

until the day of deliverance. The seal which 

thus marks all of those worthy of deliverance is here 

declared to be "the holy spirit of God." It is elsewhere 

called the spirit of Christ, because in Christ the 

spirit of God dwelt richly and without measure (Col. 1:19; 

2:9; John 3:34); and whom God did foreknow 

as heirs of his exceeding great and precious promises, 

he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image 

of his Son.-Rom. 8:29. 

The use of the term "sealed" in this connection 
is very significant when we consider the importance of 
the seal, which has been in use from remote antiquity. 
A seal is an authoritative impression affixed to an important 
document. When affixed by the originator of 
the document it testifies to its genuineness, and to the 
deliberation with which it has been executed. When 
affixed according to legal requirement, it not only thus 
authenticates, but it also ratifies, confirms and declares 
the document legal; and thus it becomes the pledge or 
assurance of its fulfilment. Hence, any act or other 
instrumentality which legally confirms or ratifies a 
statement, promise or agreement may properly be called 
a seal to such statement, promise or agreement. 

It is thus that the inspired writers symbolically 
apply the term to God's gift of the holy spirit to the 
Church, which testifies to their divine recognition as 
sons and heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, 
if so be that they suffer with him, even unto death. 
This sealing with the holy spirit is not accomplished 
by act of the individual sealed: it is the stamp of God, 
impressed by God upon all his believing and truly consecrated 

R2064 : page 273 

children. Those whose faith accepts, in childlike 
simplicity, the provision of God for redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ, with full purpose 
of heart to conform to his holy will in all things, and 
thus sanctify (set apart) themselves unto God and 



separate themselves from the world, are also sanctified 
(set apart) by God, being sealed, stamped, with his 
holy spirit for the day of deliverance. 

That blessed day is the resurrection day, the Millennial 
day, early in the morning of which the overcoming 
Church will be delivered.— "God shall help her 
when the morning appeareth." (Psa. 46:5, margin.) 
While carefully guarding the seal of promise, we 
may, therefore, as the apostles indicate, look for that 
blessed hope at the glorious appearing of the great God 
and our Savior Jesus Christ, who shall then change 
our vile body— the Church, both individually and collectively 
—and make it like unto his glorious body; for, 
"When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall 
ye also appear with him in glory." (Titus 2:12,13; 
1 Pet. 1:7; Phil. 3:20,21; Col. 3:4.) It was to this 
blessed day that Paul looked forward with joyful hope, 
and to which he bade all of those look forward who, 
like himself, were sealed with the same holy spirit of 
promise, the earnest of their inheritance, saying, 
"Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall 
give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all 
them also that love his appearing."— 2 Tim. 4:8. 

This "seal" is called the "holy spirit of promise" 
because it is of itself a foretaste, a firstfruit, a pledge, 
of that blessedness into which those who possess it and 
hold it fast shall by and by be delivered. Now, as Paul 
says (Rom. 8:23), having this first fruit of the spirit 
in the imperfect earthen vessel which cannot fully and 
satisfactorily carry out the mind of the new spirit, and 
hence in which we groan within ourselves, realizing 
both these divine aspirations and our human shortcomings, 
we longingly wait for the glorious deliverance 
provided at the appointed day,— the deliverance or birth 
of those now begotten of the spirit of God, quickened 
by his mighty power, and developing daily toward the 
stage of birth,— the deliverance into the glorious likeness 
of our Lord and Head, in which we, like him, 
shall be filled with all the fulness of God, which Paul 
sets forth as the grand ultimatum of Christian attainment 
—"That ye might be filled with all the fulness of 
God." (Eph. 3:19.) Toward this end every truly 
overcoming child of God is constantly aspiring, and 
should be able from time to time to note perceptible 
degrees of progress; for even though in this tabernacle 
of the flesh we groan, being burdened with a weight of 
inherent imperfection, it is our duty and privilege daily 
to press toward this mark of holiness and Christlikeness, 
fully assured that, in due time, if we faint not in 
our strivings, we shall be delivered into the likeness of 
our Lord and Head. 

In this view of the matter how important it is that 
those who hope for the deliverance should see to it that 
the seal of God is clearly stamped upon their hearts, 
that they have this holy spirit of promise constantly 



witnessing with their spirits that they are in deed and 

R2065 : page 273 

in truth sons and heirs of God. Nor is it enough that 
we have the recollection that at one time in the long-ago 
we were sealed with this spirit, if at the present 
time neither we nor our friends can discern the impression. 
The witness, to be of any value, must be a present 
witness, and must so continue to the end. 

In order to the receiving of this divine impress or 
seal of God, the soul, having first by faith gratefully 
accepted the redemption provided in Christ Jesus, must 
also be in a plastic or receptive condition toward all the 
influences of divine grace, just as wax, being plastic, 
readily receives an impression; and, like wax, it must 
also have that cohesive quality whereby it may retain 
and preserve that impression. Such plastic and cohesive 
qualities of the soul consist in (1), a loving and 
grateful submission of the whole heart and life to God; 
and (2), a resolute purpose and fixed principles of 
action. Unless the soul be in this attitude it would be 
impossible either to receive or to retain the seal or stamp 
of God. The stony heart will not take the divine impress. 
Nor could the unstable heart, or the double-minded 
man retain it (Jas. 1:6-8), such not having 
enough of the cohesive quality of stability and fixed 
principle. As in dough or other soft substances, it would 
soon subside and disappear, especially if some, however 
little, of the leaven of sin be permitted to work in it. 

It is to the possibility of thus losing this divine 
impress upon the soul, that the Apostle refers in charging 
the people of God not to grieve the holy spirit 
whereby they are sealed. If we are fully and continuously 
submitted to the will and power of God, the impression 
of this seal should deepen with the passing 
years and become more and more distinctly legible; but, 
on the contrary, if we do not so continue to yield ourselves 
to the will and power of God, but allow the leaven 
of sin to abide and to work in us, we thus resist and 
grieve the holy spirit, which, if we continue to do, will 
in time result in the obliteration of the seal of God, and 
in the loss of that inheritance of which its possession 
was the pledge. Grieve not the spirit, efface not the 
seal, despise not the inheritance, but hold fast the seal, 
the pledge of your inheritance, and let its blessed impression 
deepen upon the soul, that, when the appointed 
day of deliverance shall have fully come, this clearly 
legible, God-given pledge may prominently attest its 
claim to be redeemed by the payment of that fulness of 

R2065 : page 274 

the divine bounty of which it is declared by the voice 
of inspiration to be the pledge. 
Another thought in connection with this sealing is 



that, while the impression is distinctly felt upon the 
heart of the believer and is thus a testimony to himself 
of his divinely recognized kinship with God, it is also 
manifest to others; and it becomes more and more thus 
outwardly manifest as the impression deepens, bearing 
to the world its testimony of the wisdom, power and 
grace of God, and even in its silent eloquence convincing 
the world of sin, of righteousness and of a coming 
judgment.— John 16:8. 

It is not possible that any man should bear this 
divine impress or seal of God— even the first impression 
of it before the discipline of years has deepened and 
marked its outlines more distinctly and prominently— 
without its being observed by those with whom he comes 
in contact. Such is its transforming power that it will 
attract attention as strongly in contrast with the spirit of 
the world; and that without the slightest reference to 
it by its possessor. And if the seal, in its general outlines 
at least, is thus manifest even to the world, how 
much more distinctly should its features be discerned 
by those whose vision is clarified by the spirit of truth. 
Such quickly recognize in each other the stamp of God, 
and feel consequently a heavenly affinity which leads 
to a blessed fellowship and communion of spirit; and 
where the spirit of God is, there all the fruits of the 
spirit grow, and the more luxuriantly as the weeds of 
easily besetting sin, which are ever prone to spring up, 
are kept down. 

If asked to describe the outlines of the seal of God 
upon his people, we could not do better than refer to 
the words of the Apostle, who speaks of it as "putting 
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness 
and true holiness." (Eph. 4:24.) And again, 
it is the image of God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) Let us 
see to it that this seal is ours, and that its impress upon 
our hearts is becoming daily more and more distinct. 
MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2066 : page 274 

"HELL NO PART OF DIVINE REVELATION." 



"AN article under the above title, by the Rev. 

W. E. Manley D.D., appeared in the Arena. 

The writer begins by laying down the proposition 

that there is no term in the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures 

which has the meaning of the English word hell, 

and continues:— 

"When our late revision of the Bible was in 
progress, Canon Farrar (now Archdeacon and Doctor 
Farrar) said in substance as follows:— 'If the revisers 
do their whole duty, when their work is done 



our Bible will not contain the word hell, nor damnation, 
nor everlasting punishment.' This covers the 
whole ground of our proposition, and something more. 
The revisers, it seems, have not done their whole duty, 
though they have gone a good way in that direction. 
There are four words in the Bible that are translated 
hell, though not uniformly so translated. One of these 
is a Hebrew word, sheol, and is found in the Old Testament 
sixty-five times. In the old version it is rendered 
thirty-one times hell, thirty-one times grave, and 
three times pit. In the revision it is rendered hell fifteen 
times, grave fifteen times, pit five times, and is left 
untranslated thirty times. The revisers admit that the 
word does not mean hell, but say it is a place of departed 
spirits, good and bad, and must therefore embrace 
a hell and a paradise, though these places, and 
the separation between them, are nowhere mentioned 
or alluded to in that part of the Bible. With the views 
the revisers had of sheol, it was manifestly improper to 
render the word either hell or grave. There was but 
one consistent course to take, and that was to give the 
original in every instance, as they have done in nearly 
half of them, and as the New Testament revisers have 
done with the word hades. In passing, we may remark 
that Sheol was the proper name of the first king of the 
Hebrew nation, and of him who became the apostle to 
the Gentiles, with some difference of pronunciation— a 
pretty good evidence that their respective parents did 
not attach to the word the meaning of hell, unless it 
had to them a more musical sound than it has to some 
of us. The true meaning of sheol is grave, and the 
translators of the old version have given their sanction 
to this view by so rendering the word in nearly half 
the instances in the ancient Scriptures; and if we add 
the three times it is rendered pit, often the synonym 
of grave, the rendering 'grave' will be in the majority. 
It should be borne in mind that the translators of the 
old or authorised version had but one word for the two 
renderings, 'grave' and 'hell,' and that the former was 
the sense of the term more often than the latter. It is 
as plain to us as anything well can be, that in the whole 
Hebrew Bible they could not find a word for the idea 
of hell. It is often affirmed by learned Hebrews that 
there is no such word in the Hebrew language, in the 
Bible, or in any other book. This is confirmed by the 
revisers, who confess that sheol has no such meaning; 
and they name no other word in the Hebrew language 
to fill the place. Finding no word for hell, they made 
use of the word sheol, grave, and attached to that the 
desired meaning when the connection would not betray 
the fraud. The meaning of hell was not in the word; 
but they could inject it, and then it would be there, 
and the Old Testament would not be obliged to bear 
the disgrace of having no hell. The people, having no 
knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, and not doubting 
that the translators, of high standing in the Church, 



were pious, good men, accepted the new version as an 
inestimable boon to the English people, as no doubt on 
the whole it is. The revisers confess that hell is a 
wrong translation; but they have not altogether rejected 
this rendering." 



We commend to colporteurs, and to all interested 
in serving the Truth, the booklet "What Say the Scriptures 
about Hell?" (See second page.) It is quite 
convincing to readers in general that God's Word has 
been misrepresented and misunderstood on this subject; 
and after reading it they are generally ready for the 
study of the divine plan of the ages. 



R2065 : page 275 

SPLITTING THINGS FINE. 



A contemporary, The Christian, says:— 

"SOME one, speaking of the different classes of 

Presbyterians, describes them as the 'U.Ps,' 

'R.Ps' and 'split Ps.' The United States Census Bulletin 

shows how sectarianism runs to seed in America. 

In the United States there are about a hundred and 

forty different religious denominations. Among Presbyterians 

there are, 'The Presbyterian Church in 

the United States of America,' and 'The Presbyterian 

Church in the United States,' and four branches 

of 'Reformed Presbyterians,' and half a score of other 

brands of Presbyterians. There are four bodies calling 

themselves 'Brethren,' which are noted as I, II, III, IV. 

There is 'The Reformed Church of America,' and 'The 

Reformed Churches in the United States.' There are some 

twenty kinds of Methodists, and a number of kinds of 

Baptists, among which are mentioned, the 'Six-Principle 

Baptists,' the 'River Brethren,' the 'Primitive,' 

the 'Free-Will,' the 'Original Free-Will,' the 'General' 

and the 'General Free-Will Baptists;' to say nothing 

of the 'Self-Will Baptists' of which the colored 

brother spoke. Among the Societies of the Friends' 

are the 'Orthodox,' the 'Hicksite,' the 'Wilburite' and 

the 'Primitive.' The Lutherans have seventeen or 

eighteen distinct organizations. The Mennonites, with 

41,000 communicants, have a dozen different branches. 

The people who specially claim to be looking for the 

Lord, and who have adopted the name Adventists,' 

are divided into half a dozen sects, each with their denominational 

organizations; and so men divide until it 

almost seems as if they would divide a man before they 

are done.... 



"Said Dr. Philip Schaff, speaking on this subject, 
'By persecuting, abusing, and excommunicating each 
other, the churches do cruel injustice to their common 
Lord and his followers. They contract his Kingdom 
and his power. They lower in form his kingly throne 
to the headship of a party or school. They hate those 
whom he loves and for whom he died; they curse those 
whom he blesses, they violate the fundamental law of 
his gospel.' 

"One result of this state of things is, that many 
devout men are unattached to any of these denominations. 
They love the Lord, and, like the Psalmist, desire 
to be companions of 'all them that fear God;' but 
they cannot tie themselves or bind themselves to any 
single sect or body of people, nor are they ready to accept 
the creeds and confessions which are, in many 
cases, imposed as prerequisites to membership in these 
denominations. Nor are they willing to bear the unscriptural 
and sectarian names which have been imposed 
upon the Christians, either as the nick-names of 
scoffing enemies, or the sectarian badges of men who 
aspire to leadership, and desire to impose their label 
upon their followers as the marks by which they know 
their sheep, as distinguished from the tokens by which 
the Lord knows his. 

"Among the men who have given expression to 
this dislike of the denominationalism of the day, may 
be mentioned Abraham Lincoln who, though in former 
years skeptical, during his presidential career gave evidence 
of faith in God and a devout desire to serve him, 
but still remained unconnected with any denomination. 
To H. C. Deming, of Connecticut, he said:— 

'"When any church will inscribe over its altar, 
as its sole qualification for membership, the Savior's 
condensed statement of the substance of both law and 
gospel, 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, 
and thy neighbor as thyself,' that church will I join 
with all my heart and all my soul.'" 



But often even those who seem to see that something 
is wrong with nominal "churchianity," fail to 
see in what the real wrong consists, and what is the 
true remedy. 

Was it wrong for Protestants to secede from Roman 
Catholicism? No! 

Was it wrong for John Wesley's followers to secede 
from the Protestant Episcopal Church, when they 
conscientiously believed that they were moving in the 
right direction? No ! 

Is it wrong for any man or company of men to 
obey conscientiously their understanding of the teaching 
of God's Word and the leading of his providences- 
even if it make ten thousand splits? Certainly not! 



How then can we harmonize these rights and duties 
of men to split up, with the central thought of the 
unity of the Church as expressed in our Redeemer's 
prayer, when he said, "I pray not for the world, but 
for those whom thou hast given me— that they all may 
be one, even as thou Father and I are one?" 

We answer, that our Lord had no reference to any 
earthly organization, sect or denomination. He referred 
to the true Church, whose names are written in heaven; 
and his words cannot properly be applied to any other. 

So far as the splitting up is concerned, we may 
surprise some by declaring that in our view it has not 
gone far enough. Each split represented a conflict 

R2066 : page 275 

between truth and error; and the error, darkness and 
ignorance of Papacy's enforced "union" of the eighth 
to the fifteenth centuries was so dense as to require all 
the splitting and reforming that has followed the breaking 
of its power, and more too; for the work of reform 
still lacks much of completion. We hope and labor 
that the good work of reforming and protesting against 
errors may go on and on, until each individual Christian 
will rest his faith (not in a denomination, large or 
small) but personally and individually in the Redeemer, 
and be united to Christ Jesus, the Head, as a member 
of his body— the only true Church. 

For the past five centuries the Truth (strangled 
and bound hand and foot and buried by Antichrist in 

R2066 : page 276 

false creeds and systems) has been gradually awaking 
and struggling, and with some success, to get back to 
the light and life and liberty wherewith the true Christ 
made it free. Yet friends as well as foes have fought 
against this proper effort persistently; denouncing every 
reformer and liberty-lover, complimenting all who oppose 
reform, and tying on new "union" bandages as 
rapidly as possible. 

As the good work of getting free from the fetters 
of human bondage and error progresses, it is like taking 
the outer shells off of a nut and getting at the meat, 
the kernel, the valuable part, which is of very different 
shape and substance from the original outward appearance. 
So the cracking and splitting up of the Papal 
system not only threw off an outer repulsive system of 
superstition and immorality but cracked the inner shell 
of unscriptural sectarian bondage in error; and the 
cracking and picking operation must progress, as it has 
progressed, until every atom of the real meat of the 
nut is freed from the shell. 

Stripped of the outer shells we now see that the 
true Church is not composed of two hundred millions 
of professors, but instead is a "little flock" of fully consecrated 



believers, among whom are not many great or 

wise or noble or rich according to the estimate of this 

world. And we find the faith of this true Church as 

different from that of the mass as its numbers are different. 

It has three steps to which none of the true 

Church can object,— (1) Justification through faith in 

the precious blood of Christ; (2) Consecration in 

thought, word and deed to God and his cause as best they 

understand; (3) Growth in grace, knowledge and love. 

Standing thus free, untrammeled by human creeds 
and bondages, but personally united to Christ, each 
will find in the others "members of the body of Christ," 
and affinity, fellowship and love will unite them in the 
only "union" that is not injurious;— union in Christ, 
to whom, as living "branches" in the Vine, each is personally 
united. 

But such liberty will not mean anarchy and disorder; 
for the wisdom that cometh from above which 
is "first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be 
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits," no less than 
the words and example of our Lord through his apostles, 
will instruct them as to a propriety of order in 
their assemblies, for the benefit of all. (See our issue 
of Nov. 15, 1895, "Let All Things Be Done Decently 
and in Order.") 

The physical union of the Church, the entire body 
of Christ, will be in glory,— at the completion of the 
First Resurrection; for "we ourselves also groan within 
ourselves, waiting for the adoption; to wit, the redemption 
[deliverance] of our body,"— the body of 
Christ. -Rom. 8:23. 

Meantime let this "splitting things fine" continue; 
and let each individual Christian seek to be no 
longer a babe in Christian experience and knowledge 
but to attain the stature of manhood in Christ. (Eph. 4:13-15.) 
Too long has assent to human creeds taken 
the place of individual faith! Too long has membership 
in a popular or an unpopular denomination satisfied 
the conscience and taken the place of a personal 
covenant and union with the Redeemer. Too long 
have many lords, many faiths and many baptisms 
taken the place of the one Lord, one faith and one 
baptism, once delivered to the saints. 

Such a splitting up of creeds and systems has been 
necessary to set free the Lord's "sheep," to prepare a 
cleansed sanctuary class truly united in Christ.— See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., chapter 4. 



R2066 : page 276 

"UNAUTHORIZED WORKERS. 



'"BY what authority doest thou these things?' 
said the Jews to Christ, when he was healing 
the sick and casting out devils. He did the things, 
this was certain; it was equally certain that they could 
not do the things. They had authority, but no power; 
he had power, but they wanted to know his authority. 
He answered their question by asking another, 'The 
baptism of John, was it from heaven or of men?' They 
were in a dilemma. If they said, it was from heaven, 
then he could quote John's endorsement of himself: if 
they said it was of men, they feared the people, for all 
men counted John as a prophet; and so, rather than be 
trapped, they lied themselves out of the difficulty and 

R2067 : page 276 

said, 'We cannot tell.' 'Neither do I tell you by 
what authority I do these things;' was his ready reply. 

"The enemies of God and truth seek by every possible 
means to hinder faithful workers from doing the 
will of the Lord. 'They have no authority,' 'They are 
not duly appointed,' 'They have no credentials.' 

"There are plenty of men who have authority to 
do everything but have no power to do anything: there 
are other men who may lack human authority, but yet 
have the authority of God and the Holy spirit. Said 
Mr. Spurgeon in a recently published sermon:— 

'"Remember Moses when they came to him and 
said that Eldad and Medad were prophesying in the 
camp; those two fellows had not been properly ordained, 
yet they were prophesying in the camp ! What 
did Moses say? 'Stop them directly! They have not 
'Rev.' before either of their names, and certainly they 
have not M.A., or any other letters of the alphabet, 
after their names. Shut those fellows up?' No, no! 
Moses said, 'Would God that all the Lord's people were 
prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon 
them!' And is not that what Christ would say, and 
have you say? Oh, let us have joy in our hearts when 
souls are saved, even though we may not be the instruments 
of their salvation, nor any of our denomination, 
but somebody quite apart from us! God has blessed 
him, and God be blessed for blessing him!' 
— H. L. Hastings." 



R2067 : page 277 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question. M. DAWN claims that God's promise to 
Abraham (Gen. 15:5; 22:17) included both the heavenly 
and the earthly "seed"— the former represented by 



the "stars of heaven" and the latter by the "sand upon 
the seashore." Do you not think this strains the sense, 
since the sands and stars represent an almost innumerable 
number, while the heavenly seed (the Church) 
will be a comparatively small number— probably 
144,000? 

Answer. No; this does not seem to us a strained 
use of the language; but on the contrary both a reasonable 
and a beautiful application of the figures of speech 
used. We must remember that the Apostle Paul, when 
describing the resurrection of the Church (1 Cor. 15:41,42), 
uses this same figure, saying, "as star differeth 
from star in glory, so also is the [special or chief] resurrection 
of the [special or chief] dead." The same 
figure is used in Daniel.— Dan. 12:3. 

Since the "great company" of Rev. 7:9 will be 
spiritual, heavenly, and not an earthly or restitution 
class, it would properly be included in the star figure, 
—as well as the "little flock" which alone will receive 
the Kingdom and the divine or immortal nature. 

These figures of speech are only approximate. We 
cannot suppose that the earthly seed will be as numerous 
as the grains of sand. "As the sand" gives the 
thought of resemblance and not of identical likeness 
or numbers. 



R2067 : page 277 

THE FAME OF SOLOMON. 

-NOV. 29.-1 KINGS 10:1-10,13.- 

"Behold, a greater than Solomon is here."— Matthew 12:42. 

SOLOMON was in all his glory at the time of 
the visit of the Queen of Sheba in the twentieth 
year of his reign, when he was about forty years 
old. His fame as the most wonderful monarch of earth 
had not only made him renowned amongst the lesser 
nations surrounding Israel; but to the extremes of the 
civilization of that day his fame had spread. The visit 
of the Queen of Sheba tells of a great appreciation in 
that day for learning, wisdom and understanding. Herself 
evidently a more than ordinarily brilliant woman, 
the Queen wished to prove whether or not it could be 
the truth that had reached her ears respecting the great 
King of Israel. 

She came to prove him with hard questions, not 
merely, we may suppose, with conundrums, which were 
popular in the East, but probably also with questions 
related to the sciences and arts and probably also with 
questions relating to wise government. Nor did her 
inquiries cease with these, but extended evidently to 
religion, as intimated in the first verse; for not only 



had she heard of his wisdom, but that in connection 
with "the name of the Lord." Apparently she rightly 
associated in her mind Solomon's greatness and wisdom 
and wealth with some special divine blessing. Perhaps, 
indeed, the story of Solomon's choice of wisdom 
and of the Lord's promises to him had spread abroad 
with his fame. 

We have seen in previous lessons that up to this 
point in his career King Solomon was in favor with 
God, and that it was about this time that God appeared 
to him a second time to warn him against the dangers 
of his high position. The incident of this lesson, the 
visit of a Queen from the far off South-land to confer 
with him and to learn something concerning his God 
through whom this great blessing had come upon the 
nation of Israel, should have inspired Solomon with a 
fresh interest in his God and in his religion, and should 
have cultivated in him a desire to spread abroad the 
knowledge of the Lord amongst nations afar off. But, 
as we have seen, instead of choosing the right path of 
honoring God, serving his cause, blessing his people 
Israel, and instructing the nations round about, Solomon 
chose the wrong path of self-gratification and sin. 

Solomon himself seems to have anticipated the 
coming of people from distant countries, because of the 
Lord's blessing upon him, and in his prayer at the 
dedication of the temple he made mention of this and 
freely ascribed the honor and glory thereof to God, 
asking a blessing upon "a stranger that is not of thy 
people Israel, but coming out of a far country for thy 
name's sake, when he shall come and pray toward this 
house; for they shall hear of thy great name and thy 
strong hand and of thy stretched out arm." (1 Kings 8:41,42.) 
In all this Solomon very beautifully, modestly 
and properly gives the credit for his wisdom and 
greatness to God. And yet, so baneful was the influence 
of prosperity in his case, that, when he had reached 
the moment of greatest possibility for good, he forsook 
the Lord and his true wisdom. 

(2-5) Sheba, the Queen's home, was in southern 
Arabia, a land noted at that time for its immense 
wealth, and particularly for its perfumes. Of these the 
Queen brought a royal present to King Solomon, adding 
also spices from India. According to verse ten 
the quantity of wealth, spices, precious stones and perfumes 
was immense, the value of the gold alone being 

R2067 : page 278 

estimated at three million dollars. If this sum of gold 

seems fabulous for a present, its reasonableness is nevertheless 

borne out by the historian Rawlinson, who 

says, "Strabo relates that the Sabeans were enormously 

wealthy, and used gold and silver in a most lavish 

manner in their furniture, their utensils, and even on 

the walls, doors and roofs of their houses." 



The zeal of the Queen for wisdom is evidenced by 
the fact that she brought so valuable a treasure so long 
a distance upon camels, and to some extent through a 
wilderness where she was liable to the attacks of Bedouin 
robbers. Deservedly her quest for wisdom was 
rewarded. She communed with Solomon concerning 
all that was in her heart (mind); and was richly rewarded 
by having her every inquiry answered, by seeing 
the temple built to the glory of God, Solomon's 
own palace just completed, the elaborate arrangements 
of its cuisine and the remarkable passage way leading 
from the palace to the temple. (See 2 Kings 16:18.) 
The last clause of verse five corresponds in meaning 
with the common expression of our day, "took her breath 
away," as indicating overwhelming astonishment. 

(6-8) Then the Queen confessed that, although 
she had been somewhat skeptical before coming, and 
had only half believed what she did hear, yet the half 
had not been told her of what she now saw and heard, 
bearing witness to Solomon's wisdom and prosperity; 
and the summing up of her tribute of praise shows 
that she appreciated the wisdom of Solomon more even 
than his wealth and splendor, so that she almost envied 
his servants, who, continually with him, were blessed 
by the wise and gracious words which proceeded out of 
his mouth. 

(9) Her highest compliment and tribute to the 
King is recorded in verse nine, where she attributes 
Solomon's excellent glory and wisdom to the Lord's 
love of Israel; and she shows in this connection that 
she herself was a wise woman in attributing the Lord's 
blessing and favor upon Solomon to be for the purpose 
of showing justice and establishing righteousness with 
his people Israel. Well had it been for King Solomon 
had he laid to heart and ordered his life according to 
these words of wisdom from the Queen of the South. 

(10,13) Having concluded her visit, and given 
her presents, she received again presents from King 
Solomon; and although the kind and extent of the 
presents given her is not mentioned, they were probably 
of as great or greater value than those she brought 
to him; for it is a custom in oriental countries for kings 
and princes to give presents to each other according to 

R2068 : page 278 

their wealth, and Solomon was no doubt still more 
wealthy than the Queen. 

We cannot apply this lesson of the visit of the 
Queen of Sheba to King Solomon better than it has already 
been applied by our Lord. (Matt. 12:42.) As 
we have already noticed, our Lord Jesus was "the 
greater than Solomon"— the antitype greater than the 
type. He is the embodiment of wisdom, of justice, of 
righteousness, and in his possession God has placed 
riches of grace and glory and honor and dominion. 



When the kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the governor 
amongst the nations, all the ends of the earth shall remember 
and turn unto him. (Psa. 22:27,28.) And 
when they shall witness the glory of Christ and the 
greatness of his kingdom under the whole heavens, the 
majesty of his Church, the true finished and glorified 
temple, the grandeur of all of his appointments and 
the blessings upon all who are his ministers or servants, 
they, with the Queen of the South, will agree that the 
half was never told them: that they had never dreamed 
of so wonderful and excellent a kingdom as that which 
God will thus establish amongst men, for which we 
pray, "Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth," 
etc. Concerning that New Jerusalem it is written, 
"The nations shall walk in the light of it, and the kings 
of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it;" 
and as the willing and obedient shall then present their 
homage and riches and spices and odors (prayers and 
good deeds), these will be accepted of them; and in return 
they shall have from the Greater than Solomon 
the riches of his grace, including divine favor and life 
everlasting.— 1 Kings 10:24; Rev. 21:24. 

We may apply a lesson also (though not as an antitype) 
to the gospel Church of this age, which by faith 
looks forward to and anticipates the great kingdom 
and renown of the Lord Jesus before the time to become 
joint-heirs with him in that kingdom. We, who 
were afar off, having heard of God's grace in Christ, 
have been brought nigh by the blood of Christ through 
faith, and have heard the "wonderful words of life" 
and beheld with the eye of faith that which "eye hath 
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the 
heart of man,— the things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him;" and we have accepted 
them, and have confessed and do confess that the half 
was never told us of the riches of divine grace in our 
Lord. Furthermore, we have presented to him all that 
we have and all that we are. Our best of desires and 
intentions, our best efforts, our means, our opportunities, 
our service. By our covenant we have laid these 
at his feet, and he has accepted them and made us his 
stewards to use and distribute them in his name; and, 
more than this, he has conferred upon us blessings 
which pertain not only to the life that now is but also 
to that which is to come. 

Having received such grace, let us not faint, but 
hold fast the confidence of our rejoicing (while suffering 
with him for righteousness' sake) firm unto the end. 



R2068 : page 279 

SOLOMON'S SIN. 
-DECEMBER 6.-1 KINGS 11:4-13. 



"Let him that thinketh he standeth 
take heed lest he fall."— 1 Cor. 10:12. 

AS Solomon was the wisest man, so also he was 
the most foolish man; for the greater the 
opportunity the greater the loss, and the greater the 
knowledge possessed the greater the sin in its misuse. 

McLaren has truthfully said of Solomon:— 

"There are many instances in history of lives of 
genius and enthusiasm, of high promise and partial accomplishment, 
marred and flung away, but none which 
presents the great tragedy of wasted gifts and blossoms 
never fruited in a sharper, more striking form than the 
life of the wise King of Israel, who, 'in his later days,' 
was 'a fool.' The goodliest vessel may be shipwrecked 
in sight of port. 

"The sun went down in a thick bank of clouds, 
which rose from undrained marshes in his soul; and, 
stretched far up in the western horizon. His career in 
its glory and its shame preaches the great lesson which 
the Book of Ecclesiastes puts into his mouth as 'the 
conclusion of the whole matter:' 'Fear God, and keep 
his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.'" 

(4-6) "When Solomon was old." We last saw 
him at forty entertaining the Queen of Sheba with his 
wisdom, and noted that at about that time the Lord 
appeared to him a second time to indicate that he had 
reached a crisis where he must choose the right or the 
wrong path of life— wisdom or folly. Solomon chose 
the wrong path. He gave himself up to self-gratification, 
to "every desire of his heart [mind]." The result 
was a premature old age, for he died about fifty-nine 
years old. We may suppose (verse 4) that Solomon 
was to be reckoned an old man from his fiftieth year 
onward; whereas really that should have been but the 
prime of his life had he walked in the ways of wisdom. 

Contrary to the divine law (Deut. 17:17), Solomon 
multiplied wives till he had seven hundred. (Vs. 3.) 
Some of these "queens" were ladies of rank and refinement 
from the various royal families of surrounding 
nations, one being Pharaoh's daughter. Solomon in his 
wisdom was esteemed by them, and they in turn were 
esteemed by him, not only for their personality, but 
because of the court alliance and influence with other 
kingdoms which it cemented. Having slipped from 
the path of obedience to God and integrity of heart, 
Solomon fell readily under the influence of his young 
wives into the support of idolatry. We are not to suppose 
that he ceased to believe in the only true God and 
believed in the heathen gods and idols and nonsense; 
but that he came gradually to feel that he wished to 
please his various wives. This thought is borne out 
by verse six, which declares not that Solomon left the 
Lord, but that he went not fully after the Lord, and 
that he did that which was evil in the Lord's sight in 



sanctioning in any degree the idolatrous desires of his 
wives. 

(7-8) Like all sins this one had its beginning— 
when Solomon built the high place or altar of Chemosh 
to satisfy his Moabitish wives; and what might be expected 
is told us in verse eight: that when one system 
of idolatry had been introduced, the other foreign wives 
claimed similar rights, privileges, altars, etc., for the 
divinities of their lands. In yielding to these Solomon 
no doubt had in mind the foreign maids and servants 
of these wives and yet more the visiting delegations of 
court representatives from those various lands which, 
finding altars and temples to their divinities, would 
praise Solomon for breadth of character. But very different 
was such praise from that of the Lord and from 
that of the Queen of Sheba, who recognized in her day 
Solomon's true wisdom in his fidelity to Jehovah God. 

(9,10) The Lord's anger with Solomon was not 
a burst of fury nor a malicious anger. It was a righteous 
indignation against sin; and an anger of this sort 
is the only kind compatible with God's character. It is 
the only kind, therefore, that the children of God 
should cultivate or exercise. While anger in the nature 
of hatred, malice, strife, envy should be put away by 
all who are seeking to be copies of God's dear Son, 
anger in the sense of righteous indignation against 
wrong-doing, sin in its various forms, is proper; and 
although it should be used with great moderation, backed 
by love, there are circumstances and conditions in which it 
would be wrong not to have righteous anger and use it. 

(11,12) The rending of the bulk of the kingdom 
from the hand of Solomon's son, Rehoboam, was a part 
of the penalty for Solomon's sin; yet it came in a natural 
way, and as the result of natural causes. The evil 
course which started in self-gratification and was manifested 
in the multiplication of wives and the gratifying 
of their desires for false religions did not stop there, 
but extended in other directions throughout Solomon's 
affairs and kingdom. He patterned his conduct more 
and more after other rulers of his day, selfishly augmented 
his own fortune, and ministered to his own desires 
and the desires of his numerous household, regardless 
of the interests of the Lord's people in whose 
interest and for whose happiness and welfare he should 
have sought to use the gifts of wisdom, influence and 
wealth bestowed upon him by the Lord. On the contrary, 
as we have seen (1 Kings 12:4,11), he bound 
heavy burdens upon the people. 

The Jews as a people have always zealously guarded 
their liberties; and the spirit of liberty, as we have 

R2068 : page 280 

already seen, was the result of the measure of divine 
truth which had been granted them, which showed that 
the King upon the throne was as accountable as the 



peasant in the field to God the Judge of all. Hence 
the Israelites were prevented from believing, as did the 
heathen nations round about, that their kings were a 
kind of demi-god whose every wish was law; and 
hence, although we find no protest of the people against 
Solomon's departure from the Lord, nor against his 
erection of the altars for worship of false gods, we do 
find that they were disposed to resent Solomon's intrusion 
upon their personal rights and liberties. He divided 
the whole country into twelve districts, each of 
which was compelled to furnish contributions to the 
luxury of the royal palaces and court. He also established 
a system of forced labor in connection with the 
building of roads, palaces, fortifications, immense gardens, 
reservoirs, etc. And while these public improvements 
were in many respects proper enough, the method 
of securing the labor was particularly distasteful to the 

R2069 : page 280 

Israelites, who were thereby reminded of the Egyptian 
slavery. Thirty thousand men were set to work to fell 
trees on Mount Lebanon and to work in quarries under 
Jerusalem, each division of ten thousand serving for 
one-third of a year; seventy thousand were made carriers 
and general laborers, while eighty thousand others 
were engaged as stone masons and carpenters; and it 
appears that in all there were thirty-two hundred overseers 
of this labor-army. The heavy work now done 
by machinery was in those days all done by physical 
strength. In all this Solomon only copied the methods 
of his day which treated the masses of mankind virtually 
as the slaves of the rulers. Besides the forces above 
mentioned, other levies were made for the royal army 
and general service. In the end the Israelites were 
learning under their wisest and greatest King what 
God, through Samuel, the prophet, had forewarned 
them they must expect.— See 1 Samuel 8:18. 

(13) This verse was fulfilled through Jeroboam, who 
had been an officer in Solomon's industrial army. Partly 
from sympathy and largely through ambition, he sought 
to steal the hearts of the people away from Solomon and 
attempted a rebellion in Solomon's day, but contrary to 
the Lord's plan. (1 Kings 11:31.) It was after Solomon's 
death that Jeroboam, allying himself with the ten tribes 
of Israel, aroused a certain amount of animosity by 
pointing out that King Solomon, being of the tribe of 
Judah, had favored that tribe chiefly. He then joined 
with the chief men of the ten tribes in demanding of 
Rehoboam how he would conduct the kingdom, telling 
him that unless he promised reform from his father's 
methods and oppression they would revolt. Rehoboam 
refused to reform and they did revolt, and constituted 
a separate kingdom down to the time of the taking 
away into captivity by the King of Babylon, who took 
first the ten tribes and afterward the two tribes called 



Judah. Since the return from that captivity the distinction 
between Judah and Israel has not been maintained, 
and we find both the Lord and the apostles 
speaking of them, and applying prophecies to them, as 
"the twelve tribes," "the house of Israel," "the 
twelve tribes [a part of whom were] scattered abroad" 
—not ten tribes scattered abroad and two tribes at home 
in their own land, but a part of the twelve tribes in 
Canaan (chiefly Judah), and the remainder of the 
twelve tribes scattered abroad and living in the various 
cities of the Gentiles; as for instance, those at Ephesus, 
Philippi, Corinth, Thessalonica, etc., to whom the 
apostles first preached the gospel when they went with 
it amongst the Gentiles.— Acts 16:13; 17:2,10; 
18:8,19. 

The statement here is that one tribe would be 
given to Solomon's son; and this is entirely consistent 
with the facts, for although sometimes called two tribes, 
yet really the remnant of the tribe of Benjamin (after 
it was almost destroyed) was absorbed into the tribe 
called Judah. 

We may learn from this sad lesson of Solomon's 
fall, that it is not only important to begin life wisely 
in harmony with God, but equally necessary to continue 
it, and to end it so. We may learn also that the 
temptations and trials of life are not upon the young 
only, but rather that the strongest temptations are apt 
to come as we advance in life; and that for these we 
need the preparation of character well begun and cultivated, 
developed, strengthened by experience and 
endurance. 

Another lesson respects the importance of marriage, 
and fully corroborates the Apostle Paul's statement, 
that while marriage is honorable, it should be only "in 
the Lord." Whoever has neglected this advice has 
either rued his neglect or by it has been led so far 
astray as to be unable to appreciate his own decline 
from godliness. Each Christian has in his own fallen 
members quite a sufficient downward tendency to fight 
against, without putting himself directly in the way of 
outside temptation, although he has the Lord's promise 
of grace sufficient for every time of need. If, neglecting 
the Lord's instruction, he surround himself with 
additional downward tendencies, by taking a husband 
or a wife not in the Lord— not seeking chiefly the Kingdom 
of God and setting his affections upon the things 
above, but upon the things beneath— he will surely find 
it greatly to his disadvantage, as did Solomon in the 
taking of foreign wives— aliens to the divine promises 
and blessings, the commonwealth of Israel. 

Another lesson is that wisdom and wealth, education 
and influence and great opportunities are sure to 
become snares and injurious, unless we are continually 
guided in their use by the wisdom which cometh from 
above. And the more of these talents we possess by 
nature or by acquisition, the more need we have for 



the divine grace provided in our Lord Jesus only, the 

more need to study and ponder and practise the exhortations 

to humility and godliness contained in his 

Word, and the more need to make full use of every 

other agency which he has provided for our blessing and 

help— "building one another up in the most holy faith." 



page 281 
VOL. XVII. DECEMBER 1, 1896. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 282 

Worship the Lord in the Beauty 

of holiness. No. 1 283 

The Tests and Privileges of 

Discipleship 287 

Questions of General Interest 290 

"Be Temperate in All Things" 291 

Encouraging Letters 294 

page 282 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R2069 : page 283 

WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS. NO. 1. 



"The hour cometh, and now is, when the true 
worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth; for the Father seeketh 
such to worship him."— John 4:23. 

THESE words of our Lord, it will be remembered, 
were addressed to the woman of Samaria. She had 
found him sitting upon the well, and he had improved 
the opportunity by preaching her a discourse on the 
"water of life." Finally convinced that her teacher 
was no ordinary person, but a "prophet" of extraordinary 
wisdom, she improved the opportunity by asking 



a question which had long been in dispute between the 
Jews and the Samaritans. The Samaritans were a mixed 
people, not of pure Israelitish stock, nor fully conformed 
to all the laws and customs of the Jews. Hence the 
Jews had "no dealings with the Samaritans,"— considering 
them Gentiles. Indeed, our Lord indicated 
that he also esteemed them as Gentiles, outside the 
covenants and promises made to Israel; for we recall 
that when sending forth the disciples to preach the 
Kingdom of heaven at hand, he charged them straightly, 
saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and 
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not;" "I am 
not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." 
-Matt. 10:5; 15:24. 

The disputed question the woman thought she 
could now have answered for her by a truly good prophet, 
who, although a stranger to her, could tell her 
more of her own affairs than she supposed any one 
knew. She would now ask this prophet whether the 
Jews were right or the Samaritans. The Jews claimed 
to be in the Lord's hand, under divine guidance, as the 
seed of Abraham, in preparation as God's instruments 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth; and 
following the divine leading they had at first prepared 
the tabernacle, or the Lord's tent, and afterward the 
temple, or the Lord's house, which they recognized as 
the most appropriate place for worship, and hence, 
wherever they were, they worshiped facing toward the 
temple in Jerusalem, the city of the great King. And 
the pious ones sought to come at least once every year 
to the temple there to present themselves before the 
Lord for his blessing. The Samaritans, on the contrary, 
held that the simplicity of worship observed by 
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob without tabernacle or temple, 
but in the mountain was the proper method of approach 
to God; and they apparently thought that Israel had 
drifted into a mere formalism of worship, and that they, 
the Samaritans, worshiped the Lord with greater acceptance 
than the Jews. This, then, was the important 
question as between Jews and Samaritans, and now 
apparently a most favorable opportunity had come to 
have an authoritative expression upon the subject from 
one whose wisdom in holy things had been demonstrated. 
And so she put the question, Which is the proper 
place to worship, in this mountain where we Samaritans 
worship, or in Jerusalem in the temple where the 
Jews worship? 

Our Lord's answer makes clear two things: (1) 
that up to that time the Jews were right in their place 
and manner of worship— they were in harmony with 
the divine arrangement; their worship was according 
to a knowledge of the divine law. You Samaritans know 
not what you worship, you are guided not by the divine 

R2069 : page 284 



Word, but by your own impressions, while we Jews do 
know what we worship, we are following the divine 
injunctions; for God has ordained that salvation (the 
blessing of mankind through an opportunity of a deliverance 
from the curse, by the promised "seed" of 
Abraham) is to come through the Jews. God prepared 
that nation, its laws and arrangements for the development 
of the Savior. 

Our Lord did not tell the woman that he himself 
was the great Jew, "born under the law" and justified 
by the law, the forepromised and foreshadowed "seed" 
of Abraham through whom the blessings were to come 
to mankind. Nor did he tell her that when he should 
finish his testing and prove himself worthy by obedience 
in the things which he suffered as man's redemption 

R2070 : page 284 

price, he would be the God-seed and Heir of the Abrahamic 
promises, and qualified and empowered to bless 
the world. Neither did he tell her that when glorified 
he would seek a Church as his bride or members of his 
body, to be joint-heirs with him in this work of blessing 
the world, and that to the Jews first would come 
this honor and privilege of sharing his sufferings and 
afterward his glory. Nor did he tell her that only a 
remnant of Israel would esteem the privilege, and that 
the remainder, the great mass, would be blinded for a 
time to spiritual things and rejected from divine favor, 
while that favor would be turned to the Gentiles, including 
the Samaritans, to complete the elect Church, 
the bride, the Lamb's wife. These truths, so forcibly 
set forth by the apostles, were not yet due to be preached 
nor to be understood; nor would they be until our 
Lord had finished his sacrifice and ascended up into 
glory, and presented that sacrifice before the Father as 
the ransom price for the sins of the whole world, and 
until the Father had accepted it, and as a consequence 
shed forth the holy spirit upon the consecrated believers 
in Jesus on the day of Pentecost. Then would 
be the proper time for the riches of divine grace to be 
revealed and for the call to joint-heirship with Christ 
("the mystery which hath been hid from ages"— Col. 1:26,27) 
to be made clearly known. 

But although it was not due time and hence not 
proper to declare that "mystery," it was due time and 
a proper occasion to answer to some extent the honest 
inquiry of the woman respecting the proprieties of worship. 
Hence, while telling her that the Jews had done 
right in the matter of temple worship, he does not advise 
her to become a Jew, but tells her that a change of 
dispensation is at hand and points her to it as the proper 
thing henceforth: The hour is coming, and now is 
(at hand), when neither this mountain nor Jerusalem 
will be favored for worshiping the Father. The new 
dispensation will be a spirit dispensation, and those who 



in that dispensation will draw near to God and be accepted 
of him must worship him in spirit and in truth. 

The Lord does not say that there never had been 
previously true worshipers; quite to the contrary, the 
Scriptures teach that there were holy men of old whose 
prayers were acceptable before God and answered, yet 
they did not "worship in spirit" (for "the holy spirit 
was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified," 
—John 7:39); neither had they worshiped in the 
truth, for the truth would only be revealed by the spirit's 
guiding them into it.— John 14:16,17. 

The fact that we now are granted the "sealing" 
or "adoption" as sons of God, by the holy spirit, and 
a clearer knowledge of the truth as a result, and consequently 
possibilities of a more spiritual and intelligent 
worship, in no sense implies that we are more 
worthy of the favors than were some of the ancient 
worthies. Neither did the giving of the Law to all Israel 
prove that all of that people were more worthy of 
God's favors than some amongst the heathen who were 
left with less advantage every way. (Rom. 3:2.) When 
the due time came to send types of coming favors, God 
chose the nation of Israel as his agent in fore-shadowing 
Gospel blessings which would follow. But as it is 
not the hearer but the doer of a law that is justified by 
it, so it is not the one who has the greater opportunities 
as a worshiper that is blest most, but the one who 
uses his greater privileges and renders worship in accord 
with the spirit and the truth received. 

Indeed, special honor is due to the ancient worthies, 
mentioned by the Apostle in Hebrews 11, who, 
living before the Spirit dispensation commenced, saw 
not the truth, but merely its shadows and types, and 
who nevertheless laid hold upon what they did see with 
such zeal that they were enabled thereby to be faithful, 
even unto death; and who not only thus win our 
admiration, but God's approval;— although "they without 
us [the Christ] should not be made perfect," God 
having provided a "better thing," higher privileges, 
forus.-Heb. 11:40. 

The holy spirit, as heretofore shown,* is the name 
for any divine energy, whatever its manifestation. 
Operating upon the prophets of old, it caused them to 
speak and write the divine Word without comprehending 
the meaning of their own utterances in full, and 
sometimes not even in part. (1 Pet. 1:12.) Nevertheless, 
in obedience they had a blessing, and the people 
who heard with respect and endeavored to render obedience, 
so far as they understood, had a blessing from 
contact with the holy Word and holy power of God 
thus manifested amongst them. Yet the testimony is 
that very generally the people resisted what of the holy 
spirit they did appreciate and come in contact with, 
as the majority do to-day.— Acts 7:51. 



*See our issue of June, '92. 
R2070 : page 285 

Since the great antitypical sacrifice of the Atonement 
has made actual reconciliation for iniquity, it 
made possible the acceptance of consecrated believers 
as sons of God (See John 1:12), and accordingly made 
possible for sons the highest manifestation of the holy 
spirit, as a spirit of adoption, which in due time, the 
Millennial age, shall be poured upon all reconciled to 
God (of all flesh, regardless of national lines), under 
the New Covenant. (Joel 2:28.) During this Gospel 
age, this spirit of adoption is restricted to the class of 
sons, the "brethren" and "joint-heirs" with Christ, 
now being selected, "partakers of the divine nature," 
begotten of the holy spirit as "new creatures." The 
disciples came in contact with the holy spirit in our 
Lord (who had it in fullest measure), and they were 
greatly blessed, because they (except Judas) did not 
resist its influence. Yet our Lord assured them that, 
with all their spiritual advantages, a still greater blessing 
would come to them as the result of his sacrifice 
and its presentation to the Father. He assured them 
that in his name the Father would send them the Comforter, 
the holy spirit, and that they should then have 
more than a contact with it; for it would abide in them. 
Through them it would exert an influence upon others 
(Acts 24:25), but none others than the "sons" could 
receive it, as an indwelling power, nor even become acquainted 
with it, for it is a seal or mark of sonship.— 
John 14:16,17. 

"If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is 
none of his." Those who receive this spirit are to 
grow, by the truth which it enables them to appreciate, 
to the full stature of spiritual development; and to be 
"filled with the spirit" of the truth. From the very 
first these spirit-begotten and instructed ones may come 
with faith and confidence to the throne of grace as 
worshipers, "accepted in the Beloved;" and they 
may continue to grow in divine favor, as with increasing 
knowledge, faith and devotion they follow the 
footsteps of their Lord as worshipers in spirit and in 
truth, whose every act and sentiment is obedience to 
the divine will.— Heb. 4:16. 

The Gentiles up to the beginning of this Gospel age 
had been "without God" and "having no hope in the 
world" (Eph. 2:12), while the Jews, God's favored 
people, to whom he had given the law, and to whom 
"were committed the oracles of God," and who had 
advantages "much every way" (Rom. 3:2), had 
not received the spirit of the truth, the spirit of 
adoption, but had merely in their law and through 
their prophets the shadows of good things coming 
after. Their temple was a typical temple only; 



their priesthood a typical priesthood only; and their 
high priest a typical high priest; their sacrifices were 
but types of the better sacrifices to follow them. 
Their promises were only earthly promises, and 
they at very most merely foreshadowed the heavenly 
promises to the spiritual Israel not yet called. What 
they knew of God outside of these shadows of coming 
mercy and blessing was chiefly his justice and his power. 
They knew little of the love of God, for it had not yet 
been fully revealed; as it is written, "In this was manifested 
the love of God toward us, because that God 
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we 
might live through him."— 1 John 4:9. 

No wonder then that with the love of God, the 
great and all important key to the divine character and 
plan, not yet clearly revealed, and the plan of God for 
human salvation still a "mystery hid," and the sacrifice 
of Christ not yet completed, and the new covenant 
not yet sealed, and the holy spirit not yet given;— no 
wonder that none up to that time except our Lord himself 
had ever worshiped the Father in the full degree 
since made possible to those granted the spirit of adoption 
and a knowledge of the truth. But our Lord declares 
that the Father seeketh no longer the worship 
of blind faith and reverence, nor the worship of forms 
and ceremony however reverential; nor the rent garments 
and prostrate bodies; but he seeks for and will 
now qualify true worshipers with knowledge and the 
spirit, that they may worship him with intelligent appreciation 
and not merely with reverence for his greatness 
and humble appreciation of their own insignificance; 
with bowed knee, but also with bowed heart. 
And more than all this, he seeks those whose worship 
will be not merely because of his power and favor, but 
because of an appreciation, to some extent, of 
the lengths and breadths, the heights and depths of 
the love of God which passeth (human) understanding. 
To this end he has not only provided the ransom 
whereby all the true-hearted may by faith approach 
him under the justification of Christ's imputed righteousness, 
but for such he has also provided the seal of 
sonship, the spirit of adoption, whereby they may 
recognize him, and whereby they may cry to him as a 
Father. And in addition to this, and through this 
agency of the spirit, he has provided that they may 
"know the truth," so that although it is written, 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered 

R2071 : page 285 

into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him," yet "God hath revealed 
them [these hidden things] unto us by his spirit;" for 
the spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep (hidden) 
things of God.-l Cor. 2:9,10. 
It thus appears that it is by reason of the spirit of 



adoption, and through the spirit of adoption, and our 
knowledge of the divine character and plan, that the 
Church during this Gospel age, the real members of the 
body of Christ, are enabled to worship God still more 

R2071 : page 286 

pleasingly than could the ancient worthies. The hour 

came with Pentecost, and the time has continued for 

the past eighteen centuries, in which these sons of God 

(John 1:12) have thus been permitted to worship God 

in spirit and in truth. But, alas! how few even of 

those who have heard the Gospel, how few even of those 

who have named the name of Christ, have by full consecration 

become partakers of the spirit of adoption, and 

then as adopted sons, through intimate fellowship of spirit 

with the Redeemer and with the Father, and through 

the study of the Word of God, have come to that degree 

of development which enables them to worship him in 

harmony with his truth and in the very spirit of it. 

That a worshipful attitude of heart is necessary 
before being introduced to a knowledge of the 
divine plan, and before being begotten by the spirit 
as sons of God, is made very evident by the Lord's 
dealings at the time of the introduction of the new worship 
in spirit and in truth in contrast with the former worship 
in faith, reverence, ceremony and dim knowledge. 

Take, for instance, Nathanael. Notice how our Lord 
addressed him as an Israelite indeed in whom was no 
guile. He was sincere, a true worshiper according to 
the limited light and opportunities of his time; hence 
he was one of the very kind that the Lord sought as 
worshipers in spirit and in truth in the new dispensation. 
Hence, instead of addressing him in parables 
and dark sayings, that hearing he might hear and not 
understand, and seeing he might see and not believe, as 
when he taught the masses, who were not Israelites 
indeed, our Lord on the contrary made very plain to 
Nathanael his supernatural knowledge. And so when 
Nathanael inquired, Why do you, a stranger, speak so 
confidently with reference to my character as an Israelite 
indeed, our Lord answered, "When thou wast 
under the fig tree, I saw thee." We are not informed 
that Nathanael had prayed under the fig tree, but we 
think it not an unreasonable surmise that, having heard 
of Jesus as the Messiah, Nathanael had sought heavenly 
grace and wisdom on that very day just before coming 
to see the Lord. He may indeed have asked for some 
divine instruction and guidance whereby he might be 
kept from deception and might know whether this were 
the very Christ or not. If so, our Lord's words would 
have a hundred fold more significance as the answer 
to his prayer, as a proof that Jesus was to such an 
extent the Father's representative, that even the sacred 
thoughts of his heart were known to him, and that he 
was approved and acceptable as an earnest seeker for 



the truth, and Israelite indeed. Nothing further of Nathanael's 

life is furnished us in the history but our 

Lord's testimony to his real heart character. We may 

safely assume that he was one of the "five hundred 

brethren" privileged to see the Lord after his resurrection, 

that he was one of those who waited in the 

upper room for the Pentecostal blessing; that thus 

from being a member of the house of servants under 

Moses he became a member of the house of sons under 

Christ (Heb. 3:5,6); that having been begotten of 

the spirit he might progress in the knowledge of the 

truth, growing from a "babe in Christ" to the "stature 

of a man" in grace and knowledge; that meanwhile 

from the beginning of his experience as a new 

creature in Christ Jesus (as a babe in Christ) he was 

privileged to worship God in spirit and in truth, and 

that this worship grew and became more and more 

complete as he neared the "stature of a man in Christ." 

Another illustration about that same time was Cornelius. 
As the Centurion whose servant was sick, he 
had already manifested faith in the Lord Jesus to such 
an extent that our Lord said of him, "I have not found 
so great faith, no, not in Israel." The testimony respecting 
him was, that he was a just man, that he 
feared God, that he prayed and that he had been kind 
to God's people. More could not be said of him as a 
worshiper of God because, first, he was a Gentile without 
God and having no hope in the world; secondly, he 
had neither the truth nor the spirit of the truth which 
would have permitted him to offer any higher worship 
than that of fear and obedience. But we note how the 
Lord marked such characters not only in Israel but 
outside of Israel; and when the time was fully come 
(at the end of the seventy weeks of special favor to Israel- 
three and one-half years after the cross), when 
the time came that the Gospel might be preached to 
the whole world for a witness, and the barrier between 
Jews and Gentiles was broken down, this same man, 
Cornelius, who worshiped to the best of his knowledge, 
was the first one to be favored outside of Israel. Although 
he prayed, gave much alms, feared God, 
and was just, yet before he could be called and accepted 
of the Lord or become a worshiper of the kind 
the Lord seeketh to worship him, he must be instructed 
—he must have the truth, and he must have the 
spirit of the truth. Hence by divine direction he 
sent men to Joppa to call for Simon, whose surname 
is Peter; who shall tell thee words whereby thou and 
all thy house shall be saved. (Acts 11:13-16.) He 
obeyed, he heard the words of eternal life, "the truth," 
he was ready for it and believed, and God immediately 
sealed him with the spirit of adoption as one of the sons 
of God. Then, as a spiritual "babe in Christ," being instructed 
in the truth and sealed by its spirit, he became 
a worshiper of God in spirit and in truth; and we doubt 
not he continued to grow in grace and knowledge, and 



consequently to grow more and more to worship the 
Lord in the beauty of holiness. 
Another worshiper of God under the Law according 

R2071 : page 287 

to the shadow of good things to come, but not a 
worshiper in spirit and in the truth, because not possessed 
of the truth nor sealed by the spirit, was Lydia, a business 
woman to whom the Apostle Paul was directed 
soon after his arrival at the city of Philippi. Being a 
true worshiper according to her past opportunities, she 
was ripe for the truth. While other ears were closed 
to it, she heard the Gospel; while other hearts were 
unmoved by it, God "opened her heart," already consecrated 
and waiting, and thus she was received into 
the house of sons and became a worshiper in the truth 
and in its spirit.— Acts 16:14. 

We might mention also Justus, who as a believer 
entertained Paul at Corinth, of whom it is declared 
that he "worshiped God," and who on this account 
was esteemed worthy of the truth and its spirit and its 
privileges.— Acts 18:7. 

Indeed, in our Lord's declaration, "The Father 
seeketh such to worship him as worship him in spirit 
and in truth," we see that the whole mission of the 
Gospel may be properly understood to be for the purpose 
of seeking out from amongst mankind in general 
these true worshipers; and, properly enough, the early 
ministers of the Gospel sought first those who 
seemed to be earnest worshipers, and the message 
which they bore became a test to those who heard it, 
separating between the worshipers in form and those 
who truly and reverentially sought the Lord. Thus 
the Apostle Paul's ministry was summed up by his accusers 
in these words: "This fellow persuadeth men to 
worship God contrary to the law.— Acts 18:13. 

Worship in spirit and in truth does not apply simply 
to prayer, praise, supplication and thanksgiving. It 
goes deeper than all these and takes hold upon the affections, 
upon the heart, and hence signifies not an "act 
of worship" but rather a life of worship— a life in 
which, through the begetting of the spirit and the 
knowledge of the divine plan, the individual becomes so 
at-one with God and so in unison with the law of God 
and all the features of the plan of God that it is, in the 
words of our Lord, his meat and his drink to do the 
Father's will. This is worship in spirit and in truth. 
It will find its expression in bended knee and in orderly 
and reverential demeanor in approach to God in personal 
prayer, in family prayer and in company with 
the household of faith; and it will find its expression 
also in all the acts and words of life. The captivated 
heart will seek to bring every talent of the body into 
complete subjection to the will of God and of Christ. 
The whole of this is the worship which God seeketh; 



and, surely, only those who are thus captivated to the 
Lord in heart, and who serve him in spirit and in truth 
and endeavor to have his will done in their hearts, 
words and conduct, are in the full sense the true 
worshipers whom the Lord seeketh; the "little flock," 
the faithful "royal priesthood." 



R2071 : page 287 
THE TESTS AND PRIVILEGES OF DISCIPLESHIP. 



"So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not 
all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple."— Luke 14:33. 

TO be a disciple of Christ signifies much more, 
both in the way of responsibility and of advantage, 
than many seem to think. Our Lord's words 
are very explicit in defining the terms of discipleship 
to be nothing less than a full, complete consecration of 

R2072 : page 287 

all that we have and are to him who has bought us 

with his own precious blood. It must be a consecration 

to daily crossbearing and to following in the footsteps 

of Christ, even unto death. Hear the terms: "If 

any man come to me, and hate not [love not less] his 

father and mother and wife and children and brethren 

and sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot be 

my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross, 

and come after me, cannot be my disciple;" and "whosoever 

he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, 

he cannot be my disciple." 

The terms are too plain to be misunderstood. They 
signify nothing less than, as Paul expresses it, the presenting 
of our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable 
to God, which is our reasonable service. (Rom. 12:1.) 
No one of those failing to do this is recognized 
of the Lord as his disciple, or enjoys the privileges of 
that relationship; and, further, only those who do 
this intelligently and freely are accepted of him. 

That the Lord would not have any one take upon 
himself the responsibilities of this relationship without 
due deliberation and forethought, is shown by his reasoning 
on the subject, saying, "For which of you, intending 
to build a tower, sitteth not down first and 
counteth the cost, whether he hath sufficient to finish 
it? lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is 
not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock 
him, saying, This man began to build, and was not able 
to finish. Or what king, going to make war against another 
king, sitteth not down first and consulteth whether he 



be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh 
against him with twenty thousand. And if not, while 
the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an embassage 
and desireth conditions of peace."— Luke 14:28-32. 

Again, when the two brethren, James and John, desired 
to be very near the Lord in the coming Kingdom, 
the Lord endeavored to impress upon them the consecration 

R2072 : page 288 

that such a proposition would involve; and from 
the few recorded words we gather the drift of the more 
extended conversation. "Jesus answered and said, Ye 
know not what ye ask." At that time they could form 
no idea of the blessedness of being joined with Christ 
in his Kingdom and glory, to sit with him in his throne 
and to reign with him as his bride and joint-heir. They 
only knew that they loved the Lord, and that it would 
be blessed to be forever in his immediate presence and 
favor. "Are ye able," said he, "to drink of the cup 
that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism 
that I am baptized with?" That baptism signified 
the complete surrender of self to God at any cost 
of privation or suffering, even unto death. And, with 
this understanding, they replied,— "We are able." So 
great was their faith in and love for the Lord that they 
were willing to follow in his footprints of suffering. 
Then the Lord accepted their consecration, saying,— 
"Ye shall indeed drink of my cup, and be baptized 
with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit 
on my right hand and on my left [to be associated thus 
intimately with me in my throne] is not mine to give; 
but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared 
of my Father." (Matt. 20:22,23.) From his subsequent 
teaching through the apostles we learn that this 
position is reserved of the Father for the overcomers 
of the Gospel age then beginning; and therefore, at 
that time, it yet remained to be proved whether these 
would be faithful to their covenant. 

While the terms of discipleship are thus explicit, 
the advantages are none the less so. To the disciples 
belong the special teaching, training and discipline of 
the holy spirit given unto them as the seal of 
divine sonship, and all the exceeding great and 
precious promises of the gospel. While our Lord 
did much public teaching, his special attention was always 
given to his consecrated disciples. Of this class 
were the twelve apostles and others, but few of whose 
names have come down to us. Such, for instance, 
were the company present in the mount of prayer where 
the Lord solemnly set apart the twelve to be his apostles 
(Luke 6:13); also the seventy whom he sent out 
two and two before his face, and who returned again 
with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto 
us through thy name, and to whom the Lord replied, 
"Behold, I give you power to tread on serpents 



and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy; 

and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, 

in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject 

unto you; but rather rejoice because your names 

are written in heaven." (Luke 10:1,17,19,20.) Such 

also apparently were Martha and Mary and Lazarus, 

and the women who were last at the cross and first at 

the sepulcher, and Joseph of Arimathea (Matt. 27:57), 

and the five hundred brethren of whom our Lord was 

seen after his resurrection.— 1 Cor. 15:5,6. 

These disciples all had the Lord's special love, fellowship 
and instruction; but the twelve apostles were 
the more constantly under his instruction in view of 
the work that was to be specially committed to them 
for the benefit of all the other disciples, both of that 
time and subsequently. 

Notice also that the several apostolic epistles as 
well as the revelations of the Apocalypse are addressed 
in harmony with these conditions of discipleship. 

It is for this consecrated class alone that the gospel 
feast (Isa. 55:1-3) is spread— the children's table. 
To this class the Prophet Isaiah (8: 16) also refers, 
saying, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law among 
my disciples." Yet from the children's table some 
crumbs of comfort may and do fall to others. Aside 
from this disciple class in our Lord's day was a great 
multitude who marvelled at his words, who believed, 
and who said, This must be the Christ, Hosannah to 
the Son of David! When Messiah comes will he do 
greater works than these?— whose sick were healed, 
and who were fed by the miraculous loaves and fishes 
in the wilderness. Yet these multitudes were weak in 
faith and fickle-minded. They were not committed to 
a definite purpose as disciples of Christ, and consequently 
they were swayed back and forth by the stronger 
wills of their leaders. They feared to trust fully to the 
divine testimonials of Christ when their leaders taught 
them to the contrary. But in their hearts many hoped 
this might be the Messiah, and several times they were 
on the point of taking him by force to make him their 
King. Yet they never came to the positiveness of conviction 
and trust in Christ which would lead to their 
espousing his cause fully at all hazards and thus becoming 
his disciples. Consequently, such never had 
the privileges of discipleship, and soon they became 
partakers in the national sin of rejecting Christ, either 
openly, or by that silence which implied consent. 

What, we may inquire, was the Lord's attitude toward 
this great multitude whose faith had not brought 
them to the point of discipleship, but who nevertheless 
believed on him? Matthew (9:36) says he had pity on 
them because they were like sheep without a shepherd. 
They were sheeplike in many respects, but they were 
not yet his sheep: they were not yet fully persuaded 
to follow his leading, though they liked his voice, and 
some said, "Never man spake like this man." They 



followed him afar off, with uncertain steps and crooked 
paths, not fully determined to walk by faith, but desiring 
the (to them) stronger evidence of sight concerning 
his Kingdom and general teachings. Yet they 
had for a time some benefits from following Christ, even 
thus afar off: they had some faith, and consequently 

R2072 : page 289 

some hope, some love and some of the joy and peace 
that naturally flow from these. They also witnessed 
and realized some of the healing and teaching and many 
of the loving ministries of the blessed Lord. But because 
they did not improve these advantages and follow 
on to know the Lord, but weakly or indifferently followed 
their prejudice-blinded guides, not turning to the 
law and to the testimony of the prophets to see if they 
spoke according to that word, it was not long before 
they were all involved in the sin of their leaders, and 
with them they stumbled into the ditch of unbelief 
and of great tribulation, and were blinded to the privileges 
and blessings of the gospel, and lost them. But, 
nevertheless, the Lord will yet have mercy upon them, 
and his favor will return to them after the full number 
from among the Gentiles shall have come in to the 
chief place of favor which Israel failed to obtain through 
unbelief. --Rom. 11:1,2,23. 

In like manner also many sheep from among the 
Gentiles may lose their high privileges, if they walk 
not by faith. The Apostle Paul warns them against a 
similar stumbling through unbelief, saying,— "Be not 
highminded, but fear." A similar class all through 
this age has been brought under the influence of the 
gospel, and has similarly responded to it, and yet 
failed of discipleship. They have believed in Christ 
and have followed him afar off, and have been variously 
swayed by other influences than the Shepherd's voice. 
They have had some crumbs of comfort from the "children's 
table"— some faith, hope and love and some 
joy and peace in believing in the redemption provided 
for all in Christ Jesus. They have enjoyed some of the 
healing influences of the gospel as it has enabled them 
to cast off many of the old sins, and they have had 
some of the teaching and loving ministries of the saints, 
the Lord's body. They, like the multitudes in Christ's 
day, are not unbelievers; nor are they believers in the 
full sense, in the sense of that implicit confidence that 
freely ventures a full consecration— the sense of discipleship. 
They are not anchored and steadfast, but are 
easily swayed by leaders and by their own unstable 
minds. They like to company with the saints for the 
crumbs of comfort they receive, and also because they 
appreciate the righteousness of the saints, although 
they do not walk wholly with them; and they often 

R2073 : page 289 



give them the cup of cold water (some word or look or 
act of encouragement) because they are the Lord's disciples 
and are self-sacrificingly engaged in his service. 

Such are not the enemies of the Lord, nor can 
they be regarded as his disciples in the full sense. Yet, 
in so far as they have advanced toward Christ, they 
have not been repelled by him. So also the true disciples 
of Christ do not repel even the weakest inquirers 
and feelers after God. "Him that is weak in the faith 
receive ye," says the Apostle, "but not to doubtful 
disputations:" receive such to do them good. And 
"him that cometh unto me," said Jesus, "I will in no 
wise cast out." Again it is written, "A bruised reed 
will he not break, and smoking flax will he not quench." 
If there be but a little kindling of the fire of true devotion 
to God and to his truth and righteousness, the 
spirit of God will operate upon it and endeavor to fan 
it into a flame as long as such continue to come under 
the influences of divine grace by companying with the 
full disciples of the Lord. 

That there is, and always has been, quite a large 
class of such as these, companying with the saints, the 
full disciples of Christ, is manifest. And not only so, but 
such were the disciples also before they came to that 
fulness of intelligent consecration which meets the requirements 
of full discipleship. Indeed, the first coming 
to Christ is infantile in every respect; and not until 
we have passed the infantile stage and have been developed 
somewhat in Christian character can we intelligently 
comprehend and comply with the Lord's terms 
of full discipleship. 

When, by the grace of God, we have been led of 
his spirit to a clear apprehension of the privileges and 
terms of full and continued discipleship, if we draw 
back and fail to go forward, we lose our standing as 
disciples. But if, notwithstanding the difficulties that 
seem to obstruct our way, we meekly bow to the will 
of Christ, being constrained by the love of Christ to 
follow on, we shall receive more and more of the fullness 
of his grace, until, like Paul, in a blessed consciousness 
of the all-sufficiency of that grace, we can say, 
"I can do all things through Christ, who strengtheneth 
me." 

Happy and blessed, indeed, is he who thus follows 
on in the course of a true disciple of Christ; who, in 
love and faithfulness, quietly takes up the daily cross 
and bears it without complaint, remembering that the 
servant is not greater than his Lord, and esteeming it 
a privilege thus to have fellowship with him now in 
his sufferings and to be disciplined and trained thereby 
for the higher fellowship with him in the glory that 
shall follow. 

Such faithful disciples the Lord declares to be, 
even now, the very salt of the earth— a healthful, 
cleansing, preserving element in the midst of a world 



of moral decay and sinful pollution. In reference again 

to the same symbol and its peculiar fitness to his true 

disciples, Jesus here, after describing the terms of discipleship, 

adds, "Salt is good; but if the salt should 

become insipid, how shall it recover its savor?" "It is 

thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to 

be trodden under foot of men."— Luke 14:33-35; 

Matt. 5:13. 

R2073 : page 290 

Good-for-nothing, unsavory salt! castaways from 
divine favor, and left to be trodden under foot of men! 
branches cut off from the vine to wither and dry for 
the burning (destruction)!— such is the picture which 
the Lord gives of the sad end of those who draw back 
from their discipleship in the school of Christ. Paul 
also expresses the same thought, but in plain, non-symbolic 
terms, saying, "If any man draw back [not if he 
merely slip through weakness of the flesh under the 
power of temptation, which may indeed be followed by 
a godly sorrow that worketh repentance, but if he wilfully 
and deliberately draw back, loving sin and doing 
despite to the spirit of favor,— returning again like the 
sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire— if 
any man so draw back] my soul shall have no pleasure in 
him." The Apostle then shows what all such draw 
back to, when, encouraging all to faithfulness, he adds, 
"But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition 
[destruction], but of them that believe to the saving of 
the soul."-Heb. 10:38,39. 

Beloved called ones, hearken to the Master's words: 
"He that hath ears to hear, let him hear!" You may 
indeed be weary in well doing because of the reproaches 
of them that are without the pale of discipleship; 
temptations, violent or subtle, may press hard upon 
you; trials and cares may sorely afflict you; but we 
bring you these blessed words of cheer from the Word 
of the Lord:— "Have faith in God;" "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even your faith." 
"Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth 
that Jesus is the Son of God [the divinely appointed 
Redeemer, Leader and Teacher of his people]?" 
"Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which hath 
great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, 
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might 
receive the promise." "In your patience possess ye 
your souls." "Wait on the Lord; be of good courage, 
and he shall strengthen thine heart." "Be of good 
cheer, I have overcome the world," said Jesus; and 
Paul adds, "In that he himself hath suffered, being 
tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted." 
Therefore, "let us not be weary in well-doing; for in 
due season we shall reap if we faint not." "Fear not, 
little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give 
you the Kingdom. "-Mark 11:22; 1 John 5:4,5; Heb. 10:35,36; 



Luke 21:19; Psa. 27:13,14; John 16:33; 
Heb. 2:18; Gal. 6:9; Luke 12:32. 

Let us, then, in view of these precious promises, 
"gird up the loins of our mind, be sober, and hope to 
the end for the grace that is to be brought unto us at 
the revelation of Jesus Christ"— at the establishment 
of his Kingdom and his revealing in glory and power. 
God will work in us to will and to do all his good pleasure, 
if we patiently submit to the transforming influences 
of his grace. The tests of discipleship come to 
us every day, saying, This is the way: walk ye in it. 
It is the narrow way of self-denial, of cross-bearing, 
and of diligent, patient, faithful service to God. But 
who that has trod this narrow way has not been made 
to rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory in 
realizing the presence and favor of God and in communion 
with our Father and our Lord and with the 
faithful in Christ Jesus?— truly a joy which the world 
can neither give nor take away. 

MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2075 : page 290 

QUESTIONS OF GENERAL INTEREST. 



Question. Please state whether you consider as 
typical the seven years of plenty and the seven years 
of famine in Joseph's time, and their significance in relation 
to the events of the next few years. There are 
some passages of Scripture which seem to indicate that 
there will be a period of prosperity prior to the breaking 
forth of the divine wrath. 

Answer. We are inclined to think that the seven 
years of plenty and seven years of famine were typical: 
but it had not occurred to us (as you suggest) that the 
antitype would be like the type. We incline rather to 
the opinion that the seven years of plenty represent the 
grace and bounty of God in Christ laid up in the present 
time, and that the years of famine represent the Millennial 
age in which the world (perhaps the majority) 
will come to hunger after righteousness and find none 
except that which the antitype of Joseph (Christ) 
possesses and controls in the name of the great 
King. 

And the selling by the Egyptians of their goods and 
themselves to the king through Joseph, in order to obtain 
food, we would understand to typify the consecration 
of the above mentioned of mankind, of themselves 
and all they have to Christ, if they would obtain 
the bread of eternal life.— See Gen. 41:54-56; 
47:13-25. 

Question. Is heaven a place or a condition? If a 



place, where is it? 

Answer. While it is true that beings might be in 
a heavenly condition; that is, spiritual and invisible to 
human sight, and yet be near us who are in the flesh; and 
while we believe that is the condition in which our Lord 
is now present, a spiritual or heavenly being, we could 
not agree that heaven is only a condition; it must also 

R2075 : page 291 

be a place, just as truly as the earth is a place. The 
most reasonable suggestion we know of is that offered 
in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., page 327; namely, 
that heaven is located in or in connection with the 
heavenly group, Pleiades. 

In evidence that heaven is a place and at a distance 
from the earth, and that it requires time to go and 
come, notice the fact that our Lord said that he 
would "go away" and "come again." This could not 
be true if to go to heaven means merely a change from 
human conditions to spiritual conditions, because he 
will never come again to human conditions. He took 
upon him the form of a servant, and was made a little 
lower than the angels, for the suffering of death... 
that he by the grace of God should taste death for every 
man. (Heb. 2:9.) He has finished that work and 
has no further use for the body of humiliation and has 
been glorified; and is the express image of the Father's 
person. 

Again our Lord says in the parable that the Nobleman 
went away to a far country.— Luke 19:12. 

Again we are informed that the holy Spirit was 
not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified (John 7:39), 
indicating that as soon as Jesus would be glorified 
the holy Spirit would be given to the waiting 
Church. And we know that from the time our Lord 
ascended up on high until the descent of the holy Spirit 
was ten days. 



R2073 : page 291 

"BE TEMPERATE IN ALL THINGS." 

-DEC. 13. -PROVERBS 23:15-25.- 

"For the drunkard and the glutton 
shall come to poverty."— Prov. 23:21. 

HAVING found a lesson for the old in the experience 
of Solomon and his alienation from 
God in old age, we come in this lesson to the words of 
wise instruction to the young. 

(15,16) The exhortation is that of a parent or a 
teacher who has had experience in life and who fain 



would be helpful through advice to one starting upon 

life's pathway. Knowledge of good and evil may reach 

us either through the instruction of those who have 

already profited by either or both of these. To profit 

by instruction is indeed an evidence of wisdom. The 

"prudent [wise] man foreseeth the evil, and hideth 

himself; but the simple [foolish] pass on, and are punished. 

(Prov. 22:3.) We see folly in this respect 

repeated every day. Those who profit by the experiences 

of others either through instruction or observation 

are the smaller number, but they are the wise 

ones. The majority must gain their wisdom through 

severe experience— punishment for errors, for rashness, 

for lack of observing the natural laws of cause 

and effect. Since they will not learn through instruction 

that whatsoever a man soweth the like shall he also 

reap, they must learn this lesson through bitter experience. 

The lessons of wisdom learned, no matter in 

which school, the school of instruction or the school of 

experience, are valuable, and ultimately, we believe, 

will be profitable to the majority of our race. Ultimately 

all shall learn that peace, joy, divine favor, including 

everlasting life, can be had only by walking in 

the way of truth, honesty, righteousness— the godly way. 

A GOOD WAY. 



This lesson seems to picture before our minds a 
youth starting upon life's journey where two roads 
meet; the one an upward road, an honorable course of 
morality, prudence, self-control, patience, perseverance, 
righteousness; the other path a downward road, 
a way of gratification of the depraved tastes and appetites 
of the fallen human nature, a way of apparent 
ease, of carelessness for the truth and for honesty and 
self-restraint, a way of loose liberty, a way that leads 
into intemperance of language, of thought, of conduct, 
of food and of drink; and which leads on to further 
degradation and dishonor. 

The voice of wisdom is heard by nearly every 
young man and woman starting in life, directing them 
to the upward and honorable path; it reaches them 
either through parents or instructors or friends or observation. 
The smaller number, however, are wise 
enough to accept heartily the instruction and so to 
avoid the downward path entirely. The vast majority 
desire the pleasures of sin for a season at least. They 

R2074: page 291 

have no thought of going onward in the path of sin, 
but merely to remain near by the noble path of morality 
and honesty and truth. They do not realize that 
each step in the downward road away from the path of 



righteousness will cause their hearts to lose appreciation 
of righteousness and to become inured to sin. Very 
few, therefore, accept the lessons of wisdom promptly 
and heartily, and act thereon. There will indeed be 
opportunities farther down the journey of life to leave 
the downward way and to seek the upward path, but 
they will be much more difficult than at the beginning, 
at the parting of the way in youth— more difficult because 
the downward path has been leading their characters 
and sensibilities farther and farther away from 
the way of morality and honesty. 
(17,18,19) There may be times when those who 

R2074 : page 292 

walk in the way of wisdom may seem to see disadvantages 

therein, and pleasures in the way of sensualities; 

but the voice of wisdom instructs such to 

look beyond and consider the full end of the downward 

way, to respect the Lord and seek to walk honestly 

and uprightly, assured that the end of this course will 

eventually be better than the other. "Hear thou, my 

son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the [good] 

way." 

(20,21) Statistics show that hundreds of millions 
of dollars are spent every year for intoxicating liquors, 
which not only fail to profit the users, but which do 
others as well as themselves serious injury— mental, 
moral and physical. How many have been brought 
to poverty through intoxicants! And, to our shame 
be it said, this sin against self and manhood is more 
common in the civilized or so called Christian nations 
than in some others. 

The sin of gluttony leads usually to another kind 
of poverty. The poor may become sotted with drink, 
but rarely can they afford to be gluttonous. Gluttony 
is chiefly, therefore, a sin of the rich or well-to-do. It 
leads to poverty of both mental and physical strength. 
It is as truly intemperance as drunkenness, although 
not so far reaching in its bad influence. 

The lesson speaks of the intemperance and impropriety 
of sloth, or idleness, or lack of energy; and the 
observation of every wise man proves that true happiness 
is associated with energy— mental and physical 
activity. "Not slothful in business," is one of the 
characteristics of a Christian, as set forth by the Apostle. 
We live in a day, however, in which another form 
of intemperance prevails in an opposite direction with 
not a few— intemperance in energy and ambition; a 
consuming desire for honors or wealth, that robs many, 
not only of proper social enjoyments, but, more important 
still, of spiritual privileges and joys. 

(22,23) True wisdom will never despise the 
counsel of the aged, especially from parents, of 
whose interest in the child's welfare there can rarely be 
doubt. It is one of the peculiarities and difficulties of 



our day that because of the sudden increase in knowledge 

and educational facilities the young have in many 

departments of knowledge outstripped their seniors. 

The resultant tendency is disrespect for the experiences 

and advice of parents and seniors, and a disposition 

to be heady, high-minded, unthankful, unholy, disobedient 

to parents and other like disgraces foretold by 

the Apostle as features of our day. (See 2 Tim. 3:4.) 

On this account additional wisdom and great patience 

are needful on the part of parents and all instructors of 

the young. Recognizing the influences which counteract 

parental instruction, and recognizing the fact 

that the children may be in advance in some points, 

the wise parent should seek to set a good example in 

proper childlikeness himself, and be ready to learn from 

and with the children along the lines of their superior 

advantages, explaining that the present increase of 

opportunities for knowledge are phenomenal, and not 

of men but of God, as foretold by the prophet respecting 

the "time of the end." (Dan. 12:4.) By this 

course of honesty and wisdom the parent will maintain 

the confidence of his child, who will then be the better 

prepared to learn in turn along the lines of the parent's 

experiences in life and respecting principles of morality 

and the evil tendencies of immorality. Thus wisdom 

in the parents has very much to do with the choice 

of wisdom by the child. One of the chief lessons to be 

inculcated is, that truth is precious above all things— 

with reference to the ordinary affairs of life and dealings 

between men, with reference to spiritual things, 

with reference to God, and with reference to the divine 

plan. Truth is to be prized, and those who love and 

practice the truth are to be esteemed, and such only; 

error, falsehood, no matter how gaudy or showy or attractive, 

is to be disdained and repudiated. This is in 

harmony with our Lord's prayer, "Sanctify them 

[i.e., separate them from the evil and set them apart 

for good] through thy truth: thy Word is truth." 

(24,25) These verses suggest, and properly, that 
wisdom in the young does not depend wholly on inculcation, 
instruction. Probably the majority of wise 
children are born wise. "He that begetteth a wise 
child shall have joy of him." If parents in general 
could realize the importance of the parental office and 
the bearing of their own characters and sentiments 
upon their offspring, laying the foundations for good 
and wise characters before the children are born, the 
responsibilities of their position and relationship would, 
we believe, not only favorably influence their children, 
but help also to develop positive character in 
themselves. 

The parents who have failed to discern the laws 
of nature under whose control they have brought forth 
children; and whose children therefore reflect the parental 
unwisdom and unsettledness of character, have 
in consequence double reason for exercising patience 



toward the unwisdom of their offspring, and double 
reason for perseverance in their later efforts to correct 
that unwisdom and to lead their children into right 
ways. 

A STILL MORE EXCELLENT WAY. 



It should be carefully observed that the way of 
morality, temperance, moderation and wisdom above 
set forth, although a commendable way, is not 
the way in which the Christian of this Gospel age 
is invited to walk, in the footsteps of his Lord, to 

R2074 : page 293 

attain glory, honor, immortality and a share in the 
heavenly Kingdom as one of the kings and priests. 
(Luke 13:24; 12:32; Rev. 5:10; 20:6; Rom. 8:17.) 
The foregoing is sound advice for all, and none should 
be more quick to follow it than the consecrated, the 
"new creatures in Christ Jesus." But the "Narrow Way" 
of self-denial and self-sacrifice marked out in the New 
Testament is the pathway of those who would win the 
prize of the high calling to joint heirship with Christ 
as his Church, his Bride. 

All sensible people commend the path of temperance 
and morality above set forth, but few appreciate 
or commend the "narrow way" in which the Church 
is called as the bride to follow the Lord, her Bridegroom. 
The narrow way is foolishness to the world, 
neither can the worldly appreciate it, because its value 
must be spiritually discerned. (1 Cor. 2:7-16.) The 
wisdom that indicates and approves the narrow way of 
self-sacrifice is an inspired or begotten wisdom which 
cometh from above only to the consecrated, the spirit-begotten. 
It is inspired, not by earthly hopes or aims 
or promises or ambitions, but by "exceeding great and 
precious promises," "heavenly promises," of an inheritance 
incorruptible, undefiled and unfading, which the 
earthly eye has not seen, which the earthly ear has not 
heard and which has not been appreciated by the heart 
of the wisest of men. To so great an extent is this 
true that in the estimation of the worldly the way 
of the fully consecrated seems foolishness. In view of 
this the Apostle declares that as the world does not 
know the Lord, and does not understand his plan, 
which is higher than the world's conception as the 
heavens are higher than the earth (Isa. 55:9), so the 
worldly do not understand the true Church; and as the 
Apostle said, "We [who walk the "narrow way"] are 
counted fools all the day long,"— harmless but "peculiar 
people." The moving impulses which help us 
in this "narrow way" were only received after we believed 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, when we made full consecration 



of ourselves to the Lord and received the 

spirit of adoption into his family. Then, because children 

of God, we received his spirit and were privileged 

to know more and more of "the mystery of his will," 

"the hidden mystery" (Eph. 3:9; 1:9), to appreciate 

the divine plan in harmony with which (and in harmony 

with our consecration) we have joy in spending our 

lives, in "laying down our lives," in faithfulness in the 

service of the Lord; in the calling and perfecting of 

his saints to be the first fruits of the salvation purchased 

by the Redeemer. 

Those who have received this special sealing of 
heavenly wisdom, and who are walking this "narrow 
way" of full consecration to the Lord, although counted 
"fools," are the truly wise referred to throughout 
the Scriptures:— "the wise virgins," "the wise shall 
understand," "the wise shall shine as the brightness 
of the firmament." They who attain to this wisdom 
and this relationship to Christ do so at the expense of 
earthly reputation, as the Apostle declares: "If any 
man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let 
him become a fool [according to the earthly standard], 
that he may be wise."— 1 Cor. 3:18. 

Once when we misunderstood the divine arrangement, 
and did not see that the "little flock" is to be a 
"kind of first fruits unto God of his creatures" (James 1:18), 
but supposed that the "little flock" who walked 
the "narrow way" of self-sacrifice would be the only 
ones to receive any measure of divine favor hereafter, 
that all others would suffer some kind of awful punishment, 

R2075 : page 293 

because they did not walk in the "narrow way" 
which few of them saw and which still fewer of them 
were able to appreciate, it perplexed us greatly; as it 
still perplexes the majority of Christian people. Thank 
God that we now see in his Word the clear instruction 
that when this "little flock" shall have been selected 
and rewarded with joint-heirship with Christ in the 
Millennial Kingdom, then the "narrow way," will have 
ceased and another way, "a highway" shall there be 
opened up— a way in which the human family as a 
whole shall be invited to return to harmony with God 
and righteousness through the Great Mediator and under 
the terms of the New Covenant sealed with his 
precious blood. It will not be a downward way like 
the way of sin in the present time, but an upward way. 
"The redeemed of the Lord shall go up thereon." It 
will not be a narrow way, that few can find, but a 
"highway," from which the stumbling blocks of temptation 
will be removed, and on which the ravenous 
beasts of evil and temptation will not be permitted.*— 
Isa. 35:8,9. 

We can thus see that, while a life of honesty and 
morality will not fill the requirements of the "high 



calling" of this Gospel age to joint-heirship as the 
bride, the lamb's wife, yet those who during this present 
time seek to live soberly, justly, truthfully, morally, 
and who thereby develop character, will be much 
in advance of the besotted and degraded of mankind 
(who gratify instead of restraining the fallen tendencies 
of their nature), when the new age shall open up 
in which all the families of the earth shall be blessed by 
the great "Seed of Abraham," Christ and his Church, 
the bride.-Gal. 3:16,29. 

The call of wisdom to the way of honesty, morality, 
etc., has been heard and to some extent followed 
by heathen as well as civilized people; by unbelievers 
as well as by those who have heard of Christ; and to some 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., Chap. II. 

R2075 : page 294 

extent they have profited by his teachings, and all who 
walk in this, the way of wisdom, secure blessings both 
for the present life and also a preparation for the future 
blessings promised. But the "narrow way," pointed 
out to some by the still higher wisdom, is found by none 
of the heathen; Christ is the Door, the Gate, to this 
"narrow way," and it has but one, which opens to believers 
only. Although it is not merely a way of morality, 
but a way of consecration and sacrifice, nevertheless 
it includes morality in every respect, and to a 
higher degree than the unconsecrated generally recognizes. 
Those who are on the "narrow way" are required 
to consecrate their all, including their wills, 
and to receive instead the will of their Lord and Head, 
and to operate in harmony with that will. And since 
Christ's will is perfect in righteousness, truth, purity 
and goodness, all who walk in his will must walk as 
closely as the weakness of their flesh will permit after 
the spirit, after the will of their Head, and not after 
the will of the flesh. 



R2075 : page 294 

ENCOURAGING LETTERS. 



The following, received July 24, '96, will be encouraging 
to those who sometimes see little result from 
tract distribution. It shows that immediate results may 
follow in the experience of the recipient of the tract, 
though they may not be apparent for many months. 



Florida. 

GENTLEMEN: --In 1894, while attending the C.E. 
Convention at Cleveland, Ohio, your tract "Do You 
Know?" fell into my hands. I was much interested 
in it, and have often thought of writing for further information; 
but for sundry causes have delayed. Have 
been much interested in reading and studying the prophecies 
since reading your tract; but feel the need of 
some help and guides. What can you do to help me? 
What is the "Chart of the Ages" spoken of in the 
tract? and what does it cost, etc.? Any information 
or helps will be thankfully received. 

Yours in Him, 



Kentucky. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We had a good meeting 
Saturday afternoon with about 75 people present. 
Yesterday we held two meetings in an old church building, 
about twenty miles from here, with an attendance 
of over one hundred. Since coming here one week ago 
fourteen meetings have been held, three in private 
houses and eleven in public buildings. Some drove 
over fifteen miles to the meeting yesterday. I send a 
number of names for sample TOWERS. 

I had a very peculiar experience in county, 

a mountain district, where the people think nothing of 
using pistols, and where the prejudice against the truth 
was very strong. 

Brother had spoken to one of the leaders in 

the Christian Church; he told him we would use the 
building Saturday evening; and it was so published. 
The Methodists held a meeting in a Baptist church 
building that evening, and the Christian friends closed 
their building out of courtesy to them, they said. It was 
then understood that we should have the use of the 
building Sunday afternoon, but matters were so arranged 
as to make that impossible. They then agreed 
to let us use the building for three services Monday, 
and announcement was made to that effect; but when 
we went there Monday morning, it was locked, and 
the janitor refused to open it. 

Some who were very anxious to hear what we had 
to say then went to some of the leaders in the Baptist 
Church, who agreed to let us use that building Monday 
afternoon and night, and the janitor was paid in 
advance for cleaning and lighting. The friends published 
the meeting by going through the town and telling 
every one they met. A member of the Baptist 
Church, who heard of the proposed meetings, hurried 
to town to stop them. He said that if that stranger 
preached in the Baptist Church he would have to "stand 
over his dead body." As we had no desire to be riddled 
with bullets from a "Baptist gun," we decided not to 
have the meetings in the church. 



You can imagine that by this time quite an excitement 
was stirred up. We had distributed tracts at the 
meetings Sunday; and this, with the bitter feeling 
aroused in the minds of some by the action of the church 
members, created a strong desire for a meeting. Several 
in sympathy with us then obtained the school house 
for the evening. The house was crowded, and I spoke 

R2076 : page 294 

nearly two hours. The "best element" of the place 
attended. We distributed more tracts, and many gave 
their names for sample TOWERS. I am inclined to think 
that the results will be greater than if we had succeeded 
in holding meetings without opposition. 

I arrived at , which is a "Shaker Community, 

and was warmly received by Brother E . 

The "Shakers" are very exclusive religiously and do 
not permit preachers not of their faith to hold meetings 
in their midst. But for the first time in the history of 
this Community they departed from that time-honored 
custom and permitted me to preach in their school 
building. We held three meetings with an average 
attendance of 75 or 80, 1 judge. Most of those who 
attended the meetings were delighted. 

Yours in love and service, FRANK DRAPER. 



page 295 

SELF-PRONOUNCING 

S.S. TEACHERS' REFERENCE BIBLE 

The Self-Pronouncing Text Enables The Reader 
To Pronounce All Proper Names At a Glance. 

The Bible is printed from Large, Beautiful and 
Clear New Type. All Proper Names are Divided 
into Syllables and Every Vowel is Marked and 
the Syllables Inflected, showing the Sounds and 
Accents as they are given in a Dictionary, thus 
enabling the reader to properly pronounce every word. 
This feature is a great improvement and a strong 
recommendation for this Bible over others. 

THIS BIBLE CONTAINS 
ALL OF THE CELEBRATED OXFORD TEACHERS' HELPS 
TOGETHER WITH 
A Complete Series of New Maps 
ILLUSTRATING THE GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE AND THE 
SURROUNDING COUNTRIES FROM THE EARLIEST 
TIMES, AND EMBODYING THE MOST 
RECENT DISCOVERIES 
Renders the Bible Especially Desirable to Teachers and 



Students of the Holy Scriptures. 

Style No. 1. "Imperial Seal" Binding, Yap edges, 
known as "Divinity Circuit," Linen Lined, Round 
Corners, Red under Gold Edges. 

Published price $4.25, our price $1.48 

Style No. 10. Same book with Leather Lining, $1.67 
"Thumb Index" on either of above 30 cents extra. 

SIZE 6-1/4 x 8 IN. Postage 25 cents. 

page 296 

Bibles Supplied at Cost! 

Less Than Wholesale Prices! 



Never were Bibles so cheap as now, and never better supplied 
with "helps," such as Concordance, maps, etc., causing 
such to be styled "Teachers' Bibles." This is little 
difference between these as respects the "helps." 



Bagster 's Teacher's Bible, 97 Cents. 
ADD 25 CENTS POSTAGE. FULL REGULAR SIZE 6 x 8-1/2 INCHES, CLOSED. 



DIVINITY CIRCUIT. EXTRA STRONG 
LEATHER BINDING. ROUND 
CORNERS. GILT EDGES. 



STYLE No. 4 97 cents. 

STYLE No. 5: SAME AS ABOVE, EXCEPT 
RED UNDER GILT EDGES $1.10 



BAGSTER BIBLES 

EXTRA LARGE TYPE (LONG PRIMER) 

TEACHERS' EDITION. 

No. 8615 DIVINITY CIRCUIT, FRENCH SEAL. $1.97 

POSTAGE 30 CENTS. 



Oxford Teachers' Bibles (OLIVET SERIES), 97 Cents. 

--ADD 25 CENTS POSTAGE- 

Type, large faced Minion; a little larger than 

the Bagster specimen above. Binding not quite as 

strong as 97 cent Bagster, but fully as good looking. 

"Divinity Circuit." Full regular size, 6x8 inches, 

closed. Round corners. Gilt Edges. 

No. 2, price 97 cents. 

Same, with Red under Gold edges (No. 20), $1.10. 

Either with "pat. Thumb Index," 30 cents extra. 

Postage, 25 cents. 

ADDRESS, WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
BIBLE HOUSE, 58 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA. 



page 297 

VOL. XVII. DECEMBER 15, 1896. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 298 

View from the Tower 299 

Poem: "Covet Earnestly the Best" 300 

Tract Society's Report for 1896 301 

Worship the Lord in the Beauty 

of Holiness. No. 2 304 

Who shall Abide in Thy Tabernacle? 306 

Birth of the "Man Christ Jesus" 308 

Christ's Ascension 310 

page 298 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, NY. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



ABOUT TEACHERS' BIBLES. 



Some inquire, Are the 97 cent Bibles mentioned in the TOWER first 
class books? We answer, No! They are not strictly first class, but 
they are elegant, nevertheless. 

A brother who ordered one of them wrote us on receiving it that 
we had made some mistake; for surely no such Bible as the one received 
could be made for the price, 97 cents plus 25 cents postage. 
We answered him that there was no mistake, and thereupon he took 
his as a sample and among his neighbors got orders for fifty-five copies 
—selling them as a special bargain at $1.60 each. 

Those who want a very superior leather binding, and India paper, 
can be supplied at $3.00 a Bible whose list price is $7.50, and for $4.50 
a Bible whose list price is $10.00, having a still finer leather. 

However, the Bibles mentioned in our last at 97 cents and $1.10 
and $1.48 are good enough for almost anyone. 30 cents extra for 
Patent Index, 25 cents postage. 



R2076 : page 299 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 



THE day set apart for National Thanksgiving is 
past, but we trust that the spirit of thankfulness 
continues in many hearts; and no time is more appropriate 
for the review of our causes for thankfulness as 
children of the Heavenly King, than at Christmastide, 
on the threshold of a new year, while ruminating upon 
the things that were, the things that are and the things 
which we desire and hope shall be. Whether partial 
failure or moderate success has, during the year closing, 
marked our efforts along lines of moral, physical, 
financial or spiritual attainment, let thankfulness fill 
our hearts, as well as good resolves and holy ambitions 
for the coming year. Indeed, we esteem that thankfulness 
must be an abiding grace in all true Christians 
who have reached a reasonable degree of development 
in the higher life. 

This highly favored land has much to be thankful 
for in the way of bountiful harvests; and although the 
farmer has not gotten high prices, this is a cause of 
thankfulness to other lands whose harvests are scant. 
As it is, wheat is nearly $1.80 per bushel (silver) in 
India where the crop has been short for the past five 
harvests and gives little promise for the next, and 
where at present ninety millions are seriously affected 
and over one million on the verge of starvation, requiring 
military intervention repeatedly to quell bread-riots. 



If the people of India cannot give thanks for rain 
and plenty, they can at least give thanks that the wholesale 
starvations of the past are now measurably prevented 
by the intervention of civilization and its accessories 
of wiser government and commerce. If the lot 
of any here seem hard, let him compare it with that of 
others; remembering that in India, in years of average 
bounty, millions of people never get a chance to eat 
three meals a day to satisfaction, even of the plainest 
food. Yes, the "curse," the penalty of sin, rests heavily 
upon the earth. The convict, man, is being made to 
feel its weight. Conditions are not what they would 
have been, had he remained obedient to his Creator 
in Eden. 

But "thanks be unto God for his unspeakable 
gift,"— his Son, our Lord; and for the "ransom for 
all;" and for the reconciliation by it made possible; 
and for the promise of his Kingdom soon to come; and 
for our call to a share in it with our Lord; and for the 
glorious prospect of coming "times of restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets." 
-Acts 3:19-21. 

Thank God, this will mean the lifting of the "curse" 
from the ground, and from so many of the death-sentenced 
convict-race as will accept the grace of God in 
Christ. Ah! blessed thought; this will mean an end 
of famines, an end of pestilences, an end of storms 
and floods and droughts, and ultimately "there shall 
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain: because the former things 
[shall have] passed away." (Rev. 21:4.) Already a 
blessing has followed in the wake of the gospel of 
Christ— since the "Great Light" was "lifted up" on 
Calvary. Wherever any have been made free indeed 
by the Son, a light has shone out and has brought with 
it blessings; although, alas! this intelligence and its 
accompanying blessings have been sadly perverted by 
selfishness— especially in the large class of Christian 
counterfeits, called in the Scriptures "tares." 

But if others have cause for thanksgiving, how 
much more cause have those into whose hearts the 
light of the knowledge of God, shining in the face of 

R2076 : page 300 

Jesus Christ our Lord, has shined. (2 Cor. 4:4.) Those 

thus favored can rejoice and give thanks under all circumstances 

and conditions;— in sickness, in death, in 

poverty's vale or in comfort and health. Surely, thankfulness 

is a necessary ingredient to Christian living. It 

must be mixed with our songs of praise, and with our 

prayers; it must fill our hearts to enable us to render 

faithful and efficient service to our Lord, in any direction. 

It was this gratitude, thankfulness, which enabled 

Brothers Paul and Silas to serve our Master so 

faithfully that they could sing praise and offer thanks for 



the privilege of suffering for Christ in the jail at Phillipi, 
while their backs were smarting from the cruel 
lashes received as the cost of their discipleship.— 
Acts 16:25,33. 

Moreover, the thankfulness of the true Christian 
must continue— daily, hourly; its loss even for a moment 
should be deplored as an evidence of spiritual 
sickness, and the afflicted should go to the leaves of 
healing in the divine Word, that he may be refreshed 
in strength of love and zeal and realize afresh that "the 
love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, 
that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that 
he died for all that they which live [now reckoned 
alive in Christ] should not henceforth live unto themselves, 
but [in thankfulness] unto him which died for 
them and rose again."— 2 Cor. 5:14,15. 

"Let the peace of God rule in your hearts,... 
and be ye thankful."— Col. 3:15. 



The New York Observer, a high class "orthodox" 
religious journal has been studying the question of 
Israel's restoration to "the land of promise." After 
viewing the subject in various lights it gives its conclusions, 
as follows:— 

"A 'restoration,' then, through the efforts of the 
Jews themselves, must be the only hope. And that it 
will be brought about by the voluntary efforts of others 
is exceedingly improbable. Under any notion of the 
fitness of things, Palestine ought, when the Turk is 
driven across the Euphrates and the Ottoman Empire 
is partitioned, to revert to the Jews. But all the plans 
which have thus far been suggested to restore it to 
Christian control have been negatived at the outset by 
the jealousy of the Russians for the safety of the Holy 
Places. It was that safety which formed the popular 
Russian pretext for the Crimean war. With passionate 
reverence for the Holy Places an unchanging tradition 
of the Russian peasantry, there is no reason to believe 
that the Czar will permit the transfer of Palestine to 
any save a great power, and that power Russia. Probably 
if before the Ottoman break-up the Jews desired 
to buy the Holy Land, and Europe consented, he might 
acquiesce on condition of a European guaranty. But 
there is little present reason to believe that he would 
consent to such a reversion as a part of the final partition 
of Turkey. It would seem, then, that the hoped-for 
'restoration' may never come, and that although Palestine 
will again become cultivated and prosperous, to the 
Jews it may always be a land of promise." 

The italics are ours and point out the hopelessness 
of Israel's cause from the human standpoint. We admit 
that the Observer's views and reasonings are clear and 
logical; but it has omitted the most important factor in 
question; namely the will and plan of God. That will 



and plan, as revealed in God's Word, teaches us to expect 
that within eighteen years the "times of the Gentiles" 
will expire, and that with their expiration Jerusalem 
will cease to be trodden down by the Gentile 
kingdoms;— that the set time to favor "Jacob" with 
Millennial blessings as the first-fruits of the nations 
will then have come, and that it will include their saving 
or recovery from the blindness which came upon 
them nationally, at their rejection of Messiah. Who 
can question this interpretation of the prophets in the 
light of the Apostle's testimony in Romans 1 1:25-33? 



Protestant federation has been little discussed of 
late, but is evidently progressing slowly as indicated 
by the following from the Literary Digest:— 

"The committee of the Presbyterian Church in 
Canada on Union with other churches reported to the 
recent Canadian General Assembly upon its proceedings 
with reference to the proposition of the General 
Conference of the Methodist Church of Canada for the 
establishment of a federal court composed of representatives 
of the negotiating churches, whose function it 
should be to promote cooperation and economy in respect 
to mission work and 'dependent churches,' but 
which should not have power to deal with matters of 
creed or discipline, or with any question vitally affecting 
the independence of the negotiating churches. The 
proposition was generally accepted." 

The expectancy of the Episcopal Church Rome-ward 
has doubtless hindered progress toward Protestant 
Federation or union; but this is now out of the 
way, as Rome has closed that door. The new policy 
of Romanism will surely revive Protestant desires for 
a consolidated and sizable Protestant system as an offset 
in influence with the governments and with the people. 

R2078 : page 300 

"COVET EARNESTLY THE BEST." 



God has his best things for the few 
Whose love shall stand the test; 

God has his second choice for those 
Who do not crave his best. 

It is not always open sin 

That risks the promised rest; 

A good more often is the foe 
That keeps us from the best. 

R2079 : page 301 



There's scarcely one but vaguely wants 

In some way to be blest; 
'Tis not a blessing, Lord, I seek, 

I want thy very best! 

Yet others make the highest choice, 

But when by trials pressed 
They shrink, they yield, they shun the cross, 

And so they lose the best. 

I want in this short life of mine, 

As much as can be pressed 
Of service true for God and man; 

God help me do my best! 

I want to stand when Christ appears 

In spotless raiment dressed; 
Numbered among his chosen ones, 

His holiest, his best. 

I want among the victor throng 

To have my name confessed; 
And hear my Master say at last, 

"Well done! You did your best." 

Give me, O Lord, thy highest choice; 

Let others choose the rest; 
Their good things lose their charm for me, 

Since I have found thy best. —Selected. 



R2077 : page 301 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



REPORT FOR FISCAL YEAR ENDING DEC. 1, 1896. 



ALTHOUGH the above has been the recognized 

name of our Society for some four years, it 

was not until this year that the Board of Directors took 

the proper steps to have the name legally changed from 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY to that above. 

The new name seems to be in every way preferable. 

Although disinclined to make frequent reference 
to the work centering in the TOWER office, lest it might 
be misunderstood to be boasting, we are nevertheless 
glad to avail ourselves of the opportunities offered us in 
connection with this our annual report, to lay before 
our interested and sympathizing Brethren and Sisters, 
for their encouragement, a brief summary of the work 
itself, as well as of the moneys expended in the propaganda. 



If the following statement even seem to a few 

to savor of boasting and show, nevertheless, it is our 

duty to those who have contributed the means which 

have permitted the work: and they represent in the 

aggregate a large proportion of our paying subscribers;— 

and the letters from those who receive the WATCH 

TOWER free as "the Lord's poor" indicate that many 

of them are equally deeply interested in the work, in 

its every feature. Many of these, although hindered 

by poverty from sharing in this work financially, have efficiently 

cooperated in the work as tract-distributers, etc. 

The work divides itself into the following 
departments. 

(1) The WATCH TOWER Editorial Department, to 
which three proof-readers lend efficient aid. Each 
reader must judge for himself respecting the Lord's 
blessing upon this department. We trust that the 
study of the TOWER by its readers gives them even 

half the blessing enjoyed in its preparation. The withdrawal 

of our "Associate Editor" has been noted by 

some, so we explain now to all that this was granted 

at her own urgent request. She prefers to appear as a correspondent 

over her own signature, MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 

The growth of the TOWER list is one of the best evidences 
of the progress of Present Truth for which it 
stands as a defender and servant. Our friends will be 
glad to know that notwithstanding the money pressure 
of the past year the TOWER lists show an increase of 
the interest— although of course some "fall away" as 
we are forewarned to expect. 

(2) The Correspondence Department,— with which 

is associated the keeping of accounts, attention to your 
orders for DAWNS, O.T. TRACTS, WATCH TOWERS, 
Bibles, etc. This department handled during the past 
year about twenty thousand of your letters and sent out 
thirteen thousand two hundred and ninety-one replies. 
This is a very important feature of the work, very 
helpful to many in perplexity, and, blessed by modern 
progress, enables us to be in touch with such as the 
Lord may please to direct to us from all parts of the 
world. 

(3) The Publishing Department.— To this belongs 

the type setting of the TOWERS, DAWNS and OLD THEOLOGY 

TRACTS, contracting for paper, press-work, 

binding, etc. (for we save both time and money by hiring 

our printing and binding done). This department 

also includes packing and shipping of DAWNS, tracts 

and TOWERS by freight, express and mail. The writing 

of wrappers for the sending out of sample tracts 

and TOWERS belongs also to this department; but efficient 

aid in this matter has been rendered by friends 

at a distance, who have our hearty thanks. 

(4) The Colporteur Department— This is conducted 
by dear Brethren and Sisters who give, some a 

part, and some all, of their time in visiting house after 
house, and city after city, with a view to interesting 



fellow Christians in "present truth," respecting the 
Plan of the Ages, in which the divine wisdom, love, 
justice and power are made manifest; in showing, too, 
that we are now in the Millennial dawn onto which 
laps the forty year "harvest" in which ends the Gospel 
age in a great time of trouble— social, financial and 

R2077 : page 302 

religious. The past year has been a very trying one 
upon these dear faithful "reapers," obliging several of 
them to temporarily seek other employment. And 
many who continued got so deeply into our debt that 
it was very trying to them as well as to us. Many of 
them will be made glad and encouraged to fresh energy 
by one item of this report yet to be mentioned. Already 
the prospect of "better times" is leading to new inquiries 
for fields of service, etc. This branch of the 
service continues to yield most favorable results which 
are, however, ably supplemented along the other lines. 

Any who may have the idea that the colporteurs 
are in the service merely as a business, are greatly mistaken. 
We never knowingly encourage such, and if, 
by chance, they do slip into the harness, they soon become 
discouraged. As an illustration of the spirit which 
prompts the colporteurs, we will here give an extract 
from a letter written by one of them to a friend, with 
no expectation that it would ever reach your eyes or 
ours. The Brother is not yet nineteen years old, but 
since getting the Truth has caught its spirit, and with 
his sister is seeking to spread it. His letter says:— 

"We had very poor success in selling DAWNS that 
day. Yet it was no more than I had expected (having 
been in the business before), but I think my sister was 
a little disappointed, as it was her first attempt, and she 
became pretty tired by evening. But I do not see that 
we should be discouraged, but rather encouraged, since 
we are following in the footsteps of our dear Master, 
and we remember how he also many times became 
weary, and how he sat down by the well to rest. We 
should be encouraged when we look at the course of 
Jesus and the apostles, how they went from door to 
door, sacrificing all earthly things, and when we remember 
the life of the great Apostle Paul and the sufferings 
he endured for Jesus' sake, working his own 
way as he preached. 

"Now I know that the Lord is abundantly able to 
prosper us in this work and make it an honorable service 
before the world; but on the other hand I see also 
his plan in not permitting it thus. Our work of preaching 
is made to be dishonorable and a reproach before 
the world and the nominal church, that we may thus 
prove our love and loyalty to God and his truth, and 
show ourselves worthy to be of that "little flock" who, 
through much tribulation, shall enter the Kingdom of 
God. Unless we suffer with him, we cannot reign 



with him. 

"All my brothers and sisters (ten children in our 
family) are studying the DAWNS and TOWERS with the 
Bible in hand and learning the truth as fast as they 
can. The death of our dear mother has also been a 
chastisement to father and is leading him closer to Jesus 
and farther from the world and its spirit." 

(5) The Evangel Department.— This branch looks 
after the holding of meetings, to water the good seed 
sown by the colporteur brethren, and to refresh and 

assist little groups of the Lord's people, wherever accessible, 

and to assist them to the most profitable methods 

for private and social study of the Lord's Word. 

Of the good results of this service, as now carried on, 

we have constant evidence through your letters; and 

still we are endeavoring to make it more efficient. 

To the Lord of the "harvest" be all the glory, and to 

his people, the true "wheat," more and more blessing. 

The expenditure for this branch of the service is noted 

in the Financial Report in another column: it has been, 

we believe, wisely and economically used for legitimate 

expenses only; and, so far as we have been able to 

judge, has cooperated with such only as have considerable 

knowledge of present truth and some talent as 

speakers. It has been expended for meetings held in 

224 places, from one day to a week at each place and 

from one to three meetings per day in the following 

States:— Pennsylvania, New York, Virginia, West Virginia, 

Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, 

Kentucky. 

(6) The Tract Distribution Department.— Every 
TOWER reader is desired to be an active participant in this 
branch of the service. Some have more and others less 
opportunity for engaging in this service. The report 
given in another column shows that this department 
lagged a little this year as compared to last; probably 
because of the general distraction incident to the recent 
political campaign. However, many may now be all the 
better prepared to see that "Neither their silver nor 

their gold shall be able to deliver them" from the impending 
trouble, and to look for the only hope of the 
groaning creation. 

(7) The Financial Department.— The work of 
course must have means or stop, as we have no power 
to work miracles. But it may surprise you all, as it 
does us at the Office, how, almost miraculously, the 
Lord keeps opening the way more and more from year 
to year. The report for this year will doubtless 
amaze you. It shows that notwithstanding the extreme 
financial depression, your increasing zeal has been 
blessed and used of the Lord to such an extent that we 
open the new year with a small balance on hand 

for the use of which contracts are already let. It will 
soon be out on its mission in the form of O.T. TRACTS 
and TOWERS, to be used of the Lord in reaching others 
of his children who are now more or less blinded by the 



falsities propagated by the god of this world,— to help 
them "out of darkness" into God's "marvelous light." 

It is a rare matter for us to mention the names of 
the Tract Fund contributors— nor would we have space 

R2078 : page 302 

for them all, for our list of contributors is nearly or quite 
five thousand; and their donations range from half 
a cent per week upward. Neither do we intend now 
to change our rule, believing that it is best that the 
left hand know not what the right hand does for the 
Lord's cause, until the King shall make known his 

R2078 : page 303 

judgment, based upon the purposes and intents of our 
hearts. And indeed the Brother, whose name and very 
generous gift we will mention wrote— "I prefer you 
do not mention my name, unless you think that some 
special good would be secured. It is quite sufficient to 
credit it to 'A deeply interested Brother.'" 
But we are not satisfied to do this for two reasons; 

(1) because many might say, That is Brother Russell's 
own gift to the work, and thus make a mistake; and 

(2) because we believe it does us all good to know something 
of the noble sacrifices of others. We therefore 

conclude that it will be to the Lord's glory and our 
readers' good for us to give you some particulars including 
the name, as follows. 

Some time ago Brother W. Hope Hay fell heir to 
a fortune in Great Britain. On securing the money he 
invested most of it in mortgages; and being anxious to 
do something in the Lord's cause, he built and donated 
a neat little Episcopal church for the town in which he 
resided. About that time the Lord counted him worthy 
and sent him MILLENNIAL DAWN, which, as the Lord's 
messenger, guided our Brother to a better and more 
consistent understanding of the divine Word. With 
a heart full of thankfulness to God for "his marvelous 
light," Brother Hay visited us at Allegheny, 
looked into the work and said, Brother Russell I want 
to have a share in this work. By simple living I can 
spare $10,000, and I want you to put it into active 
service in spreading the "harvest" message of divine 
love and wisdom to others who are yet in the darkness 
from which God has so graciously delivered me. Not 
only do I believe that this is Truth, but more, I believe 
it to be the very message ordained of God "to gather 
together his elect" unto himself preparatory to their 
glorification with him. 

It required some time and sacrifice to get the 
money out of the mortgages, but it finally came. 
Brother Hay's idea and our own originally was to invest 
this money and use the interest to help defray the 
additional expense of making ZION'S WATCH TOWER 



a twelve page weekly, without increasing the subscription 

price. (In harmony with this thought we made quite 

a number of this year's issues sixteen pages instead of 

twelve.) But the pressure upon our time, the greater 

necessity for getting out additional volumes of MILLENNIAL 

DAWN, and the growing burden of Colporteur 

debts has hindered. And now we have received 

from Brother Hay a letter directing the sale of the investments 

and the direct application of the money to 

the uses of the Tract Society; part of the sum to be 

applied to the cancelling of portions of the accounts of 

burdened Colporteurs in arrears— for their reencouragement, 

and for the Tract Society's relief from the burden 

of debt, interest, etc. He remarked incidentally that 

he feared anyway that if the TOWER were made a weekly 

its important subjects would be merely read and not 

studied, Bible in hand, as they should be. 

We in no wise wish to intimate that Bro. Hay's 
gift is greater in God's sight than the much smaller 
donations of many others less able; but we are sure 
that all who are in harmony with the work which God 
has been pleased to assign to the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society will rejoice with us, and with the 
Colporteurs, and with Brother Hay, in view of the 
great blessing which, as a servant of divine providence, 
he has been permitted and enabled to render to the 
Lord's cause. And besides, while Brother Hay did 
not give out "of his penury" nor "all his living," like 
the poor widow (Mark 12:42-44), nevertheless, neither 
did he give this out of a vast superabundance; for in this 
gift he laid upon the Lord's altar (we believe) more than 
half of all his earthly possessions. And indeed he 
would have given more, had we not counseled otherwise; 
urging that he keep enough to maintain himself 
and family, so that he could give his time in the service 
of the truth. And now he is so engaged,— holding 
meetings on Sundays, and during the week engaged 
in DAWN and tract work, seeking and feeding 
the Lord's sheep. 

DISTRIBUTING ACCOUNT. 

During the year from December 1, 1895, to December 
1, 1896, there have been circulated, at the expense 
of the Tract Fund. 
Copies of the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS 1,134,952 

" " ZION'S WATCH TOWER 183,187 

In view of the fact that tracts vary greatly as to 
the number of pages, it is customary to state their circulation 
by pages. The foregoing, so stated, represent 
a total of tract pages, 23,978,780 

The total number of copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
circulated by the cooperation of this Fund, but not at 
its expense, was 74,013 

FINANCIAL ACCOUNT. 



EXPENDITURES: 

For Tracts and for TOWERS sent out free, $8,213.48 

Labor, for mailing same, 485.00 

Postage, freight, wrappers, etc., 747.78 

Interest paid on Colporteur accounts overdue, 555.23 
Cash paid out on account of foreign 

translations, etc., 1,264.42 

Expenses of traveling Evangelists, etc., 925.04 

Colporteurs' hopeless indebtedness paid off 

by W. Hope Hay's donation 8,847.66 



Total, $21,038.61 

Cash balance on hand, now being invested, 
1897 account, 104.49 



$21,143.10 

RECEIPTS: 

From "Good Hopes," $ 6,502.80 

" other sources, 4,850.20 

W. Hope Hay's contribution for the 

general uses of the Society, and specially 

to clear off part of the Tract 

Society's liabilities, 10,000.00 



Total, $21,143.10 



R2078 : page 304 

Respecting the helpers connected with the above 
work we must say a word. Our office force consists of 
eight Brethren and Sisters and two lads, besides Sister 
Russell and the Editor. The amount of work turned 
out must be your guide as to the zeal and efficiency of 
these dear co-laborers. There are no "drones" among 
them: each labors "as unto the Lord," and seems to 
wish that there were more hours to each day that he 
might accomplish more. Indeed, strange as it may 
seem, we have been obliged to hinder some from overtaxing 
their strength in willing, joyful service to our 
King and to you our fellow-servants. 

It will be noticed that no items of rent, fuel, gas, 
salaries, etc., appear in the above. This omission is 
not by oversight: we have no such expenses, but share 
the office comforts of the TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
free of charge. Thus we are enabled to accomplish 
much more proportionately than other tract societies, 
much of whose receipts goes for rent and salaries. 

Another matter. Not one cent of the above fund 
was begged or even asked for,— directly or indirectly. 
It was all voluntary. Those who have been truly 
blessed by present truth love to serve it out to others, 
and need no urging. They want to do what they can, 
and we merely show them what is being done, and 



consider that they and we are highly favored in being permitted 
to join in it. The rewards for present sacrifices and 
services cannot be expected now, but they will come 
later,— from the King of Glory himself! 

The usual "Good Hope" blank goes with this 
issue; do not understand it as a request, but as a 
notice of opportunity to join in this service. Knowing 
in advance what the friends wish and hope to do enables 
us the better to regulate the work economically 
and efficiently. 

We congratulate all of the friends of present truth 
upon the result of our united efforts for the year past; 
and trust that as our King shall pass judgment upon 
it he may be able to say to us each and all,— Well done, 
good, faithful servants, enter ye into the joys of your Lord. 

Let us now unite our hearts in fervent prayer for 
divine wisdom and blessing for the new year, remembering 
each part of the work and all co-laborers in any 
manner associated with it. 



R2079 : page 304 

"WORSHIP THE LORD IN THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS." NO. 2. 



"The hour cometh, and now is, when the true 
worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and 
in truth; for the Father seeketh 
such to worship him."— John 4:23. 

AT the first advent our Lord said of some of the unbelieving 

professors of religion of the scribes 

and Pharisees: "In vain do they worship me, teaching 

for doctrines the commandments of men." The majority 

of those addressed, it seems, were outwardly very pious, 

and fasted and prayed much, and for a pretense made 

long prayers in the streets; but theirs was not true and 

acceptable worship; and therefore, they were not prepared 

to be introduced at Pentecost to the begetting 

of the spirit and thus to become worshipers in spirit 

and in truth. And our Lord in the above words shows 

one important hindrance to their proper attitude of 

heart, and hence to their acceptance as worshipers; 

namely, false doctrines— human tradition and commandments 

as instead of the pure teachings of God's 

Word. And it is but reasonable to suppose that similarly 

all down through this Gospel age many, very 

many, have been hindered from proper development 

as true worshipers of God, worshipers in spirit, worshipers 

in every act and word and deed of life, by the 

same baneful influences; namely, false doctrines, human 

creeds and traditions accepted and held to as instead 

of the Word of God, the true bread which comes 



down from heaven. 

Many think lightly of faith, and hold that it matters 
little what a man may believe; that his life and 
conduct are the only things of importance in the divine 
sight. But in our Lord's testimony here considered 
(and it is corroborated by Christian experience) a 
man's faith concerning God and his plan is very important 
indeed, and has a wonderful influence upon his 
life, conduct and character. The Christian who under 
the delusions of the great adversary has accepted the 
human traditions (presented by nearly all the theological 
schools of "Christendom"), that God is a tyrant, 
who uses his omnipotent power in the creation of angels 
and men with the foreknowledge that the great 
mass of them (all except a little flock) will be by his 
providence preserved in indescribable torments and anguish 
throughout all eternity;— such Christians, thus 
blindfolded by false doctrines, attempt in vain to worship 
such a God with their whole heart; for their fears 
hinder perfect love and full devotion. They would 
find every element of their moral nature in antagonism 
to such a plan of damnation; and although they might 
bow the knee in fear and submission, they would find it 
impossible to bow down their hearts in full acquiescence, 
unless their hearts were grossly depraved as to 
justice and love and mercy. 

It may be safely said, however, that all who become 
children of God and whose hearts are honest are 
delivered to some extent from bondage to this false 

R2079 : page 305 

doctrine, and are enabled through truths received to 

counteract the baneful effect of this error to such an 

extent as to permit them through certain great truths 

to see God's love and in a general way at least to hope 

and trust that God will commit no injustice upon any 

of his creatures, and that somehow, somewhere and at 

sometime all men will have a full chance to be reconciled 

to God through Christ. Thus with many of God's 

saints, we believe, the spirit of error hindering worship 

is overcome by the spirit of truth in general and true 

worship made possible. Yet many never fully escape 

the fear "taught by the precepts of men" (Isa. 29: 13), 

and to the very last are hindered thereby from the attainment 

of "perfect love" and from the rendering of 

the highest degree of worship in spirit and in truth. 

And what is true of this false doctrine is true to 
some extent of all false doctrines. Every error hides 
some truth; every misunderstanding of the character 
of God or of the fundamental features of his plan of 
salvation is so much to hinder men from becoming to the 
fullest extent possible worshipers of God in spirit and 
in truth. It is to this end that God's people are exhorted 
to search the Scriptures to "know the truth," 
to "know God," because, as our Lord declares, the object 



of the giving of the truth is to produce sanctification 
of heart and life, and hence whatever beclouds or 
hinders the truth hinders sanctification of heart. No 
one can possess the spirit of the truth without having 
considerable of the letter of the truth upon fundamental 
principles. 

WORSHIPING FELLOW MESSENGERS. 



God's people are to love and esteem each other, 
and that in proportion as they recognize in each other 
the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of holiness 
and devotion to truth and righteousness; as the 
Apostle says, the faithful should be esteemed "very 
highly for their work's sake" (1 Thess. 5:13); but 
while there may be danger that some will fail to render 
"honor to whom honor is due" (Rom. 13:7), there is 
undoubtedly danger also that some might render too 
much honor to human instruments, whom God is pleased 
to use in connection with the service of the truth. It 
is proper therefore that we call attention here, as we 
have done heretofore, to the danger of man-worship. 
This matter is very forcibly brought to our attention 
in Revelation 22:9. John the Revelator, who, representing 
the living saints all down through the Gospel 
age, is caused to see unfolding the various features of 
the divine plan, in conclusion falls down to worship the 
angel who showed him those things. So there has been 
and is a tendency on the part of many to give more 
than love, respect and honor to the servants of God 
who from time to time have been used as special servants 
of God in bringing to the attention of the Church 
things new and old, or to the particular brother or sister 
who was the means of conversion or other spiritual 
benefit. There was this disposition in the early Church, 
some exalting one Apostle and some another as their 
chief and master, and naming themselves as his disciples, 
saying, "I am of Paul;" or "I am of Apollos;" 
or "I am of Peter," etc. The Apostle Paul assures 
them that this disposition indicates a measure of carnality, 
and he inquires, who then are Paul, Apollos and 
Peter, but merely the servants or channels through 
whom God has been pleased to send you the blessings of 
the truth. "Neither is he that planteth anything, 
neither he that watereth, but God that giveth the increase." 
He indicates thus that they should recognize, 
not the channels through whom the blessings came, but 
the Lord, the Author of their blessings, and loyally 
bear no other name than his who died for and redeemed 
them. 

Likewise, when the Church began to get rid of the 
gross darkness of the dark ages under the help and instruction 
of the reformers, Luther, Calvin, Zwingli and 
others, they naturally and properly had great respect 



for those whom God had honored as the instruments in 
the work of reformation. But again the tendency to 
"worship" the messengers, the human agents, instead 
of the divine Author was manifested, and to-day there 
are hundreds of thousands who call themselves by the 
name of Luther, Calvin, Wesley, Campbell and others, 
and who give more respect to their teachings and writings 
than to the Word of God, and this with corresponding 
injury to themselves. 

Likewise, to-day, in the light of present truth, 
shining more clearly than ever before, no doubt there 
is need to be on guard against this carnal tendency 
which has had so deleterious an influence in the past. 

When John fell down to worship the angel who 
had shown him the wonders of the divine plan, the angel's 
refusal to accept homage should be a lesson to all 
ministers (servants— messengers) of God. He said, 

R2080 : page 305 

"See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant [not 
thy Lord and Master], and [fellow-servant] of thy 
brethren the prophets, and [fellow-servant] of [all] 
them which keep the sayings of this book. Worship 
God [the source from which come all these blessings 
and all this light]." All servants of God are fellow-servants 
regardless of the time or extent of their service. 

The Apostle calls attention to this man-worshiping 
tendency in his epistle to the Colossians (2:18,19), 
saying, "Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a 
voluntary humility and worshiping of angels [messengers]." 
The intimation is that this temptation will 
come insidiously, craftily, and not by brazen demands 
for reverence. Such is the reverence accorded in general 

R2080 : page 306 

to the ministry of the nominal churches. Many 

ministers who seem very meek, and who would not 

think of demanding reverence or worship, nevertheless 

accept of their flocks the voluntary title, Reverend, and 

encourage it, and feel offended if reverence or worship 

of this sort is not rendered. The effect has been and 

still is to injure the household of faith, to give an over-confidence 

in the judgment and word of the minister in 

spiritual things, so that many neglect to prove their 

faith by God's Word, and to trust implicitly to its 

authority. 

And there is danger amongst those who do not use 
the title, Reverend. It should always be remembered 
(as pointed out in our issue of Nov. 15, '95) that control 
resides in the congregation and not in self-appointed 
leaders, whether they seek to serve a dozen or thousands. 
The churches of Christ should recognize the 
leading of their Head, and know their leaders to be of his 
choice (See Heb. 13:7,17,24, Diaglott), but they 



should beware of any disposed to usurp the rights of the 

congregation or to ignore those rights by taking the 

place of leaders without the specific request of the congregation; 

beguiling the company into supposing that the 

leader alone is competent to judge and decide for the 

congregation as to the Lord's choice, and thus failing 

to hold the Head (Christ) as the only real teacher, 

who is able and willing to guide all the meek in judgment, 

because they are his Church— "his body." 

Nor is this beguiling of the attention of the flock, 
away from the only Shepherd, to a fellow sheep always 
the fault of the "leaders:" there seems to be a 
general tendency on the part of all who have the true, 
humble, sheep nature to follow one another. It is a 
lesson, therefore, for all to learn,— that each sheep recognize 
as leaders only such as are found in full accord 
with the voice and spirit of the Chief Shepherd (Christ), 
and the under-shepherds (the Apostles), and that each 
sheep see to it that he eats only "clean provender" and 
drinks only "pure water" as directed by the Shepherd. 
(See Ezek. 34:17-19.) This implies the exercise of the 
individual conscience of each member of Christ's flock 
on matters of doctrine and practice, and tends to keep 
each one in sympathy and fellowship with the Shepherd, 
who knoweth each sheep and "calleth his own 
sheep by name." The same intimate relationship of 
the individual Christian with the Lord is illustrated in 
the figure of Christ the Head and the Church as members 
of his body.-l Cor. 12:12-27; Eph. 4:15,16. 

As we have been to some extent, by the grace of 
God, used in the ministry of the gospel, it may not be 
out of place to say here what we have frequently said 
in private, and previously in these columns,— namely, 
that while we appreciate the love, sympathy, confidence 
and fellowship of fellow-servants and of the entire 
household of faith, we want no homage, no reverence, 
for ourselves or our writings; nor do we wish to be 
called Reverend or Rabbi. Nor do we wish that any 
should be called by our name. The name of him who 
died for all— the name Christian— is quite sufficient to 
designate the spiritual sons of God, the true brethren 
of Christ; and whatsoever is more than this cometh of 
evil, of carnality, and tends toward more of 
the same. 

Nor would we have our writings reverenced or regarded 
as infallible, or on a par with the holy Scriptures. 
The most we claim or have ever claimed for our 
teachings is, that they are what we believe to be harmonious 
interpretations of the divine Word, in harmony 
with the spirit of the truth. And we still urge, as in 
the past, that each reader study the subjects we present 
in the light of the Scriptures, proving all things 
by the Scriptures, accepting what they see to be thus 
approved, and rejecting all else. It is to this end, to 
enable the student to trace the subject in the divinely 
inspired Record, that we so freely intersperse both quotations 



and citations of the Scriptures upon which to build. 



R2080 : page 306 

WHO SHALL ABIDE IN THY TABERNACLE? 



"Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? 
who shall dwell in thy holy hill?"— Psa. 15:1. 

THE tabernacle of God is his dwelling place in the 
midst of his people. As the typical tabernacle 
in the midst of the typical Israel indicated that the divine 
presence was with them, so the antitypical spiritual 
Israel is similarly, yet even more highly, favored, 
as the antitype is higher than the type. "God is in the 
midst of her; she shall not be moved." And "he that 
dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High [in the 
holy place— the place or condition of full and faithful 
consecration to God] shall abide under the shadow of 
the Almighty." They abide in his love, under his 
protection and care, and in communion and fellowship 
with him. 

Every "saint" has realized something of the blessedness 
of abiding in this secret holy place of the divine 
tabernacle, and with the Psalmist can say, "How 
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!" Wherever 
God is, there is his Tabernacle: wherever there is 
a loyal consecrated heart, there is a dwelling place of 
God; and wherever two or three or more such are met 
together in his name, God is in the midst, and there is 
his dwelling place. How amiable indeed are thy tabernacles; 

R2080 : page 307 

how blessed to sit together in the heavenly 

places in Christ Jesus, how sweet the songs of praise, 

how fervent the prayers, how blessed the communion! 

But only those who abide in the secret place know 
how to appreciate these things. With them there is a 
longing after more and more of the manifestations of 
divine favor. The language of their hearts is, "My soul 
longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; 
my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God; 
[elsewhere]. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the 
house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness." 
-Psa. 84:1,2,10. 

Yes, "Blessed are they that dwell in thy house;" 
blessed are they that dwell in God, and in whom God 
dwells. They find in him a shadow from the heat, 
where the heart may rest its burdens and find refreshment, 
and a refuge from the storms of life (Isa. 4:5,6), 
and that the Lord God is a sun and shield, giving 



grace and glory, and withholding no good thing from 
them that walk uprightly. 

These are some of the blessings of those who abide 
in the tabernacle of the Lord now, while it is pitched 
in the wilderness of this present life. But what pen 
can portray the blessedness of abiding in that glorious 
tabernacle, that temple of God, which shall be the 
dwelling place of the overcoming saints to all eternity, 
after we have passed through this wilderness and beyond 
the Jordan of death? There we shall see the Lord 
in his glory, and be like him; there we shall see our 
Father's face, and worship and adore; there we shall 
delight in the society of all his holy angels; there we 
shall be endowed with power to execute the gracious 
designs of our God toward all his creatures; and life 
and everlasting joy shall fill his temple, and thence 
shall flow streams of blessing to all creatures in heaven 
and in earth. 

This is the glorious hope of our high calling to live 
and reign with Christ: and this will be the joy of abiding 
forever in the tabernacle of the Lord and dwelling 
in his holy hill (his holy Kingdom). With such a hope 
before us, and with the conditions of its attainment 
yet to be fulfilled, how solicitous should be the inquiry 
of every sincere child of God, "Lord, who shall abide 
in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? 

The answer is plain, that those so honored must be 
lovers of righteousness and haters of iniquity; they 
must be persons of uncompromising integrity, having 
no fellowship with the workers of iniquity; and 
those who, having made a covenant, do not ignore its 
solemn obligations,— "He that sweareth to his own 
hurt and changeth not." "He that doeth these things 
shall never be moved." 

These considerations call very forcibly to mind the 
great importance which the Scriptures attach to the— 

COVENANT OBLIGATIONS OF GOD'S PEOPLE. 



The man that sweareth to his own hurt, or, in 
other words, who makes a solemn covenant to present 
himself a living sacrifice to God, is thenceforth bound 
by that covenant. He cannot, by subsequently changing 
his mind, be released from the obligations thus incurred; 
and to endeavor to ignore them is to be caught 
in a most deceitful snare of the adversary.— "It is a 

R2081 : page 307 

snare to man to sanctify things hastily, and to make inquiry 

only after having made vows;" i.e., to make inquiry 

in the sense of reconsidering the cost and whether 

or not, in view of the cost, we shall keep it, when already 

its solemn obligations are upon us and cannot 



be either repudiated or ignored with impunity. 
(Prov. 20:25— Leeser.) Again we read, "When 
thou vowest a vow unto God [when thou makest 
a covenant or promise], defer not to pay it; for he 
hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast 
vowed. Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, 
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. Suffer 
not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin."— Eccl. 5:4-6. 

Again the obligation was expressed to typical 
fleshly Israel— and if it was applicable to them, the 
typical people, it applies with at least equal force to 
the still more highly favored and enlightened antitypes 
of the Gospel age— thus: "When thou shalt vow a vow 
unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it; 
for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it 
would be sin in thee. That which is gone out of thy 
lips thou shalt keep and perform, even a free-will offering, 
according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy 
God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth."— 
Deut. 23:21-23. 

It is those who thus respect their covenant obligations, 
and fulfil them, that shall forever abide in the 
tabernacle of the Lord and dwell in his holy Kingdom. 
It is in view of these solemn obligations that the Lord 
counsels those who would come to him to "first count 
the cost" and make sure that they are ready to assume 
them (Luke 14:28-32), and that on another occasion 
he said, "No man, having put his hand to the plow, 
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God." 
(Luke 9:62.) Again we read, "If any man draw back, 
my soul shall have no pleasure in him." And the 
Apostle Paul shows that some at least will draw back 
unto perdition— destruction.— Heb. 10:38,39. 

Thus viewed, how imperative are the obligations 
of our covenants with God. But, on the other side of 
this great responsibility, are the bountiful encouragements 
and assurances of divine grace:— "My grace is 
sufficient for thee;" "My strength is made perfect in 
[your] weakness;" "I will teach thee and guide thee 

R2081 : page 308 

in the way which thou shalt go." Yes, the blessed 
promises stand out on every page of the sacred Word; 
and the spirit of God is ever ready to seal them upon 
the hearts of his consecrated children who continue to 
look to him for the supplies of grace, and who make 
diligent use of them. 

Thus the Lord is able to carry on to completion 
the good work which he has begun in us; and he will 
do it in all who continue loyal and true to their covenant 
and zealous for the cause of truth and righteousness. 
"He that doeth these things shall never be moved." 
MRS. M. F. RUSSELL. 



R2081 : page 308 

BIRTH OF "THE MAN CHRIST JESUS." 

-DEC. 20.-MATT. 2:1-12.- 

"And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you 
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people."— Luke 2:10. 

OUR subject does not take us back to the beginning 

of God's creation when Christ as a spirit 

being became "the first born of every creature;"— the 

Word that was with God in the beginning of creation, 

and by whom all things were made, and without whom 

not one thing was made. (John 1:1-3,10.) Our Master 

at that time was "the beginning and the ending, the 

first and the last," of Jehovah's direct creation: all subsequent 

creations being by and through him as Jehovah's 

honored agent. (Rev. 1:11; 3:14; Col. 1:15; 

John 1:1-3.) We come to the time when he who was 

rich for our sakes became poor (2 Cor. 8:9) and left 

the glory which he had with the Father "before the 

world was." (John 17:5.) Then, without dying, our 

Master underwent a change of nature and "humbled 

himself," "was made flesh" (Phil. 2:8; John 1:14), 

"took upon himself the form of a servant" and was 

"found in fashion a man;" "a little lower than the 

angels;" and then still further he humbled himself even 

unto death, and yet more even unto the shameful death 

of the cross— as a culprit, as a sinner. (Heb. 2:9,16; 

Phil. 2:6-9.) This lesson, appropriate to the season, 

calls our attention to the birth of "the man Christ Jesus." 

In the divine predictions of a coming Savior attention 
is largely called to the fact that he is to be a King, 
a Deliverer, a Savior. This point is made prominent 
because God appealed to mankind along the line of 
their necessities and hopes. The sacrificial feature of 
our Lord's ministry was made less prominent than his 
power and majesty and glory, because the sacrifice related 
specially to God and was to meet the demands of 
the divine law against the sinner-race. The question 
of how God would settle the matter consistently with 
his own sentence of death, resting upon the race, would 
to the average human mind be much less important than 
the statement of the resulting glories, restitution and 
blessings. Hence, we find the references to the sacrificial 
features of our Lord's ministry largely presented 
under types and symbols intended to be comprehended 
only by those who, as sons of God, would be guided 
into the truth by the spirit of God. 

It is not surprising that the angels who announced 
our Lord's birth mentioned only the glories to follow 
and not his sufferings which would intervene. It is 
not surprising that they did not weep for the sufferings 
and humiliation, but sang "Glory to God in the 



highest, on earth peace, good will toward men;" grasping 
merely the culmination of the great divine plan 
which had its beginning in the birth of Jesus. 

(1,2) Whether or not the "wise men" of the 
East were Hebrews we are not informed; but since divine 
favor was for the time confined to Israel, and since 
that favor did not depart until they had rejected the 
Messiah, we consider it highly probable that these wise 
men from the East were part of "the twelve tribes 
scattered abroad," who, "instantly serving God," were 
hoping for and "waiting for the consolation of Israel" 
through the long promised Messiah. (Acts 26:7; Luke 2:25.) 
We do know that hundreds of thousands if not 
several millions of Israelites were carried captive to 
this very East country— Babylon, Medo-Persia; and 
we know also that less than 55,000 availed themselves 
of the decree of Cyrus permitting their return to Palestine. 
The great bulk of the people Israel, therefore, 
at that time (as now) resided in foreign lands. 
And it would appear that their foreign captivity was 
helpful to their religious interests, and that the Israelites 
in general had more faith in the Lord and more 
strong interest in prophecies respecting Messiah after 
the captivity in Babylon than for several hundred years 
previous, when they were continually beset with 
idolatry. 

The promise of God to Abraham of a great "seed," 
a great king and ruler who should bless the world with 
a righteous reign, it would appear, was carried by the 
Israelites into all the then civilized world; leading some 
to expect a Jewish Messiah, it led others through a 
feeling of pride to declare that they were as able as the 
Jews to produce the desirable government and ruler 
for the world. Hence, we find that the idea of universal 
dominion began to prevail. It is claimed by 
some that Zoroaster, the great Persian religious teacher, 
was a disciple of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the 
memoir of Mrs. Grant, missionary to Persia, says:— 

"Zoroaster taught the Persians concerning Christ. 
He declared that in the latter days a pure virgin should 

R2081 : page 309 

conceive, and that as soon as the child was born a star 
would appear, even at noonday, with undiminished 
luster. 'You, my son,' exclaimed the venerable seer, 
'will perceive its rising before any other nation. As 
soon as you see the star follow it wherever it leads you 
and adore the mysterious child, offering your gifts to 
him with the profoundest humility. He is the almighty 
Word which created the heavens.'" 

Although this is only a legend, it is interesting to 
know that there was such a legend amongst the people 
of the East. And respecting Zoroaster it may be said 
that his teachings were of a higher character than 
those of other heathen teachers. 



(3-6) Expecting a king, the wise men naturally 
came to the palace of Herod, who, although called the 
King of the Jews, was the representative of their conquerors, 
the Romans. Herod was the founder of the 
House of Herod and naturally had great expectations, 
not only with reference to the duration of his own dominion, 
but also with a view to the establishment of 
his posterity in the power and office which he enjoyed. 
No wonder, then, that he was "troubled." The prospect 
of a rival either in the power or in the esteem of 
the people was not to his liking. "And all Jerusalem 
[was troubled] with him." Political influence takes 
in a wide circle. There were connected with Herod's 
government or benefited by it, directly or indirectly, 
many whose plans, hopes, etc., might be very much 
disarranged by any change of the government. Herod 
evidently knew of the Jewish tradition respecting Messiah, 
for he at once sent for those who were learned in 
the Scriptures to demand of them where the prophets 
indicated that Messiah should be born. The scribes 
and Pharisees were evidently quite familiar with the 
subject, had looked it up, and apparently without 
hesitation gave the name of Messiah's birthplace as 
Bethlehem, and quoted from the prophet in support 
of it. 

(7-12) The cunning art of Herod, by which he 
hoped to learn who was this divinely designated Prince 
and heir to his throne, is only appreciated when we 
remember the sequel to this narrative: how, when 
he found that the wise men did not return to give him 
the information and permit the destruction of the child 
Jesus, he determined to kill all the children of the city 
of Bethlehem of two years old and under; thus he 
might be sure, he thought, that he had outwitted the 
divine plan and protected his own power. 

The star which seemingly had led these wise men 
toward Jerusalem, and which then apparently had vanished, 
and left the searchers to arouse the curiosity and 
interest of the people of Jerusalem, again became their 
guide as they left the city, and led them to Bethlehem, 
which is only a short distance, and the star appears 
to have indicated even the very house in which they 
found the new-born King. According to the custom 
of the time they presented costly treasures as well as 
their homage. 

Although the King came, his own received him 
not; and like the "young nobleman" of his own parable 
he went "into a far country," even heaven itself, 
there to be invested with power by the King of kings, 
and to postpone the establishment of his kingdom until 
his Church, his bride, his joint-heirs, should be selected 
and prepared to share the Kingdom with him. 

Meantime, the world still needs a King as much 
as ever. All nations are learning more and more their 
need of a wise, a just, a powerful, a loving, a merciful 
ruler. They need this very one, and are gradually 



learning that none of the fallen race can be trusted 
with much power, honor and glory; that all are weak 
through the fall, and that a superior king and a superior 
government are essential to their highest blessing. The 
masses are beginning to feel this need more keenly; 
and it is remarkable to what extent various advocates 
of Socialism recognize and quote the teachings of this 
very King with commendation;— even though it may 
be said that they wish others to be governed by the 
Golden Rule, while they themselves fail to walk by it. 

The world is beginning to realize that the King is 
at the door: the Herods of to-day and with them all 
those of influence and power, political and financial, 
are "troubled" at a prospect of a change of government, 
which their own "wise men" announce as imminent. 
We need not expect that the princes of the world will 
welcome him: rather they will fear a disruption of 
present institutions;— fear that under his government 
they would not have so favorable opportunities for 
prosperity; and that in the general levelling, which 
the prophets declare will accompany his reign, some 
that are high shall be abased, and some that are low 
shall be exalted. As a consequence, Messiah's Kingdom, 
although a kingdom of peace and righteousness, 
must be introduced by "a time of trouble, such as was 
not since there was a nation." Yet we rejoice in the 
promise that "when the judgments of the Lord are 
abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness," and that eventually his kingdom 
shall come to be the "desire of all nations." 

Thus far the gospel of the kingdom has been received 
by only a few; and the special blessings have 
been with the few who have acknowledged the King, 
and who are being prepared to be joint-heirs in his 
kingdom. But let us not forget the gracious results 
that are to follow the establishment of that kingdom, 
when, as declared in the Golden Text,— the good tidings 
and the great joy "shall be to all people." 



page 309 
DEC. 27.— REVIEW of the lessons respecting Solomon. 



R2081 : page 310 

CHRIST'S ASCENSION. 

-JAN. 3.-ACTS 1:1-14.— 

"While he blessed them, he was parted from them, 
and carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 



THE writer, Luke the evangelist, here introduces 
the Book of Acts and associates it with the 
Gospel of Luke. 

(2,3) These two verses cover briefly the forty 
days of our Lord's presence with the disciples after his 
resurrection, prior to his ascension. An important part 
of our Lord's mission during those forty days was to 
give the disciples instruction respecting the spiritual 
character of the kingdom to be established, and the necessity 
for his sufferings as a prelude to the glory to 
follow. His words of explanation, as for instance to 
the disciples on the way to Emmaus, constituted only 
a part of this instruction; another and, we may judge, 
a still more important instruction was conveyed to them 
through observation of his conduct. He would prove 
to them two things: (1) that he whom they had seen 
crucified and buried had come to life, had arisen from 
the dead; (2) that, although alive and the same person, 
with the same individuality, yet now his conditions 
were entirely altered;— that he was no longer "the man 
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom," but that, 
having finished that work for the performance of which 
he took the form and nature of a servant, he was made 
alive again on the higher, the spiritual plane, which he 
left more than thirty-three years previously in order to 
redeem mankind. 

Since the apostles were still natural men, not having 
as yet received the gift of the holy spirit, they 
were still unable to appreciate spiritual things (John 3:12); 
and hence it was necessary to give the proofs 
of a spiritual matter (namely, that Christ had risen 
from the dead a spirit being) along lines which the 
unilluminated could appreciate. It would not have 
availed the accomplishment of his purpose, it would 
not have given the disciples satisfactory evidence of 
his resurrection, had he appeared to them as he did 
subsequently to Saul of Tarsus in the glory of a spirit 
being "above the brightness of the sun at noonday." 
That was a valuable lesson to the Apostle Paul and to 
all the apostles; but it needed the connecting links associating 
the risen and glorified Jesus with the man 
Jesus, and these links of association were provided during 
the forty days before the ascension. It was to this 
end that our Lord appeared to the disciples in bodies 
of flesh, and on two occasions in bodies resembling the 
one which they had seen crucified, bearing also the 
nail and spear marks. He thus associated in their 
minds the crucified man-Jesus and the risen spirit- Jesus. 

The second step in the lesson was in the fact that 
these appearances were infrequent: in all the forty 
days the records would not indicate that he appeared 
to them at the very outside more than ten times, and 
his interviews with them would appear to have been 
very brief, so that we are certainly safe in concluding 
that out of the forty days he was not visibly manifest 
to the disciples more than four hours— quite probably 



not more than one-half hour at each of the five to ten 
interviews recorded. Where was he the remainder of 
the time? would naturally come to them as a question. 
Why not with them continually as before his crucifixion? 
they probably asked. And this was part of the 
lesson— to induce reasoning and reflection on their part, 
and to cause them to understand that a great "change" 
had taken place in the interim between his crucifixion 
and his first appearance to them on the morning of his 
resurrection. We can fancy their study of the subject 
during those forty days, and discussions pro and 
con, their wonders when the next appearance would 
take place, and what would be the outcome of the whole 
matter. 

The third feature of their lesson in observation 
was in respect to the manner and variety of his appearances; 
once as the gardener to Mary, who saw no nail 
prints in his hands or feet, although she embraced his 
feet; again as a sojourner and guest at Emmaus in 
another form, so that the disciples did not know him 
and did not remark anything peculiar about his hands 
or his feet, although he was with them at the table. 
It was in his asking of a blessing upon the food that 
they recognized him. Again at the seashore where he 
evidently appeared in still another form to Peter, James 
and John who recognized him by the miracle, and concerning 
whom the evangelist says, None of them durst 
ask him who he was, knowing that it was the Lord- 
not by the marks of the crown of thorns, not by the nail 
prints, but by his manner and the miraculous draught 
of great fishes following their unprofitable night of toil. 
And on two occasions he appeared in a body of flesh 
like to that crucified, with nail prints and spear marks; 
once when doubting Thomas was absent, and once when 
he was present. These various appearances under 
various conditions in various places, wholly unlike his 
previous conduct with them, were calculated to teach 
them the lesson that he was "changed"— that he was 
no longer a flesh being, "the man Christ Jesus," "made 
flesh" and limited to fleshly conditions in locomotion 
and visibility, etc.; but that now he was alive, though 
so changed that he could appear or disappear, assume 
one kind of body or another kind, assume one kind of 
clothing or another kind at pleasure. 

The fourth lesson along the lines of observation 
was taught by the fact that he appeared and disappeared 
miraculously, suddenly, unaccountably. Coming 
from they knew not whither, the Lord had joined the 
two going to Emmaus; and then, after he had given them 
as much of a lesson as they could digest, he "vanished 
out of their sight." The same evening in another 
city he suddenly appeared to the ten, the doors being 
shut for fear of the Jews, and, we may suppose, securely 
barred: he needed not to undo the bolts nor to open 
the door as the "man Christ Jesus" would have needed 
to do; the spirit-born Jesus could do and did do just 



what he had previously explained to Nicodemus in the 
hearing of the disciples as recorded by the Apostle 

R2082: page 310 

John (3:5). He came and went like the wind; they 
could not tell whence he came; and when he went he 
vanished out of their sight again, and they could not 
tell whither he went: So is every one that is born of 
the spirit. No wonder the disciples were astonished 
and affrighted at the first, and needed that our Lord 

R2082: page 311 

should convince them that they were not looking at a 
spirit but at plain, ordinary flesh and bones, of which 
they need have no fear. Of this he assured them 
saying, you do not see a spirit, "a spirit hath not flesh 
and bones as ye see me have." Similarly he appeared 
in a body of flesh and bones to Father Abraham and 
ate and drank with him (Gen. 18:1,2); and similarly 
angels in the past upon certain missions have appeared 
to men. We are to draw a great distinction between the 
power of a spirit being to appear in a body of flesh and 
the great humiliation which our Lord accomplished on 
our behalf, when he entirely left his glory and exchanged 
his nature as a spirit being for human nature and was 
"made flesh." In the one case the spirit nature was 
maintained with unrestricted power and merely used a 
human form as a means of communication, creating the 
human body as well as the human clothing in an instant, 
and as quickly dissolving both. This was evidently 
what our Lord did, when he appeared in the room, the 
doors being shut, and when he vanished, the doors still 
being shut. The power thus manifested is so far beyond 
human power as to be incomprehensible to us, as 
the turning of water into wine or as the resurrection 
itself. It can only be received by faith based upon the 
evidences of reliable witnesses and supported on every 
hand by our knowledge of the divine power. 

That the apostles got this thought is evident from 
the peculiar manner in which they refer to the Lord's 
manifestations after his resurrection. They say, "he 
appeared," "he showed himself." These are not ordinary 
expressions nor do they mark ordinary circumstances. 
Ordinarily, people are seen if present without 
any necessity of showing themselves or appearing. 
The disciples learned and noted also the fact that these 
showings and appearings were only to the believers and 
never to the world; which agrees with our Lord's testimony 
before his death,— "Yet a little while and the 
world seeth me no more." Nor will the world ever 
see the man Christ Jesus. While he still bears the 
title of Son of Man as a mark of his great obedience to 
the Father, and the purchase of the human race, and 
his title to the glories of the divine nature which he 



now possesses as a reward of his obedience even unto 
death, even the death of the cross, God has now highly 
exalted him and given him a name which is above every 
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow and every tongue confess. 

Many confuse themselves greatly by failing to 
clearly distinguish between spirit-beings and human-beings 
and their distinct powers. Very many suppose 
that a spirit body must be made out of a human body, 
and must still contain certain human elements. They 
overlook the fact that the resurrection body is not the 
body buried, as the Apostle so forcibly proves (1 Cor. 15:37,38); 
nor will those have "flesh and blood" 
bodies who shall inherit the Kingdom. (1 Cor. 15:50; 
John 3:3,5,8.) Some, in an effort to harmonize a 
false theory with the Scriptures, claim that a spirit-body 
is one in which the blood gives place to spirit. 
(Do they mean wind?) They fail to see that this 
would not harmonize with the conditions noted foregoing. 
A body of flesh and bones with wind in the veins 
instead of blood could no more come into a room when 
the doors were shut than could a body of flesh and 
bones and blood: nor could it vanish from sight— nor 
could its clothing come in and then vanish out of a 
closed room. The only solution is that which recognizes 
the truth of our Lord's words,— "A spirit hath 
not flesh and bones;" although spirit beings in harmony 
with God have in the past been permitted to assume 
flesh and bones and clothing for approved purposes. 

(4,5) Here our attention is called again to the 
fact that the gift of the holy spirit to the gospel Church 
is something unique— wholly different from any previous 
gift of the holy spirit except upon our Lord Jesus 
himself. They were to wait for it, and did wait ten 
days from the time of our Lord's ascension, until the 
spirit power came upon them. They waited while he 
as the great High Priest went into heaven itself and 
there appeared in the presence of God and presented 
to God on our behalf the merits of his sacrifice at Calvary. 

(6-8) They were perplexed with the new order of 
things since Christ's resurrection. Their previous ideas, 
common to the Jews, had been of an earthly kingdom, 
and Christ and themselves, the apostles, associated 
in a human or fleshly glory and kingdom power. Now 
however they perceived their Master wonderfully 
changed, and he spoke to them again of going away 
and said nothing about the kingdom for which they in 
common with all recognized as the twelve tribes of Israel 
waited. (Acts 26:7.) So they asked him concerning 
the time for its establishment. In his answer he 
does not deny that there will be a kingdom, but the 
reverse, merely telling them that it is not for them to 
know the time. When they asked him a similar question 
before his crucifixion he answered that he did not 
know. (Mark 13:32.) But he does not so answer on 
this occasion. We must suppose, on the contrary, that he 



did know, because he was now born of the spirit, and 
he himself testified "All power in heaven and in earth is 
given unto me." This must therefore have included 
the power of knowledge; but he withheld the knowledge 
from the disciples in their interest and instead 
told them of the coming power of the spirit, and of the 
intermediate mission appointed for them and all his 
Church, of witnessing to the world before the establishment 
of his Kingdom. 

(9-1 1) The account of the ascension is very simply 
given and yet, strange to say, many stumble over 
the statement of the angels "this same Jesus" "shall 
so come in like manner as ye have seen him go." Many 
think of this as though it read that same Jesus, "the 
man Christ Jesus," shall come again. But it was this 
Jesus, the resurrected Jesus, the Jesus whom none of 
the world saw; the Jesus who was seen by the disciples 
only a few times during that forty days; the Jesus who 
was seen by them only when "he appeared" or 
"showed himself;" the Jesus who could come into their 
midst, the doors being shut, and who could and did 
"vanish out of their sight;" "this same Jesus" is the 
one who will "come again." 

Again, many get a wrong impression from the 
word "manner." They think of manner as meaning 
flesh; but manner means manner. He ascended in a quiet 
manner, without display or commotion or noise, in 
a secret manner, so far as the world was concerned, in 
a manner known only to the disciples. Hence, when 
he comes again in like manner, it will be likewise unknown 
and invisibly to the world, without noise or 
demonstration, and recognized only by believers. 



