Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
What a wonderful time we had on March 8. It was the day of the graduation of Gilead’s 48th class. The Assembly Hall was packed and the program was superb.
Brother Knorr pointed out that the students in the class, from twenty-one lands around the earth, were going to serve in twenty-four lands where the preaching fields are ripe for harvesting as recent reports show. For example, he announced that four students were going to Chile, a land where a 15-percent increase in publishers recently brought the total to 6,824, and they placed an all-time peak of 18,764 books. Five students are headed for Ecuador, where book placements in January were double the report of the same month last year and a new peak of 2,623 publishers shared in the work. How splendid!
Just think what a fine assignment the four students have who anticipate serving Japan! That land reported its thirtieth consecutive new peak, with 8,316 publishers! Consider, too, the joy of the four headed for Korea. It was reported that when freezing weather there forced the closing of schools, many young folks zealously entered the vacation pioneer ranks and a new peak of 1,288 vacation pioneers was reached. Not only that, but Korea had its twenty-sixth publisher peak in 27 months; 11,380 reported preaching, a 21-percent increase! Yes, the harvest is ripe and the increase is on as never before! In his talk, “The Way,” Brother Knorr urged the graduating missionaries to stick to their assignments. Forthcoming issues of The Watchtower and Awake! will contain more details of the fine program.
Soon we shall be seeing students coming in for the next class of Gilead, due to begin on April 27. It is planned that 72 students from six different lands will then be with us. We anxiously look forward to meeting them.
The willingness of these young men and women to offer themselves for service wherever they can best be used stirs us all to join with them in seeking success through faithfulness in the ministry. And during April, with its special activity, there is much for all of us to do in that joyful ministry.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

