Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING APRIL 5
Theme: Succeed in Writing Living Letters. (2 Cor. 3:2. 3) Song 115.
17 min: Family discussion of text for the day and comments from “The Watchtower.” Family head then reviews with family what has been done by each family member in the ministry so far this month and makes sure that all have filled out a report slip for their service, to be turned in at next meeting. Bases comments on article “Are You Writing a Letter?” Also cover third paragraph of that main article. Highlight briefly each of the seven suggested avenues to new subscriptions, by means of experiences in the congregation, from “Yearbook,” or by demonstrations.
13 min: Suggested back-call, referred to in main article, “Are You Writing a Letter?”
(5 min.) Chairman gives talk based on first paragraph of main article.
(5 min.) Publisher makes back-call on new subscriber. After the initial greeting, say: “You know, the attitude you expressed in our conversation last week impressed me. I really appreciated the interest and respect you had for the Bible thoughts we discussed. That’s why I thought you’d enjoy something in this ‘Truth’ book.” Hand him a book and have him turn to page 5. Ask him to read the first sentence. After he has, ask him, “Would you like to?” Repeat this with the next two questions, giving him opportunity each time to express himself. Now have him read the final sentence in paragraph one. Without getting answer, you could say, “For an answer to that question a notice question ‘a’ on the next paragraph.” Read it and let him find the answer. (Then proceed to consider with him the next few paragraphs to show him what hope the Bible gives. This the chairman could describe rather than demonstrate.) After making arrangements for your next call you might say. “If you would like to have that book for use at our next visit, we leave it for 25 cents.”
(3 min.) Chairman: This very simple and straightforward approach could be used with success when calling back on subscribers, or where magazines or books have been placed, or where no literature was taken but interest was shown. Base closing thoughts on last paragraph of main article.
17 min: Succeeding in Subscription Work. Everyone should have a copy of April 15 “Watchtower.”
(10 min.) Consider together outstanding points that would interest people in your territory. Chairman emphasizes need to be prepared with specific references in magazine to arouse interest in subscribing.
(6 min.) Demonstrate interest-arousing presentation of subscription offer.
(1 min.) Encourage offering subscription at every opportunity.
 3 min: Accounts report.
10 min: Concluding comments. Refer to local congregation field report for March and “How Did We Do in February?” Song 98.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 12
Theme: Everyone Can Place Magazines. (Jer. 1:6-8) Song 39.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
8 min: Presenting April 22 “Awake!” All publishers should bring a copy to meeting. Discuss items that will appeal to people in your territory.
12 min: “May I Deliver Them?” Questions and answers. Interview some local publishers who have magazine routes, asking how they succeeded in establishing a route. What appeals to local people? There is value to the people in having regular contact with Jehovah’s servants. If none have magazine routes yet, consider local possibilities of organizing some.
10 min: Do You Call Back Where Individual Magazines Were Placed? A talk. Our work not simply to make record number of placements of magazines. Note placements, with view to starting studies. Call for experiences of local publishers in this back-call service. Also consider “Yearbook,” page 173, paragraph 2.
15 min: “Do You Think I Can Do It?” Overseer or assistant discusses article and theme of meeting, inviting all qualified ones present to participate in magazine work this week. (Refer to April 1 “Watchtower” article “Going from Door to Door for the First Time.”) Outline plans for a special magazine day. Show how newly associated ones can join in, offering them assistance and companionship.
10 min: Concluding remarks and slogan on page 4. High points of Branch Letter. Song 10.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 19
Theme: Assembling Together is Beneficial. (Heb. 10:23-25) Song 36.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 8 min: “‘Men of Good Will’ District Assemblies.” Encourage everyone to make definite plans now.
12 min: “How Are Your Congregational Manners?” Questions and answers. May have one or two brief demonstrations of proper microphone position and of facing audience during presentations.
10 min: Question Box. Two students discuss points with school servant.
12 min: What We Learn in Meetings Tell to Others. (Matt. 10:27) Talk on how essential house-to-house service is. (Matt. 10:11-13) There are sheeplike persons who are searching for the truth. Important to be out among them. Let your light shine. Your visit could be the answer to a prayer. Refer to some of following experiences in “Yearbook”: p. 102, par. 1; p. 137, par. 4 p. 138, par. 1; p. 246, par. 1.
13 min: Concluding comments. Acknowledge good work of vacation pioneers (if any) and show how having pioneers out daily has good effect on congregation activity. Encourage consideration of regular pioneer service or plans for future vacation pioneer opportunities. Song 63.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 26
Theme: Well-Pleasing to God by Faith with Works. (Heb. 11:6) Song 78.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 8 min: Bible study servant discusses importance of checking all notations on House-to-House Record. Go back this week to get subscriptions. If people do not subscribe, may start study.
10 min: May Theme: “Well-Pleasing to God by Faith with Works.” A talk. May refer to “Yearbook” p. 54, par. 5, and p. 96, par. 3 to 97, par. 2.
20 min: Presenting the “Mystery” Book.
(2 min.) Chairman displays “Mystery” book. Comments about May campaign. In territories where people are somewhat familiar with Bible a publisher might do this:
(5 min.) Demonstrate: “Have you ever read the Bible book of Revelation? Many people have read it and wondered about the meaning of its numerous symbolic expressions. This book ‘Then is Finished the Mystery of God’ contains an interesting verse-by-verse consideration of much of this last book of the Bible and shows how other parts of the Bible help us to understand the book of Revelation. History and current events also play a part.” Open book and show how headings give verses under consideration on each page. Publisher could then say: “Chapter 24 is a very interesting one. This chapter tells what the book of Revelation says about God’s promises for the near future when a new system of things will be in operation here on the earth.” (Turn to page 368. Read the last paragraph on page 368 over onto page 369.)
(1 min.) Chairman explains that many other presentations can be used. Simplicity is important. Another presentation that might be used effectively in some territories includes opening the Bible to Revelation 1:3.
(5 min.) Demonstrate presentation: “Have you ever read the Bible book of Revelation? Note what Revelation 1:3 says.” Then after reading the scripture, the publisher might say: “God’s promise made here is that happiness comes to those who read the words of this prophecy and observe the things written in it. When and how does this occur? Now is God’s appointed time. The book of Revelation is a prophecy having its fulfillment in this century and it is very interesting to see how history and current events dovetail with prophecy written nearly 2,000 years ago. Therefore, all men on earth should desire to learn what is in the Bible and get in line for God’s blessings.” Then the publisher might turn to Chapter 24 and conclude as did the presentation outlined above. After placing book, publisher makes note on House-to-House Record.
(7 min.) Chairman tells how publishers can plan to call back as soon as possible. Publisher can return with his own question booklet and explain how the book can be studied. In some cases it may be a good idea to invite the interested person to the regular congregation book study where the book is being studied. A question booklet can be placed with such persons to encourage them to prepare ahead of time. On the back-call publisher can talk to interested person and see what his interests are and decide whether to try to start the study using the “Mystery” book or the booklet that was placed or to bring out the “Truth” book and talk about some points in it. Give examples. It is important not to wait too long before calling back. Suggest one week should be the maximum.
17 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate Theocratic News items and announcements. Discuss “Using the ‘Yearbook.’” Song 93.
WEEK STARTING MAY 3
Each congregation will plan its own program for this meeting.

