Troubled Cyprus Hears “Good News”
FOLLOWING a coup that overturned the government in July 1974, the Turkish army invaded Cyprus. Since then nearly seven years have passed and the northern half of this country (about 40 percent of it) is still held by the Turks. Thousands have fled to England, Australia, Canada and Greece. Some 200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees have moved from the northern to the southern part of Cyprus.
One might think that such circumstances would cause the country to suffer economically. But in the southern part of Cyprus the economy is flourishing. New houses, hotels and business offices are shooting up like mushrooms. Here a person must beware of succumbing to materialism.
KINGDOM PREACHING IN CYPRUS
Jesus Christ once said: “I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent forth.” (Luke 4:43) Jehovah’s Witnesses in Cyprus endeavor to share such “good news” with the inhabitants of this troubled island.
Although the Turkish forces occupying the north have prohibited the activity of Jehovah’s Witnesses, fine progress has been realized in the south. Approximately 300 Witness refugees from northern Cyprus have moved south. Many of them have succeeded in securing homes originally owned by Turks who moved north.
With the dividing of the country, the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the city of Nicosia came to be located on the border between northern and southern Cyprus. Since this was a dangerous area, it was decided to transport the contents of the building to the city of Limassol. At the risk of their lives, a small group of Witnesses entered the branch building, closing the window shutters on the side that faced the Turkish troops. Next, they collected the furniture and office equipment, lowered it from a window and carried it over the fences of nearby abandoned homes. Then they loaded the materials into waiting cars for transport out of the danger zone. The road in front of the branch building could not be used, as it was an easy target for nearby Turkish troops.
In times past many Cypriots had never heard of Jehovah’s Witnesses. But this is no longer the case. During 1980 there was a peak of 1,008 Witnesses sharing in the Kingdom preaching activity, a fine increase over the 962 Kingdom preachers doing the work during the previous year. An old Turkish cinema in Limassol now serves as an Assembly Hall for Jehovah’s Witnesses, with part of it being used as a Kingdom Hall. There are now 12 congregations in Cyprus.
OVERCOMING FAMILY OPPOSITION
With regard to the effect that genuine Christianity would have on some people, Jesus declared: “I came to cause division, with a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a young wife against her mother-in-law. Indeed, a man’s enemies will be persons of his own household.” (Matt. 10:35, 36) In modern times this has proved to be true also here in Cyprus. A young woman, first contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1975, relates:
“I was having serious difficulties getting along with my husband, and in April 1975 I left him and went to live with relatives in Limassol. Jehovah’s Witnesses were visiting the family regularly and I soon realized that I knew nothing about the Bible. Noting my interest in the Word of God, the Witnesses conducted a regular Bible study with me. At the same time difficulties between my husband and me increased until my nerves were at the breaking point. One night, while in a very distressed state, I decided to read a publication of the Watchtower Society that explains basic Bible teachings. My interest was so great that I continued reading until completion of the entire book at 4 a.m.”
Shortly thereafter this woman attended a circuit assembly of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Concerning the Christian conduct that she observed there, she exclaimed: “I thought I was in paradise!”
But then opposition started. “Arriving home from the assembly,” she relates, “my mother beat me. My husband too opposed me; and so did many others in the family. Due to fear of having their reputation besmirched if I became a Witness, my mother even threatened suicide. However, one of my sisters showed interest in the Bible and began to study with Jehovah’s Witnesses. This caused other family members to turn against both of us. Our books were destroyed and the Witnesses who studied with us were threatened with death.”
As a result of what this woman was learning from her study of the Bible, she sought reconciliation with her husband, from whom she had separated. A home was located and she and her two children again began living with her husband. But this did not end the opposition to her Bible study. “Many times on returning from a Christian meeting,” she explains, “I found that my husband had locked the doors. When I finally would be permitted to enter, a beating was waiting for me and the children.”
The Bible urges Christians not to return evil for evil, but to display long-suffering. (Rom. 12:17, 18) The young woman endeavored to heed this Scriptural advice. It had a rewarding outcome, as she points out, saying:
“After three long years I was baptized, in April 1978.  From then on I have had continuous blessings from Jehovah. My husband has softened his attitude and has begun studying the Bible. We are a united family. My sister is now baptized. Her husband also has had a change of attitude. He has shown interest in Bible study and attends meetings at the Kingdom Hall. My parents, too, have changed. Previously they had refused to recognize me anymore as their daughter. But now they view that decision as foolish and do not wish to lose their children just for the sake of what others may think. All my relatives now want to learn about the Bible.”
Persons who govern their lives by what Jesus taught make a fine impression on others. (Matt. 5:16) On one occasion, a lawyer argued in court that his client would no longer steal or tell lies. The judge replied: “Has your client become a Jehovah’s Witness?”
While many continue to oppose the Bible educational activity carried on by Jehovah’s Witnesses, persons who have a love for Scriptural truth are being found and are responding favorably. This is a fine incentive for Jehovah’s Witnesses to continue sharing the “good news” with the inhabitants of Cyprus.
[Map on page 29]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
TURKEY
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
Nicosia
CYPRUS
SYRIA
LEBANON

