From Our Readers
Supreme Court  Thank you for the cover series “U.S. Supreme Court and Free Speech.” (January 8, 2003) These articles showed how the prejudices of the majority can sometimes be viewed as unquestionably right. Most say that it is all right to believe whatever you want but that it is taboo to talk about it. After reading these articles, I will be more open about discussing my religious beliefs with others.
S. O., Japan
The Stratton, Ohio, case was indeed a triumph for free speech. The favorable decision may have a persuasive effect in other parts of the world, such as here in the Philippines, where in some places Jehovah’s Witnesses are hampered by secular authorities who require that a permit be obtained for preaching from house to house. We are grateful for this much-needed victory.
N. E., Philippines
Hatred  Thank you from the bottom of my heart for the experience of José Gomez, related in the article “Freed From the Chains of Hate.” (January 8, 2003) For many years, I too was subjected to harsh treatment. Now I do not hate anyone. José’s words, “Where would I be today without Jehovah’s mercy?” apply to me too. Thank you for this wonderful experience of how he overcame his hatred.
N. T., Japan
Safer Pregnancy  I want to thank you for the article “Making Your Pregnancy Safer.” (January 8, 2003) This article has given me a clear view of what pregnancy involves. I am 32 years old, and I really needed this article. Now I understand what I have to do to make pregnancy safer and show appreciation for this wonderful gift.
B. C., Italy
This article mentions that a woman may be tested for group B streptococcus at 26 to 28 weeks. The current recommended time for screening is between 35 and 37 weeks of gestation and not at 26 to 28 weeks. Readers of this article will likely query their physicians as to why they are not being screened at 26 to 28 weeks. Their physicians may dismiss Awake! as a credible source of information for their patients.
L. S., United States
“Awake!” responds: Our issues are prepared months in advance to allow time for translation into more than 80 languages. At the time the article on safer pregnancy was written, between 26 and 28 weeks was accepted by many as a proper time for screening. In August 2002, however, the American Academy of Pediatrics issued updated information that was provided to them by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control. Currently, as this reader correctly mentions, the recommended screening time is at 35 to 37 weeks.
On page 13, a footnote states that iron and folic acid can be found in liver and nuts. However, liver contains a lot of vitamin A—which, as your article states, can be dangerous for the baby.
B. J., Britain
“Awake!” responds: Thank you for the caution.
Peer Pressure  I am a 15-year-old girl who finds it hard to deal with peer pressure. I was very pleased to come across the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Deal With Peer Pressure?” (December 22, 2002) Reading about other youths who have had problems reassures me that I’m not the only one. We can overcome peer pressure with the help of the one and only Almighty God. Thank you so much for this information, which came at the right time.
K. R., Australia
[Picture Credit Line on page 30]
Photo by Josh Mathes, Collection of the Supreme Court of the United States

