Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed reading the recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will find it interesting to recall the following:
□ Why can we have confidence in Jehovah’s choice of individuals to guide his people?
Jehovah chooses for certain responsibilities individuals who have the qualities necessary to guide his people in the way he wants them to go at a particular time.—8/15, page 14.
□ What can we learn from Jonah’s experience?
Jonah thought too much of himself and too little of others. We can learn from Jonah by keeping ourselves and our personal feelings in the background.—8/15, page 19.
□ In what way can it be said that “the name of Jehovah is a strong tower”? (Proverbs 18:10)
Taking refuge in God’s name signifies trusting in Jehovah himself. (Psalm 20:1; 122:4) It means supporting his sovereignty, upholding his laws and principles, having faith in his promises, and giving him exclusive devotion. (Isaiah 50:10; Hebrews 11:6)—9/1, page 10.
□ How does Paul’s method of witnessing before dignitaries provide an example for us?
In speaking to King Agrippa, Paul used discretion, emphasizing points on which he and Agrippa were in agreement. Likewise, we should stress the positive aspects of the good news, emphasizing hopes held in common. (1 Corinthians 9:22)—9/1, page 31.
□ Who benefit from Jehovah’s patience?
Because of Jehovah’s patience, today millions more are being given the opportunity to be saved through the coming “day of Jehovah.” (2 Peter 3:9-15) His patience is also allowing each of us to ‘keep working out our own salvation with fear and trembling.’ (Philippians 2:12)—9/15, page 20.
□ How valuable was the Septuagint translation of the Bible?
This translation figured prominently in spreading knowledge about Jehovah God and his Kingdom with Jesus Christ as King. By means of the Septuagint, important groundwork was laid for Greek-speaking Jews and Gentiles in the first century to accept the good news of the Kingdom.—9/15, page 30.
□ What does the parable of the prodigal son teach us about God?
First, that Jehovah is “merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness and truth.” (Exodus 34:6) Second, that he is “ready to forgive” when a change of heart provides a basis for extending mercy. (Psalm 86:5)—10/1, pages 12, 13.
□ When will the peaceful conditions promised at Isaiah 65:21-25 be realized?
As Jehovah’s united worshipers in the spiritual paradise today, the anointed and those of the “other sheep” are now experiencing God-given peace. (John 10:16) And such peace will extend into the physical Paradise, when ‘God’s will takes place in all the earth, even as it does in heaven.’ At that time the prophet Isaiah’s words will be fully realized. (Matthew 6:10)—10/15, page 24.
□ Why do Christians celebrate wedding anniversaries but not birthdays?
The Bible does not put marriage in a bad light. It is entirely a private matter whether Christians choose to take note of a wedding anniversary, reflecting on the joyfulness of that event and on their resolve to work for success as a couple. However, the only birthday celebrations of Biblical record are those of pagans, and such were linked to instances of cruelty.—10/15, pages 30, 31.
□ In Paul’s illustration recorded at 1 Corinthians 3:12, 13, what does the “fire” represent, and of what should all Christians be aware?
There is a fire that we all face in life—tests of our faith. (John 15:20; James 1:2, 3) Everyone to whom we teach the truth will be tested. If we teach poorly, there may be sad consequences, as Paul warned. (1 Corinthians 3:15)—11/1, page 11.
□ How did Noah ‘walk with the true God’? (Genesis 6:9)
Noah walked with God in that he did what God told him to do. Because of devoting his life to the doing of God’s will, Noah enjoyed a warm, intimate relationship with God.—11/15, page 10.
□ What opportunities are opened for us by our not knowing the exact time when God’s vengeance will be executed on the wicked?
This gives us the opportunity to prove that we truly love Jehovah and want to walk in his ways forever. It also shows that we are loyal to God and trust in his way of handling matters. Moreover, this helps to keep us vigilant and spiritually awake. (Matthew 24:42-44)—11/15, page 18.
□ What does it mean to put faith “in the name of the Son of God”? (1 John 5:13)
This means obeying all of Christ’s commandments, including his commandment to “love one another.” (John 15:14, 17) Love seeks to do good to others. It banishes all racial, religious, and social prejudice.—12/1, page 7.
□ Why are Jehovah’s Witnesses “objects of hatred”? (Matthew 10:22)
Jehovah’s Witnesses have been unjustly hated for the same reasons that the early Christians were persecuted. First, Jehovah’s Witnesses act upon their religious beliefs in ways that make them unpopular with some. Second, they have been targets of false accusations—barefaced lies and twisted presentations of their beliefs.—12/1, page 14.

