Can You Be Like Phinehas When You Face Challenges?
IT IS a precious privilege to serve as a congregation elder. God’s Word acknowledges, however, that elders face challenges. On occasion, they must handle cases of wrongdoing in which they ‘judge for Jehovah.’ (2 Chron. 19:6) Or an overseer may receive an assignment for which he feels unprepared, as did Moses, who meekly asked regarding one assignment: “Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh?”—Ex. 3:11.
The Scriptures, written under the influence of the same active force that appoints elders, provide living examples of overseers who faced trials successfully. Phinehas was the son of Eleazar and the grandson of Aaron and thus was in line to become high priest. Three events in his life highlight the need for elders today to face challenges with courage, insight, and reliance on Jehovah.
“He at Once Got Up”
Phinehas was a young man when the Israelites were encamped on the Plains of Moab. The Bible reports: “The people started to have immoral relations with the daughters of Moab. . . . And the people began to eat and to bow down to their gods.” (Num. 25:1, 2) Jehovah afflicted the wrongdoers with a death-dealing scourge. Can you imagine how this report of wrongdoing and the scourge it caused must have affected Phinehas?
“Look!” the account continues, “a man of the sons of Israel came, and he was bringing near to his brothers a Midianite woman before Moses’ eyes and before the eyes of all the assembly of the sons of Israel, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting.” (Num. 25:6) What would priest Phinehas do? He was relatively young, and the offending Israelite was a chieftain who took the lead in worship among the people.—Num. 25:14.
But Phinehas feared Jehovah, not men. When he caught sight of the two, he at once took a lance in his hand and went after the man into the tent and pierced both of them through. How did Jehovah view Phinehas’ courage and decisiveness? Jehovah immediately ended the scourge and rewarded Phinehas with a covenant that the priesthood would remain in his line “to time indefinite.”—Num. 25:7-13.
Of course, Christian elders today do not resort to violence. But like Phinehas, elders must be ready to be decisive and courageous. For example, Guilherme had been serving as an elder for only a few months when he was asked to serve on a judicial committee. The case of wrongdoing involved an elder who had helped Guilherme when he was younger. “I felt awkward being in that position,” he says. “I found it difficult to sleep at night. I kept going over in my mind ways to handle this case without letting my emotions blur my spiritual vision. I prayed for several days and researched Bible publications.” This helped him to have the needed courage to handle the unique situation and render spiritual assistance to his erring brother.—1 Tim. 4:11, 12.
By acting with courage and decisiveness when situations in the congregation require such, elders become examples of faith and loyalty. Of course, other Christians also need to act courageously, reporting serious wrongdoing that they may become aware of. Likewise, it takes loyalty to discontinue association with a friend or relative who is disfellowshipped.—1 Cor. 5:11-13.
Insight Averts a Crisis
Phinehas’ courage was not mere youthful impetuousness. Consider how he displayed insight—acting with prudence and discretion—when another report reached his ears. The tribes of Reuben and Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built an altar near the Jordan River. Other Israelites concluded that it was for false worship and prepared to take military action.—Josh. 22:11, 12.
How did Phinehas react? Phinehas, along with the Israelite chieftains, prudently discussed the matter with those who had built the altar. The accused tribes clarified the situation, explaining that it actually was an altar for “the service of Jehovah.” A crisis was thus averted.—Josh. 22:13-34.
If a Christian hears an accusation or a negative report about a fellow servant of Jehovah, how wise it would be to imitate Phinehas! Insight restrains us from taking offense or revealing unkind observations about our brothers.—Prov. 19:11.
How can insight assist elders to act as Phinehas did? “When a publisher starts speaking about a personal difference he is having with another person,” notes Jaime, an elder for over ten years, “I quickly ask Jehovah to help me not to take sides but to provide Scriptural guidance. A sister once approached me about a personal problem regarding the way a responsible brother in another congregation had treated her. Since the brother was my personal friend, it would have been easy for me to speak to him. Instead, the sister and I reasoned on several Bible principles. She agreed, first of all, to speak to the brother herself. (Matt. 5:23, 24) Peace was not immediately restored. So I urged her to consider other Scriptural principles. She decided to pray again about the situation and to strive to forgive.”
What was the result? “Several months later,” Jaime recalls, “the sister approached me. She explained that, in time, the brother regretted what he had said. He arranged to work with her in the ministry and expressed appreciation for her. The matter was resolved. Could I have come up with a better outcome if I, who might have seemed to be partial, had become unduly involved in the dispute?” The Bible counsels: “Do not go forth to conduct a legal case hastily.” (Prov. 25:8) Insightful elders wisely encourage Christians who have personal differences to apply Scriptural principles to promote and achieve peace.
He Inquired of Jehovah
Phinehas was privileged to serve as a priest for God’s chosen people. As noted, he had extraordinary courage and insight, even at a relatively young age. However, his success in coping with challenges depended on his trusting in Jehovah.
Following the tragic rape and murder of a Levite’s concubine by the men of Gibeah, of the tribe of Benjamin, the other tribes set out to wage war against the Benjamites. (Judg. 20:1-11) They prayed for Jehovah’s help before fighting, but they were defeated twice, with significant losses. (Judg. 20:14-25) Would they conclude that their prayers were ineffective? Was Jehovah truly interested in seeing them respond to the wrong that had been done?
Unwavering in his confidence, Phinehas, now Israel’s high priest, again came to the fore. “Shall I go out yet again to battle against the sons of Benjamin my brother or shall I cease to?” he prayed. In response, Jehovah gave the Benjamites into their hand, and Gibeah was burned to the ground.—Judg. 20:27-48.
What lesson might we learn from this? Some problems faced in the congregation persist despite the elders’ diligent efforts and prayers for God’s help. If this occurs, elders do well to remember Jesus’ words: “Keep on asking [or praying], and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.” (Luke 11:9) Even if an answer to prayer seems delayed, overseers can be assured that Jehovah will respond in his own due time.
For instance, a congregation in Ireland was in desperate need of a Kingdom Hall but did not have the favor of the local planning officer. He objected to all proposals for the site on which the brothers hoped to build. It seemed that the only other authority who could approve the proposals was the chief planning officer for the entire county. Would prayer help, as it did in Phinehas’ day?
A local elder relates: “After a great deal of prayer and supplication, we traveled to the main planning office. I was told that it would probably be weeks before we could see the chief officer. However, we managed to meet with him for five minutes. After he saw the redrawn plans, he quickly gave us permission to continue, and from then on the local planning officer went out of his way to help us. That experience impressed on us the power of prayer.” Yes, Jehovah will answer the sincere prayers of elders who rely on him.
Phinehas carried a heavy load of responsibility in ancient Israel; yet, with courage, insight, and reliance on God, he was able to face challenges successfully. And Phinehas’ diligent care for God’s congregation met with Jehovah’s approval. Some 1,000 years later, Ezra was inspired to write: “It was Phinehas the son of Eleazar that happened to be leader over them in the past. Jehovah was with him.” (1 Chron. 9:20) May that be true of all who take the lead among God’s people today, in fact, of all Christians who serve him loyally.

