





HIGHLIGHTS OF THE PAST YEAR
The Largest Gathering of Jehovah’s Witnesses




ON Saturday, October 5, 2013, an audience of 257,294 in 21 lands attended the 129th annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania either in person or via a live Webcast. Later that weekend, other groups of Witnesses viewed a replay of the program. The total attendance was 1,413,676 in 31 lands—the largest gathering of Jehovah’s Witnesses yet.
Since the 1920’s, Jehovah’s Witnesses have broadcast conventions to international audiences, using telephone lines along with vast radio networks. Now Internet technology allows people even in remote places to hear and see events either as they happen or soon afterward.
Members of several branch offices worked for over a year to set up the Webcast. On the weekend of the Webcast, technicians monitored the program from a control center in Brooklyn, New York, and stayed on duty around the clock as it was shown at venues in 15 time zones.



Fast Facts—Webcast Venues
            Primary: Jersey City Assembly Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, New Jersey, U.S.A. Attendance: 4,732

            Largest: Perth, Australia Attendance: 7,186

            Northernmost: Fairbanks, Alaska, U.S.A. Attendance: 255

            Southernmost: Invercargill, New Zealand Attendance: 190

            Most distant: Perth, Australia, which is about 11,600 miles (18,700 km) from Jersey City




How the Webcast Works
             Several video cameras capture the program.

             Video images are sent to a switcher, and the best shot is selected.

             The selected video signal is then sent to a computer in the control center.

             Low-, medium-, and high-resolution video streams of the live program are created.

             The video streams are sliced into ten-second segments.

             The segments are made available over the Internet by a network of Web servers.

             A device at each destination downloads the segments from the Web server and places them into a holding area, or buffer. The device then reassembles the downloaded segments to make a smooth video stream.

             The audience sees and hears the program.









