VOL. XXXIV APRIL 1 No. 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

"Shall a Nation be Born at Once?" 99 

Two Classes Born in Zion 99 

Rejoice With Jerusalem 100 

Qualities and Attributes of Jehovah 101 

The Omnipotence of Jehovah 101 

"God is Love" 102 

The Permission of Evil 102 

The Conflict Between Flesh and Spirit 103 

The Conflict Ends with Death 104 

Discerning the Will of God 104 

The Oneness of the Body of Christ 105 

The Gospel of Hope 106 

"The Whole Creation Groaneth" 106 

Gethsemane (Poem) 107 

Hated Without a Cause 107 

"If We Suffer With Him" 108 

Afflicted, Yet a Comforter 109 

The Value of Adversity 110 

An Interesting Letter Ill 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies Ill 

page 98 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



ON MEMORIAL SUNDAY 

On April 20th, at 10 a. m., at Brooklyn Tabernacle, an 
opportunity will be given for symbolic baptism. 



1913-GENERAL CONVENTIONS- 1913 

We are giving timely notice of this year's Conventions to 
permit the friends to arrange their affairs accordingly, and to 
decide which they may prefer to attend. Places and dates 
as follows: 

Pertle Springs, Mo. (near Warrensburg) June 1-8 

Hot Springs, Ark June 1-8 

Madison, Wis June 29-July 6 

Springfield, Mass July 13-20 

Toronto, Canada July 20-27 

Asheville, N. C July 20-27 

Mountain Lake Park, Md July 20-27 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for May follow: (1) 165; (2) 1; (3) 160; (4) 176; (5) 191; 
(6) 327; (7) 12; (8) 130; (9) 260; (10) 324; (11) 195; (12) 
145; (13) 90; (14) 312; (15) 315; (16) 108; (17) 299; (18) 314; 
(19) 301; (20) 72; (21) 201; (22) 107; (23) 109; (24) 87; 
(25) 16; (26) 257; (27) 5; (28) 29; (29) 135; (30) 151; (31) 93. 



R5211 : page 99 

"SHALL A NATION BE BORN AT ONCE?" 

"Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain 
came, she was delivered of a Man child. Who hath heard 
such a thing? Who hath seen such things? Shall 
the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall 
a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, 
she brought forth her children."— Isa. 66:7,8. 

THE name "Zion" was anciently applied to a 
prominent hill of Jerusalem, generally regarded 
as the southwestern and highest of 
those on which the city was built. It included 



the most ancient part of the city, 

with the citadel; and having been first occupied 

by a palace, it was called "the city of 

David." (2 Chron. 5:2.) It was also called 

the "holy hill," or "hill of the sanctuary" 

(Psa. 2:6), being the original site of the 

tabernacle pitched by David for the reception of the ark. 

By the Prophets the name "Zion" was often put for 
Jerusalem itself, and also for its inhabitants, who were 
sometimes called sons and daughters of Zion. The word 
was often used in a wider sense, as was Jerusalem also, 
to signify the entire nation of Israel. And since fleshly 
Israel was typical of Spiritual Israel, the name "Zion" applies 
with still deeper significance to the Gospel Church, a 
term which throughout the Gospel Age included the entire 
body of professed Christians, of whom all the truly 
consecrated are on probation for full membership in the 
Church triumphant— the true Church, the Zion of the 
future and the true Zion of the present Age, the Elect 
Little Flock, to whom it is the Father's good pleasure to 
give the Kingdom. (Luke 12:32.) In the symbolic application 
of the term we must, therefore, judge from the 
character of the prophecy whether the reference is to the 
fleshly or to the Spiritual House of Israel, or to both; and, 
if to the latter, whether it applies in its broadest sense to 
the nominal Gospel Church, or to the Elect Little Flock, 
the only true Church in God's estimation. 

The symbolic travail in the above prophecy is a reference 
to the great time of trouble— the travail that is to 
come upon the nominal Gospel Church, great "Babylon," 
from which some are to be accounted worthy to escape. 
(Luke 21:36.) This is indicated by the preceding verses, 
which locate the time of this prophecy as synchronous 
with that wherein is heard "a voice of noise [confusion] 
from the city" [Babylon], and "a voice [of truth and 
warning] from the Temple" [the Elect Little Flock of 
consecrated and faithful ones], and "a voice of Jehovah, 
that rendereth recompense to His enemies"— in the great 
time of trouble.— Isa. 66:6. 

The travail that is coming upon nominal Zion— "Christendom," 
"Babylon"— will be a great and sore affliction, 
"a time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation." (Dan. 12:1.) But the marvelous thing the 
Prophet here has to record is that a Man child is to be 
born out of Zion before this travail comes. This is a 
striking reference to the fact, elsewhere clearly taught, 
that the ripe wheat of the Gospel Church are to be separated 
from the tares, that they are to be gathered into 
the barn condition of safety before the burning, the consuming 
trouble, shall come upon the latter. (Matt. 13:30.) 
This Man child, therefore, is the Little Flock— the true 
Zion in God's estimation, the Body of Christ; as it is 
written, "There shall come out of Zion [the nominal Gospel 
Church] the Deliverer [The Christ, Head and Body], 
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob [fleshly 
Israel, or Zion]."— Rom. 11:26. 



TWO CLASSES BORN IN ZION 

This is the Man child that is to bless all the families of 
the earth. (Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29.) The birth of the 
Man child is the First Resurrection. Blessed and holy 
are all they that have part in the First Resurrection. (Rev. 20:6.) 
Such are now begotten of God by the Word of 
Truth, and quickened by the Holy Spirit (James 1:18; 
Eph. 2:1; Rom. 8:11), and in due time— before the travail 
—they will be born in the glorious likeness of Christ. 

The birth of the Man child began over eighteen hundred 
years ago with the resurrection of Christ Jesus. 
There the Head of this Body of Christ came forth; and 
as surely as the Head has been born, so surely shall the 
Body come forth. "Shall I bring to the birth, and not 
cause to bring forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to 
bring forth and shut the womb? saith thy God." (Isa. 66:9.) 
Ah, no: "the Man child," The Christ complete, the 
Great Deliverer, shall come forth! 

Yet "who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen 
such things?" for not only shall the Body of Christ, the 
true overcoming Zion, the "holy nation, the peculiar people," 
be delivered out of nominal Zion before the travail; 
but when she travails, a Great Company of other children 
will be born. This is the Great Company described in the 
Apocalypse as coming up out of the great tribulation, having 
washed their robes and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb. (Rev. 7:14.) The Body of Christ, the Man 
child, born before the travail, will be composed of those 
who heard and obeyed the call, "Come out of her, My 
people," etc. (Rev. 18:4), and who were counted worthy 
to have a part in the First Resurrection. 

The many children born through the great tribulation 

R5211 :page 100 

will be those believers in nominal Zion, Babylon, who have 
allowed themselves to become measurably intoxicated by 
the spirit of Babylon, the spirit of the world, and who, 
therefore, are not quick to discern and prompt to obey the 
voice of the Lord in this harvest time. They fail to see 
that it is harvest time, and consequently fail to understand 
the separating work which the sickle of Present Truth is 
accomplishing. They regard those servants of God who 
wield the sickle as enemies, who oppose them and the 
Lord, whom they serve. 

The great tribulation, or travail, that is coming upon 
nominal Zion is the only thing that can convince such as 
these. This class includes a large number of believing 
children of God, whose manner of life is righteous and 
generally circumspect, but who are nevertheless worldly-minded, 
and who are not rendering themselves a living 
sacrifice to God, following the Lord through evil and 
through good report, and meekly bearing the reproach of 
Christ. They have respect to men's opinions, traditions 



and plans, and fail to submit themselves fully to the will 
and plan of the Lord. And only when they behold the 
wreck of nominal Zion— Christendom, Babylon— will they 
realize its gross errors and be delivered from them and it. 

CHRIST A STUMBLING-STONE TO SPIRITUAL ISRAEL 

"Behold," says the Prophet, "I lay in Zion a stumbling-stone 
and rock of offense; and whosoever believeth on 
Him shall not be ashamed." (Rom. 9:33; Isa. 8:14,15; 
28:16.) That stumbling-stone is redemption through the 
precious blood of Christ. At that stone the fleshly Zion 
stumbled, and so now the nominal spiritual Israel is 
stumbling at the same stone; for it was to be "a stone of 
stumbling and a rock of offense to both the houses of 
Israel" (Isa. 8:14)— the fleshly and the spiritual. 

The Elect Little Flock of overcomers do not so stumble, 
but recognize this as the chief corner-stone of the true 
Zion, remembering the words of the Prophet, "Behold I 
lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect, precious; and he 
that believeth on Him shall not be confounded. Unto 
you, therefore, which believe [in Christ as your Redeemer 
who bought you with His precious blood] He is precious; 
but unto them which be disobedient,. ..the 
same is made. ..a stone of stumbling and a rock 
of offense, even to them which stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed." 
(I Peter 2:6-8.) God does not purpose to deliver His 
Kingdom unto any of the disobedient. They need the 
fiery trial of the coming tribulation to bring them into a 
proper attitude before God; and hence they must come up 
through the great tribulation. 

While those who are truly begotten of God, who have 
been quickened by His Spirit to the new spiritual life, and 
who are faithful in fulfilling their covenant of entire 
consecration as living sacrifices unto God, may well rejoice 
in hope of the First Resurrection, and of being born 
before the travail upon nominal Zion, it is also a cause of 
rejoicing that many of the weaker children of God, now 
stumbling with nominal Zion, will, nevertheless, by and by 
be recovered and saved so as by fire [born] through the 
great tribulation [travail], in which nominal Zion shall 
expire, but from which they shall come forth. 

REJOICE WITH JERUSALEM 

"Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all 
ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that 
mourn for her." "Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing 
and her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem and 
joy in My people, and the voice of weeping shall no more 
be heard in her, nor the voice of crying."— Isa. 66:10; 
65:18,19. 

This call to rejoice with Jerusalem immediately follows 
the prophetic announcement of the birth of Zion, 
the terms Zion and Jerusalem being here used interchangeably. 



The birth of Zion, the exaltation of the Body of 
Christ to Kingdom power and glory, will indeed be a cause 
for rejoicing on the part of all people. It is for this exaltation 
and manifestation of the sons of God that the whole 
creation waits, groaning and travailing.— Rom. 8:19-23. 

When the true Zion is thus exalted, then will follow 
the great work of the Kingdom. The travail upon nominal 
Zion immediately succeeding will quickly liberate the 
true children of God still in her, and they shall come forth 
to larger views and higher principles, and to develop into 
nobler characters. The rule of the iron rod will quickly 
subdue all things, completely breaking up the whole present 
social fabric and accomplishing the leveling process 
which will make ready for the reign of righteousness. 

Then the great Millennial reign of righteousness will 
begin, when every man will have a full, fair opportunity 
to gain everlasting life by faith and obedience to the New 
Covenant. And no man's opportunity will be less than a 
hundred years; though if he wastes all of that time without 
taking any steps toward reformation, he will be considered 
unworthy of life and will be cut off in the Second 
Death. (Isa. 65:20.) But the obedient shall eat the good 
of the land. (Isa. 1:19.) "They shall build houses and inhabit 
them [there will not be so many houses to let in 
those days probably, but improved and cultivated homesteads, 
in which the owners shall take pleasure and comfort]; 
and they shall plant vineyards and eat the fruit of 
them. They shall not build and another inhabit; they 
shall not plant and another eat; for as the days of a tree 
are the days of My people ["They shall renew their 
strength"— Isa. 40:31]; and Mine Elect [all the faithful and 
obedient then] shall long enjoy the work of their hands. 
They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; 
for they are the seed [the children] of the blessed of the 
Lord [the Church], and their offspring with them."— 
Isa. 65:21-23. 

"And it shall come to pass that before they call I will 
answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear"— so 
near will the Lord be, so mindful of all their interests. 
"The wolf and the lamb shall feed together [The reference 
here may be to men formerly of wolf-like or lamb-like 
character, or to animals, or to both— the expression 
signifying in any case a reign of peace]; and the lion shall 
eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be the serpent's 
meat [—another expression similar to, 'His enemies shall 
lick the dust,' signifying the destruction of the serpent, 
or rather of Satan, whom the serpent symbolizes]. They 
shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain [Kingdom], 
saith the Lord."-Isa. 65:24,25. 

Thus the birth of the true Zion will be a cause for rejoicing 
among all who truly love righteousness: for 
though it will first dash in pieces all their long cherished 
hopes, it is the dawn of real hope for all the world. It 
will humble all their pride, despoil them of all their cherished 
possessions and what they have come to esteem 
their rights, break down all their boasted institutions, civil, 



social and religious, and completely wreck all order and 
all hope, until they begin to see hope in the new order of 
things inaugurated by the Kingdom of God. 

Yes, rejoice with Jerusalem, Zion, and be glad with 
her, all ye that love her, as well as all ye that mourn for 
her now and try to dissuade her from her course, not seeing 
the prize at the end of her life of faithful self-sacrifice; 
for soon her glory will appear, not only to her own 
exceeding joy, but also to the joy and blessing of "all the 
families of the earth." 



R5209 :page 101 

QUALITIES AND ATTRIBUTES OF JEHOVAH 

THE SCRIPTURES declare a "beginning of 

the creation of God." His qualities and attributes 

were the same then that they are 

now; for the Scriptures also declare His 

unchangeableness— "the same yesterday, today 

and forever."— Hebrews 13:8; 

Psalm 90:1,2. 

The completeness of the Divine perfection 
is such that companionship is not necessary 
to the happiness of Jehovah. The 

One who "inhabiteth eternity" is self-centered. The creation 
of angels and of man was indeed His pleasure, because, 
benevolently, He desires to do good, to give capacity 
for pleasure and to afford it opportunity for gratification. 
Furthermore, the highest good of His creatures calls for 
an exhibition to the full of all the elements of Divine 
character— Divine Justice, Love, Power and Wisdom. 

BELIEF IN SATAN LOGICAL 

The declaration of the Bible respecting the Father's 
Power is that "the eyes of the Lord [the intelligence of 
Jehovah] are in every place, beholding the evil and the 
good." (Proverbs 15:3.) This statement implies that 
there are things evil as well as good; things which God 
approves and things which He disapproves. This citation 
comes the nearest to a suggestion of God's omnipresence 
contained in the Scriptures. 

The fact that the Lord has knowledge of all conditions 
of things is not out of harmony with the other fact that 
He permits conditions which He disapproves, and which 
He declares that He will ultimately destroy. "All the 
wicked will He destroy."— Psalm 145:20. 

If we accept the great Divine premise that the Bible 
is the Word of God, then we are bound to accept the 
declaration that there is a being called Satan, that he is 
the "god of this world" (2 Corinthians 4:4), and that he 
now works in the "hearts of the children of disobedience." 
(Ephesians 2:2.) These words imply not only that there 



are evil principles at work in this world, but that behind 
them there are evil spirit beings, of whom Satan is the 
inspirer and through whom he is working. 

Certain statements are made respecting Satan which 
could not properly be applied to a principle of evil, or to a 
working of error; as, for instance, Jesus declared that 
Satan was a "murderer" from the beginning— and a 
"liar." (John 8:44.) Errors and principles are not murderers 
and liars. It would be a misuse of language to 
make such application. Only an intelligent being can be 
a murderer or a liar. Hence the whole tenor of the Scriptures 

R5210 :page 101 

upholds the assertion that there is such a being as 
Satan and that he is in opposition to God. 

If we were to suppose the everlasting continuance of 
Satan as a being, as an adversary of God, the matter 
would seem strange to us, because irreconcilable with our 
conception of Divine Power. We have the statement of 
the Scriptures respecting his reign and ultimate destruction. 
(Hebrews 2:14.) With this information we have a 
reasonable, logical thought on the subject. When we consider 
the Scriptural presentation further, that originally 
Satan was not an evil being, but that he made himself 
evil by the exercise of personal liberty and became the 
enemy of God, the subject seems to be clear and reasonable. 
In fact, this is the only rational solution to the problem 
of his existence. 

To suppose that there is no Satan is to suppose that 
God has permitted His Word to deceive mankind in this 
respect, or that the Devil is a manifestation of God Himself 
—a position which is unthinkable. Nor is it logical to 
say that there is a Devil, an opponent of God, and at the 
same time to maintain that God is all in all, and omnipresent 
—everywhere present. But we do not find this latter 
statement to be Biblical. The Scriptural proposition is 
that at the close of the Millennial Age, when Christ shall 
have conquered sin and Satan, when Satan shall have 
been destroyed, and when the Kingdom of the Universe 
shall be in absolute harmony, then God will be all in all. 
(I Corinthians 15:28.) To all eternity there will be no 
opposition to His will. There is opposition now, however, 
in many places and at many times. But ultimately, 
God will have full control. 

THE OMNIPOTENCE OF JEHOVAH 

To say that God is all Power is sophistry of language 
which often misleads the one questioning as well as the 
one attempting to answer him. The statement is not 
correct. If God is all Power, then He is not Love or 
Justice or Wisdom. He would thus be limited to the one 
great attribute of Power, or force. Such cannot be the 
thought entertained by any logical mind. It is, nevertheless, 
a form of statement that is often used, perhaps unintentionally, 



but very injuriously to the reasoning 
faculties. 

The Bible nowhere says God is all Power. There is a 
marked difference between being power and exercising 
power. God is all-powerful. He has the ability to exercise 
power in any direction to the extent that He wills. 
If He had chosen, He could have so created Satan that 
he could not think or do other than in harmony with the 
Divine will; or He could have exercised His power to 
crush the Adversary and thus have destroyed him long 
ago. But He has permitted Satan to exist for six thousand 
years, in the sense that He does not restrain the 
Devil from doing evil. The Scriptures, however, tell us 
that God will eventually destroy him. 

The scope of the exercise of Divine Power is the Universe, 
but it is difficult for our finite minds to comprehend 
the meaning of this word— Universe. Astronomers tell 
us that by the aid of photo-astronomy they can see nearly 
125,000,000 suns— the centers of solar systems like our 
own, with supposedly more than a billion of planets more 
or less like our earth. These, we may assume, are in 
process of development, are in preparation for inhabitants, 
whom the great Creator will in due time provide. From 
the Scriptural standpoint, however, the great work of 
human creation began with our earth. What a boundless 
thought we have in the mere suggestion that the billion 
worlds are to be peopled, and that the lessons of righteousness 
and sin, of life and death eternal, now being taught 
to humanity, will never need to be repeated! 

We stand appalled at the immensity of space and at 
the law and order which everywhere reign! We heartily 
assent to the words of the Prophet David, "Day unto 
day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge. 
There is no speech nor language where their voice 
is not heard." (Psalm 19:2,3.) The person who can 
look upon this wonderful display of superhuman power 
and believe that these worlds created themselves, shows to 
the majority of us that, if he has brains, they are sadly 
disordered, unbalanced. Whoever, after mature thought, 
concludes that there is no God, that everything came to 
be what it is by chance or by the operation of some blind 
force— that person is described in the Scriptures in the 
following words, "The fool hath said in his heart, There 
is no God."— Psalm 14:1. 

As scientific instruments demonstrate to us the immensity 
of the Universe, we perceive that the Prophet used 
very moderate language indeed in his description of the 
majestic power and greatness of the Creator, when he 
represents Jehovah as weighing the mountains in His 
balance and holding the seas in the hollow of His Hand. 

R5210 : page 102 

(Isaiah 40:12.) From His standpoint, a thousand years 

are but as a watch in the night. (Psalm 90:4.) How insignificantly 

small we all feel in the presence of our God! 



No wonder some great men are inclined to say that humanity 
is too insignificant from the Divine standpoint to 
be worthy of the least consideration— much less to be 
objects of Divine care and providence! 

THE OMNISCIENCE OF JEHOVAH 

To say that God is all Knowledge is also an inaccurate 
statement. If God were all Knowledge, how could He 
be all Power? God has all Knowledge, possesses all 
Knowledge. But this is a different matter. If we say, 
"The boy has a hoop," we do not mean that he is a hoop. 
To be a hoop and to have a hoop are not the same. God 
is omniscient; that is, He knows all things. This very fact 
proves that He is a personal God. There can be no 
knowledge without personality. Knowledge implies cognizance 
of external things. Amongst the things outside 
the Divine Person are things both good and evil. 

When we read that God created man in His own image 
and likeness (Genesis 1:26,27), we may know that 
man is not God. He was merely made in the image of 
God. Because God is perfect, therefore the human being 
made in His image would be satisfactory to God. That 
human being had knowledge. But he neglected the Word 
of God, and thus he learned something by his neglect. 
What he learned is mentioned in the Scriptures. "He is 
become as one of Us [the Elohim], to know good and 
evil." (Genesis 3:22.) This statement proves that God 
knows good and evil. 

If God did not know evil from good, then He could not 
be our Instructor. By His laws, His principles, God sets 
before our minds that which is right and that which is 
wrong. Adam knew how to discriminate between right 
and wrong, but his disobedience increased his knowledge 
of both good and evil. In his fallen condition man cannot 
always determine between them. Therefore God gave 
Israel a Law, and man's knowledge of that Law assists 
him to discriminate between good and evil. 

One of old time said, "Thou art a God which hidest 
Thyself." (Isaiah 45:15.) How true! As a result the 
world by wisdom knows not God. He is near in His 
Wisdom and Love, yet He can be seen only by those 
whose eyes of understanding have been opened. But we 
are glad that the time is coming when all the blind eyes 
shall see clearly. "As truly as I live," says Jehovah, "all 
the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord." "The 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the 
Lord, as the waters cover the sea." (Num. 14:21; Hab. 2:14.) 
Then all shall see what God hath wrought, and 
our temporary blindness will but accentuate the glorious 
brightness of His Wisdom, Justice, Love and Power. 

"GOD IS LOVE" 

God is Love in the sense that the term Love represents 
the central principle of the Divine character. There is 



nothing contrary to love in God. The Scriptures do not 
teach that there is nothing except love anywhere— that 
God is everywhere and love is everywhere. But they 
teach that God is a loving character. This does not militate 
against the other statements that God is just, wise and 
powerful. But this quality of Love best of all represents 
the Divine Being. All of His Justice is in harmony with 
His Love. There is no exercise of Justice or Power in an 
evil sense, for all His attributes work together for good to 
all His creatures. 

The Scriptures encourage us to reason from the known 
to the unknown. They tell us that although God is so 
great, so wise, so powerful, He is also just and loving. 
And the more we consider the matter, the more reasonable 
the Bible description of the Almighty appears. His 
Power we see demonstrated. The Wisdom of One so 
great cannot be doubted. When we come to consider, 
Could One so wise and so powerful be unjust or ungenerous? 
Our hearts answer, No ! No one is really great 
who is devoid of justice and love. So surely as our God 
is Jehovah, He must possess these qualities. 

When we came in contact with the Bible, and particularly 
after we learned something of its teachings and got 
rid of the misrepresentations which gathered about it 
during the Dark Ages— then we began to recognize it as 
the Message of Jehovah to His creatures. It informs us 
that the great Creator of the Universe is not only Almighty 
and All-wise, but loving and kind, with Justice 
as the foundation of His Empire. (Psalm 89:13,14.) 
From the Bible we learn, too, that our Creator has been 
pleased to make us in His own image, in His own moral 
likeness, to the intent that we may enjoy Him and the 
fruits of His righteousness to all eternity. 

All the Power, all the Justice, all the Wisdom, of God 
must be used in accordance with His own character, which 
is Love. It will therefore be loving Wisdom, loving Justice, 
which He will use toward all creation in the exercise 
of His loving Power for their good. He created man. 
He permitted Adam to disobey His Law, telling us that 

R5211 :page 102 

He knew in advance what man would do and that He 
permitted man to do wrong.— Isaiah 46:9,10. 

In permitting sin to enter the world, God had two ends 
in view. He purposed to give an illustration to the angels 
respecting the results of obedience and of disobedience. 
He also intended that the human family should gain a lesson 
from this experience. Thus we know that God's arrangement 
from the beginning has been for a resurrection 
of the dead. "As all in Adam die, even so shall all in 
Christ be made alive."— I Corinthians 15:21,22. 

If we were to take any fragment of Scripture as a 
basis for a system of doctrine, we would find ourselves 
either teaching universalism on the one hand, or claiming 
that God has no Wisdom, or that He purposed the evil, or 



what not. We would get into all sorts of confusion. But 
when we see the perfect adjustment of God's Justice, Wisdom, 
Love and Power, and realize that He has good purposes 
respecting the evil, that He has fully marked out 
what it shall do and what it shall not do, either in its 
present influence, or in its ultimate influence, this gives us 
confidence in the character of God. 

THE PERMISSION OF EVIL 

From only one standpoint can Divine Wisdom and 
Love be discerned in connection with the history of mankind. 
It must include the Age about to be ushered in— 
the period of Messiah's reign of righteousness. This will 
be the time when every member of Adam's race, sharing 
the penalty of sin and death because inheriting his weaknesses, 
will be set free from these; the time when the 
full knowledge of the glory of God shall be granted to 
every human being, and when a full opportunity will 
come to each, by obedience, to gain life everlasting. 

The lesson thus far taught is the goodness and the 
severity of God— His goodness in bringing us into being, 
and His severity in the punishment of Father Adam's 
wilful transgression; also to both men and angels, Justice, 
unswerving Justice. The next lesson to be taught to 
God's intelligent creatures is that God is Love. The 
foundation for these lessons is already laid in the Ransom-sacrifice 
of Jesus, through and on account of which 
He becomes the world's Redeemer and Restorer. A few 

R5211 :page 103 

can believe this Message by faith; but not many have the 
ear of faith or the eye of faith. Only the saints are 
able to appreciate this great fact at the present time. 

That which is now secret and understood only by the 
few is shortly to be made manifest to every creature in 
heaven and in earth. All will then see and be able to 
appreciate the great fact that the redemption accomplished 
by the sacrifice of Jesus is world-wide and means a full 
deliverance from the sin-and-death condemnation which 
passed upon Adam and all of his race, to all who will accept 
the same as a gift from God. The remainder will 
be destroyed in the Second Death. 

THE SECOND DEATH THE ESSENCE OF WISDOM 

As for the Second Death, we easily see that if God 
created man in His own image, man must of necessity be 
a free moral agent; otherwise he would not be in 
God's image. If he was created a free moral agent, he 
must have the power or privilege to will wrong as well as 
right. If he exercise his power in the direction of evil, 
God has the power to destroy him. On the other hand, if 
he live in harmony with righteousness God has the power 
to grant him life to all eternity. 



The destruction of the wicked in the Second Death 
is the essence of Wisdom. As to the declaration that God 
is too pure to behold evil (Habakkuk 1:13), the thought 
of the original seems to be that God's character is so pure 
and so righteous that He will not continue to behold evil. 
He will not permit evil to exist to all eternity, for this 
condition would not be pleasing to Him. 

This very thought implies that there is evil to behold. 
If not so, how could He behold it? But this is all consistent 
with the Divine Plan. Ultimately all evil shall be 
destroyed. Ultimately all creatures which are "in heaven 
and on earth and such as are in the sea" shall be heard 
saying, "Blessing and honor and glory and power, be unto 
Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb forever 
and ever."— Revelation 5:13. 



R5211 :page 103 

THE CONFLICT BETWEEN FLESH AND SPIRIT 

"The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against 
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so 
that ye cannot do the things that ye would."— Galatians 5:17. 

THE APOSTLE is addressing these words to 

Christians, who have become New Creatures 

in Christ, to whom old things have passed 

away, and all things have become new. 

These are said to be begotten of the Holy 

Spirit and therefore to be, in reality, spirit 

beings, who will be changed in the Resurrection, 

"in a moment, in the twinkling of 

an eye"— spirit beings who have not yet 

been completed. But the New Creature 

has only the flesh in which to operate at the present time. 

God expects that the New Creature will manifest his 
loyalty, and demonstrate worthiness of perfection of the 
spirit in the First Resurrection. The Apostle says that 
such must expect to find a conflict going on— the Spirit 
lusting against the flesh and the flesh against the Spirit. 
The word lust here used is a good Anglo-Saxon word 
meaning desire. The New Creature strongly desires to be 
loyal to God and to do His will. The flesh strongly desires 
against all this. 

These two spirits are in opposition. The two are in 
antagonism. The flesh desires to serve itself. It has 
earthly desires, earthly objects, earthly aims. The New 
Creature desires to set its affections on the Heavenly 
things and to sacrifice the earthly interests and aims and 
prospects, to live as a spirit being tabernacling in the 
flesh— to live no longer as a human being with earthly 
interests. Whatever serves the one interest is in conflict 
with the other interest. 



NEW CREATURES HAMPERED BY THE FLESH 

The words of our text are not addressed to the world, 
but to the Church. The Church has been begotten of the 
Holy Spirit— a New Creation. If these live after the 
flesh, if they renounce their covenant of sacrifice, they 
will die. But if they mortify, or kill, the deeds of the 
flesh and abandon this wholly for the Spirit, they shall 
live— have everlasting life. We all see that in our Lord 
Jesus, holy, harmless, undefiled, there was such a contrast; 
the earthly interests drawing one way, and the Heavenly 
interests another. These were all pure and perfect desires; 
nevertheless, as the New Creature, begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, He was obliged to overcome them. 

We recall our Lord's words very near the conclusion 
of His ministry: "I have a baptism to be baptized with; 
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" (Luke 12:50.) 
The conflict was going on; but the Lord's spirit 
was firm, and He was obedient to the terms of His sacrifice. 
Being perfect, however, He could do those things 
that He would. He did them, and won the great victory. 

In our case the matter is different. We are by nature 
fallen. Our earthly appetites and tastes are depraved. 
All are more or less selfish; some more depraved than 
are others. 

Our flesh is depraved; we cannot do the things that we 
would. Hence we need the merit of Christ to assist us; 
hence the Apostle tells us that every time we as New 
Creatures have done wrong, we should acknowledge the 
error and go to the Throne of Heavenly Grace to obtain 
mercy and find help for future needs. Thus we show to 
God the loyalty of our hearts. All those having Christ's 
mind and disposition are hampered merely by the weaknesses 
of the flesh, the fallen flesh; but they have an Advocate, 
to whom they may go and have these weaknesses 
of the fallen flesh compensated for. 

The question may arise, Why should there be any 
conflict between the flesh and the spirit in our case? and 
how do we overcome these weaknesses sufficiently to 
desire to become joint-sacrificers with Christ, before we 
are begotten of the Spirit at all? The answer is that 
while the whole race is fallen, many of the fallen ones 
realize the shame of their condition and long to do 
righteously, but are unable to do so. They find themselves 
to be slaves of sin. They are weak; they are so 
bound that they cannot do the things that they would. 
Many of the Jews were in this condition. They were 
desirous to do God's will, but were unable to do so. The 
desire was there, the will was there. But because of 
man's fallen condition there were other qualities of their 
mind in opposition. 

The human mind is made up of various qualities. 
When sin came in, the lower and baser of these qualities 
of the original man gained the ascendancy, and the nobler 
of these qualities gradually became effaced, until the original 
likeness of God was measurably gone from humanity. 



But in some of the sons and daughters of Adam there is 
sufficient of the original God-likeness to oppose sin and to 
seek to have reformation of life. Such good influences 
are manifest even amongst the heathen. 
During the Jewish Age, some amongst the Jews were 

R5212:page 104 

seeking to live in harmony with God. Others were following 

the course of Belial, and serving Satan and giving 

themselves up to selfishness. And so it is today. The 

Jews could not keep their Law, and unless they could 

keep the Law perfectly, they would fail of getting everlasting 

life, just the same as those who had never been 

under the Law. Since Pentecost there has been a different 

arrangement. God has provided a Savior, whose 

death is efficacious for the sins of the world. 

THE CONFLICT ENDS WITH DEATH 

Why, then, has this death not yet been effective for 
the world? God is wishing to find a class willing to lay 
down life itself in God's service. Some of these fallen 
children of Adam, noting the call of God's Word— to 
become footstep-followers of Jesus— have enough strength 
of character to follow in Christ's footsteps. They manifest 
their determination by consecrating their lives to His 
service. Such a consecration means that the higher 
qualities of the mind have united, and have gotten control, 
of the lower qualities of the mind, putting them under 
constraint. 

Under the inspiring influence of God's promises and 
the Message of the Gospel, they are through the great 
Advocate received as members of His Body— as New 
Creatures in Christ, begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
they have a relationship with God. They are expected 
then to go forward from step to step, continually 
fighting against the snares of Satan. This is the Christian's 
life— the battle mentioned in our text. The two influences 
—the flesh and the Spirit— are contrary; hence 
the conflict. 

There is no need to go outside and battle with others. 
There is plenty to do within. Happy are those who, by 
their endeavors, show their loyalty to God! In due time, 
by the power of the First Resurrection, they will lose the 
old body altogether and will be clothed upon with immortality. 
If we are "faithful unto death," we shall be 
like Him, our Lord and Head, see Him as He is, and 
share His glory. 

There is, however, a great and continuous battle; for 
although the new will asserts itself, puts the body under 
and compels its subjection to the new mind, nevertheless, 
the mortal body, not being actually dead, is continually 
coming in contact with the world and the Adversary, and 
is continually being stimulated by these and by earthly 
cares, ambitions, methods, strivings, conflicts, to insubordination 



to our new will. 

No saint is without experience of this kind— fightings 
without and within. It must be a fight to the finish, or 
the great prize for which we fight will not be gained. For 
although the New Creature, by the Lord's grace and 
strength, repeatedly masters the mortal body, nevertheless, 
until death there can be no cessation of the conflict. 

"How goes the fight with thee? 

The life-long battle 'gainst all evil things? 
Thine no low strife, and thine no selfish aim; 

It is the war of giants and of kings! 



"Say not the fight is long; 

'Tis but one battle and the fight is o'er; 
No second warfare mars thy victory, 

And the one triumph is for evermore!" 



R5212 : page 104 

DISCERNING THE WILL OF GOD 

"Teach me Thy way, O Lord."— Psalm 27:11. 

THE LORD does not wish us to walk by sight, 

and thus to have no difficulty in discerning 

His will. Therefore He puts matters in 

such a way that both our obedience and our 

perseverance are tested; for we are to walk 

by faith and not by sight. In order to do 

this, we should daily take everything to 

the Lord in prayer. We should not undertake 

anything without seeking to know 

the will of the Lord respecting the matter. 

Since, however, we have no miraculous insight 
through which we may know what is the will of God in 
all the details of every-day life, we are not always able to 
discern that will. When the matter is one about which the 
Scriptures give instructions, then the way is clear; for 
the only course which the child of God desires to follow 
is that of obedience. But when the matter is such as depends 
upon one's own judgment, then the way is not so 
clear. Realizing that our judgment is not sufficient, we 
should not tax our minds with what we know is beyond our 
power to decide, but should leave the matter to the Lord. 

We know that the Lord can direct our course in whatever 
way He chooses, if we put ourselves under His care. 
So at the beginning of the day we can say, "Lord, here 
am I; I thank Thee for the privilege of another day, 
which I hope will be full of opportunities for serving the 
Truth and the brethren. I ask Thee to direct my thoughts, 
words and conduct, that I may serve Thee acceptably." 



Then we may go forth and use our best judgment. 

If the Lord wants to lead us in one direction or another, 
that is His part, not ours. We have solicited His 
guidance; and our eyes are alert to know and to do His 
will at any cost. In this attitude we may rest easy, 
knowing that God is able and willing to overrule all 
things for His glory and our profit. 

As a child, the Editor noticed that some people had a 
certain way of going to the Lord with all of their affairs. 
They would open their Bibles at random; and whatever 
verse their thumb or finger happened to touch they would 
consider to be the Lord's message to them; and they 
would follow its suggestion carefully. Sometimes the 
text to which they opened seemed to be a remarkable answer 
to their prayer. 

This method is not one with which the Editor desires 
to find fault. But since it did not appeal to his judgment, 
he took the matter to the Lord in prayer and said, "Father, 
I am really afraid to adopt this plan. So if it please Thee, 
I would rather be directed by my judgment than by this 
method; for my mind does not seem capable of accepting 
it." The Lord seems to have taken him at his word. 

There is surely a reason why right is right in every 
matter; and we should desire to know it. We should desire 
to know why God wishes a matter this way rather 
than that way; not that we doubt His wisdom, but that 
we may enter into the spirit of the Divine regulations. 
The Editor's method of seeking Divine guidance is to 
study the Scriptures, taking all of the verses bearing upon 
the subject under consideration, and trying to find the 
underlying principle of God's dealings and teachings. 

By this method he has much more happiness than he 
otherwise could have. By following the other method he 
could not know whether God or the Devil or chance 
would open the Bible for him. He much prefers to follow 
what he believes to be the teaching of the Word of 
God; that is, to commit all to the Father in prayer, asking 
Him to guide both reason and judgment, and then go out 

R5212 : page 105 

and use that judgment and reason to the best of his ability. 
Even if God should permit him to use his judgment 
in a way that afterward appeared not to have been the 
best, nevertheless the Father may use it to bring some 
great blessing or profitable lesson. By judgment, of 
course, he means his understanding of the Father's Word 
and of His providential leadings. Thus doing, he knows 
that all things shall work together for good.— Rom. 8:28. 



R5212 : page 105 

THE ONENESS OF THE BODY OF CHRIST 



"For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all 
the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so 
also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized 
into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether 
we be bond or free; and have all been made to 
drink into one Spirit."— I Corinthians 12:12,13. 

WE ARE all baptized by one Spirit into one 

Body. The figure of a human body of 

many members, operating together for the 

general good and for the accomplishment 

of one general purpose, one work, is a mental 

picture that is very generally made use 

of by the whole world. It is not confined 

to the Church. In our own country we 

speak of the President, our Chief Executive, 

as the Head of the Government. We speak 

of the Congressional Body and the Senatorial Body, and 

of the co-operation of the various members of these bodies 

in a work for the general good. 

The specially called out of God's people during this 
Gospel Age, whether they be called out from amongst the 
Jews or from amongst the Gentiles, are of one Body, because 
the Body is one, and not a divided Body. In this 
respect, the Body of Christ is different from the political 
bodies of today. In the United States, for instance, 
there are the Republican party and the Democratic party. 

R5213 : page 105 

They are not united in the most desirable sense. But the 
Lord says, through the Apostle, that the Church is one 
Body of Christ, that many members compose this one 
Body, and that all the members are related to each other. 

The members of the Body of Christ all have one work, 
one purpose, or object, in view, and one method by which 
to attain that purpose. They are called to a special service 
—that they may show forth the praises of God. The 
world is seeking to show forth the praises of king or 
queen or sect or what not. But this class have but one 
aim and object in life— to serve God. They are His representatives 
in the world. 

God is the real Emperor, or Ruler, of the Universe. 
But His subjects in this part of His Dominion are under a 
curse of death. He does not intend to leave them in this 
condition. He intends to roll away this curse eventually 
and to bring them a blessing. 

Many who in the past heard of this purpose did not 
understand; and many who understood found their hopes 
grow faint, as the time was long. The Scriptures say 
that God's plans will not fail; that His present Plan is the 
election, or selection, of the Church, and that the purpose 
of the election of the Church is for the blessing of the 
non-elect. God had this purpose in mind from before the 
foundation of the world, and He will carry it out. The 
Church is being chosen that they may be associated with 



the Son of God, the Logos, the Mediator, in His Kingdom. 
THE ONENESS OF THE BODY ILLUSTRATED 

Those who are now called out all receive a begetting 
of the Holy Spirit. They are all baptized by the one 
Spirit into the one Body. His members are fellow-sharers 
in the suffering of this present time. They are to 
be fellow-sharers in the glories that are to follow. So 
the Apostle is here dilating on this particular phase of the 
subject. One member cannot say to another, "You are not 
needed"; for God hath set the members every one of 
them in the Body as has pleased Him. And the Body 
would not be complete without every one of them, unless 
one should fail to make his calling and election sure. 

With this view of matters, we should be very sympathetic 
with each other. There is no division in the human 
body. Yet one hand is separate from the other hand; 
there is a separation between the hand and the foot. But 
there is a work for every part of the body to do. The 
hand and the foot are connected through the head. The 
brain is in touch with all parts of the body through the 
nerves. Nourishment passes from the central stations to 
the various parts of the body. So it is in the spiritual 
Body. We are not all doing the same thing. God has 
a variety of things to be done. He gives one a work to 
do in this department, He gives another work to do in 
another department. 

The Apostle proceeds to say that if one member suffer, 
all the other members come to its relief. If one member 
of the Body of Christ suffer, all the other members 
suffer with it. And no member can be in ill condition 
without the knowledge and sympathy of the Head Member, 
Christ. Our Lord said to Saul of Tarsus, "I am Jesus, 
whom thou persecutest." When Saul was persecuting 
some of the members of the Church, he was persecuting 
Jesus. Whether it is a member living back in Jesus' day 
or one living today, it is the one Body. There is one 
God and Father of all, one Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
and one Holy Spirit by which all are to be controlled and 
guided. 

It is blessed to mark this oneness between Christ 
Jesus and the members of His Body. Our Lord does not 
selfishly grasp all the glory and seek to retain it for Himself. 
On the contrary, with loving solicitude He marks 
the progress of His Body-members as they develop in 
character-likeness to Himself, and says, "They are Mine; 
and I am glorified in them" (John 17:10); and He would 
have them all bound up together with Himself in the 
Father's Love. He would also have them with Himself, 
beholding and sharing the glory which the Father has 
conferred upon Him as a reward for His loyalty and 
obedience throughout all the crucial testings which came 
upon Him. 

All the Divine family are bound together in one bond 
of love and fellowship and confidence and sympathy and 



harmony and common interest; and the honor and glory 

of one are the honor and glory of all. The Lord's prayer 

abounds with petitions for this oneness. Mark the expression 

—"That they all may be one; as Thou, Father, 

are in Me and I in Thee" [Thy Spirit, or disposition, and 

purposes and aim being common to us all]. (John 17:21.) 

Hence He would have us adopt the same Father's Spirit, 

aim and purpose, and devote all our powers with zeal 

and faithfulness to the accomplishment of the Father's will. 



Be not men's servant: think what costly price 

Was paid that thou might'st His own bondsman be, 
Whose service perfect freedom is. Let this 

Hold fast thy heart. His claim is great to thee. 
All His are thine to serve: Christ's brethren here 

Are needing aid, in them thou servest Him. 
The least of all is still His member dear, 

The weakest cost His life-blood to redeem. 



R5213 : page 106 

THE GOSPEL OF HOPE 

FOLLOWING our public address at Havana, a 

lady of some prominence came forward and 

expressed herself as greatly pleased with 

what she had heard. She said she appreciated 

the hopeful outlook which we had 

held before the audience respecting God's 

Love and care, and the comforts of the 

Truth in the present life, and the hopes respecting 

the future life. 

"But," said this lady, "I wish, Pastor 
Russell, that you could inoculate THE WATCH TOWER 
readers with this same spirit of hope breathed in your discourses. 
I am well acquainted with some who are deeply 
interested in your presentations of the Bible teachings, 
but who seem to lose sight of the hope and the good 
things, being chiefly impressed with matters that are very 
doleful and discouraging. They seem to dwell upon a 
coming time of trouble to such an extent as to make both 
themselves and others about them sad. I believe that if 
they could be inoculated with more of the spirit of hope 
in respect to the future, they could be much happier themselves 
and make others about them much happier. I believe 
that they would really make much more progress in 
the propagation of the Truth, if indeed your presentations 
are the Truth, as they seem to be." We promised to lay 
the matter before THE WATCH TOWER readers, and are 
now doing so. 

YE HAVE NEED OF HOPE 



The Apostle wrote, "Ye have need of patience." We 
are not contradicting his statement when we add that 
also, "Ye have need of hope." Without hope, patience 
would soon fritter away; and no length or breadth or 
depth of character could be expected. The very word 
Gospel is full of hope; for it means Good Tidings. Whoever, 
therefore, would preach the Gospel should be sure 
that his message is one of Good Tidings, one of Hope. 
True, it may be necessary and appropriate at times to 
say something respecting the time of trouble that we see 
near. Yet even that subject is to be approached from 
the standpoint of Good Tidings. To tell about the time 
of trouble merely to alarm people, would not be to use 
it as a part of the Good Tidings. If necessary to refer 
to the time of trouble, we should mention it merely as 
that dark cloud which for a little season will obscure the 
dawn of the rapidly oncoming Day of Christ— the Day 
of blessing and joy— the world's jubilee— the time of rolling 
away the curse and substituting God's blessing. 

"THE WHOLE CREATION GROANETH" 

The majority of the world and also of the Lord's consecrated 
people have plenty of trouble in the present time 
without being terrorized needlessly in respect to the great 
day of trouble. Let us remember that, additionally, the 
world has a latent fear respecting the future. They have 
been told by distinguished religious teachers and by musty 
creeds that nearly everybody was damned in advance to 
spend an eternity of torture. And although this is no 
longer outwardly preached to intelligent people, and no 
longer would be believed, nevertheless insinuations are 
often thrown out; and a secret fear lurks in the mind 
lest there should really be something terrible awaiting the 
masses after death— a Catholic Purgatory of awful severity, 
if not the endless torture of Protestantism. Much of 
the present day tendency toward intoxication with pleasures 
and travels, as well as with alcoholic intoxicants, is 
the result of an attempt to get away from fearful forebodings 
—to substitute more pleasant and happifying 
thoughts. 

What the world specially needs is what the Bible alone 
can give. Bible Students alone are qualified to introduce 
others to this comfort of the Scriptures. More and more, 
therefore, it should be our aim to bind up the broken-hearted 
and to say to the weary and heavy-laden, "Come 
to Christ, and find relief and rest. Come now, and see 
who is the great Burden-bearer for all who become His 
followers. Then look beyond the present and see how, 
in harmony with the Father's gracious arrangement, He 
will eventually scatter the blessings of Restitution far 
and wide. Behold the Love of God, which constraineth 
us! Cast away your fear of Him! Draw nigh unto Him 
through Christ, and He will draw nigh unto you." 

As there may be proper times for telling something 



about the time of trouble coming, which will inaugurate 
Messiah's glorious reign, so there may be proper times 

R5214 : page 106 

for telling the wayward that those who sin shall suffer; 
that walking in the ways of sin they are walking away 
from God; that the end of that way is death— the Second 
Death; and that "whatsoever a man soweth, that shall 
he also reap." But these features of the Divine Word 
are not so necessary to be repeated every day; for mankind 
instinctively know that sin leads to suffering of 
some kind, and that righteousness sooner or later brings 
its reward. 

What the world needs most is encouragement to turn 
away from sin, to realize the sympathy of God for the 
rebellious family of Adam, and to know of the arrangement 
which God has made whereby He will have mercy 
upon all, through Christ. We need to follow the Master's 
course when He declared, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see; and your ears, for they hear." We need to tell 
those who see and hear what a blessing they enjoy. 

It is necessary at times to point to the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice, self-denial, suffering, which the followers 
of Jesus must take if they would share with Him in 
His Kingdom glories, honors and immortality. But they 
will find the narrowness of the way, even if we should not 
tell them. No one can walk in the narrow way, no one 
can follow Jesus, without knowing the truth of the statement, 
"Through much tribulation shall ye enter the Kingdom 
of Heaven." 

What then shall we tell the people? Oh, give them 
also the Message of hope, the Message of joy, the Message 
of peace! Let us draw the attention of the 
brethren to the blessed privileges that are ours, rather 
than frequently to point them to the trials and hardships 
of the way. But what are the privileges of the Christian, 
if through great tribulation he must enter the Kingdom? 
They are, oh, so grand! It is his to know the joy of sins 
forgiven; and many need to have this told them over 
and over again, that they may fully appreciate it. It is 
his to know of the Heavenly Father's Love and care- 
matters so easily forgotten in the stress of life. These 
assurances of the Word need to be repeated over and 
over: "The Father Himself loveth you." "God is for us." 
"All things shall work together for good to them that 
love God." 

As these promises of God's Word abound in our hearts, 
they promote the fruits of the Holy Spirit; joy and peace 
come in, such as the world can neither give nor take 
away. The peace of God, which passeth all human understanding 
thus gradually comes more and more to dwell in 
our hearts; and so thankfulness results. Thankfulness in 
turn leads to more joy and praise, and to more sympathy 
for our fellows— for our families and for the world. Thus 
the Christian finds himself growing in grace, knowledge 



and love. 

"THINK ON THESE THINGS" 

All this is in full accord with St. Paul's advice: 
"Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, 

R5214 : page 107 

whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be 
any praise, think on these things." (Philippians 4:8.) 
Following this course then— of preaching the Gospel of 
Hope— we are following the Master and the Apostles. 
They had so much of this spirit of hope, trust, confidence, 
love, joy and peace, that they could rejoice in tribulation; 
and they did so. The Apostles even sang praise to God 
that they were accounted worthy to share in the sufferings 
of Christ, that they might also share in His coming 
glories. 

Let us then, dear brethren, realize that the world has 
tears and sorrows enough, and fears aplenty. Let us 
more and more use our time, strength, talents, joys, etc., 
in relieving the poor world of its mental distress. 
Hearken to the words of Jesus, "God shall wipe all tears 
from all eyes." "Be ye perfect, even as your Father 
which is in Heaven is perfect." As it will be God's great 
work in the future, through Christ and the Church, to 
wipe away earth's tears, let us chase away some of those 
fears at the present time. Thus we shall help to prepare 
the way for the world to come back into fellowship with 
God by and by, for the faithful of the present time to 
walk more carefully in the footsteps of Jesus and to encourage 
one another in the good way. 



GETHSEMANE 

I journeyed through the twilight 

Where all was dark and drear, 
And wondered why my Savior 

Did not seem always near. 
As steeper grew the pathway 

And full of thorns the road, 
I stumbled, deaf and blinded, 

Beneath my heavy load. 

The tears of my own grieving 
Had filled mine eyes with mist, 

And thro' the vapory veiling 
The face of Christ I missed. 

At last I fixed my vision 

On Heavenly Heights of Love, 

Whose tips were ever glowing 



In sunlight from above. 

And wandering thus, up-gazing, 

I earnestly pressed on, 
Unheeding thorns and thistles 

By which my feet were torn. 
At last, worn out and weary, 

I fell upon the ground. 
Where, worn by time and tempest, 

A granite cross I found. 

I leaned my head upon it, 

My all on it I laid; 
Together with my sorrows, 

My joys I also gave. 
Then suddenly a rustling 

Of pinions filled the air, 
And lo! beside me kneeling 

I saw an Angel there. 
And midnight in the Garden 

Was bright as day to me, 
For Christ stood 'mid the shadows 

Of my Gethsemane! 

BIRLA I. MORRIS. 



R5214 : page 107 

HATED WITHOUT A CAUSE 

--APRIL 27.-GENESIS 37.- 

"Love Envieth Not."— 1 Corinthians 13:4. 

THE STORY of Joseph and his brethren, beautiful 
in its simplicity as a narrative, is deeply 
interesting and instructive, from various 
viewpoints. One lesson would be the unwisdom 
of a parent in showing too great a 
preference for one child above another, and 
thus cultivating amongst the children a 
spirit of envy. Another lesson would be 
along the line of the unwisdom of telling 
even our dreams to unsympathetic ears: as 
when Joseph told his dreams to his brethren. In the one 
dream, he saw eleven shocks of wheat bow down to one 
shock, which was his. In the other dream, he saw the sun, 
the moon and the eleven stars all doing homage to him. 
Joseph was not to be blamed for having these dreams. 
Unlike the majority of dreams, they apparently came not 
from indigestion, but were from the Lord. Joseph was 
not even to blame for artlessly telling the dream to his 
brethren; and evidently this was the very thing which the 
Lord intended should be done. The Lord foreknew the 
jealousy of Joseph's brethren, and how envy would be cultivated 



in their minds; and He gave the opportunity for it; 

for He had already mapped out Joseph's subsequent experiences, 

which the envy of his brethren merely helped 

to accomplish. 

We may, however, learn the lesson that in general it is 
the part of wisdom to keep to one's self truths not necessary 
for another to know which might merely arouse opposition. 
Jesus encouraged this very thought, saying, 
"Cast not your pearls before swine, lest they turn again 
and injure you." Very deep truths connected with the 
Divine Plan and with Christian hopes had better not be 
told to others than those for whom they are intended by 
the Lord— namely, the meek. 

JOSEPH A TYPE OF MESSIAH 

The most important feature of today's Bible Study is 
that which in addition to all that we have suggested, 
recognizes Joseph as a type, or prophetic picture of Christ, 
the Messiah. Joseph was kind to his brethren and was 
on an errand of mercy to them when their envy plotted 
his death, and later on sold him into slavery in Egypt. 
His brethren hated him without a cause— merely because 
he was good, because his father loved him, and because 
God in the dreams foreshadowed his coming exaltation. 

Joseph's brethren should have said, "Let us rejoice that 
we have so noble a brother. Let us rejoice if it be God's 
will that he should be very highly exalted. God's Promise 
made to our grandfathers, Abraham and Isaac, and to our 
father Jacob, may thus be reaching a fulfilment. Let 
God's blessings come in whatever way He sees best. We 
will rejoice with our brother, as we see that he is pleasing 
to God and to our father Jacob. We will seek more and 
more to copy his character." But they were envious to 
the point of cruelty, first resolving to murder him, and 
later, merely as an alternative, to sell him as a slave. 

"THEY HATED HIM WITHOUT A CAUSE" 

But God's providence continued with Joseph and 
blessed him as a slave, and through much tribulation 
finally brought him to the throne of Egypt— next in influence 
and power to Pharaoh himself. Then it was that 
the famine of the land drove Joseph's brethren to Egypt 
to buy wheat. Thus was fulfilled his dream— that his 

R5215 :page 108 

brethren bow down, as illustrated in the eleven sheaves 
which bowed down before his. 

Later on when his father and the entire family came 
into Egypt to live in Goshen, they all did obeisance to 
Joseph, as the representative of the Egyptian Government, 
thus fulfilling the second dream. But all of these experiences 
were at the time dark. They all looked as though 
the Lord had less love for Joseph than for any others of 



his family, until the time came for his exaltation to the 
throne. Then everything changed. 

"WHICH THINGS ARE AN ALLEGORY" 

The allegorical meaning of all this, as applied to 
Joseph, is that he was also hated without a cause. We 
read in Psalm 69:4, "They that hate me without a cause 
are more than the hairs of mine head." Jesus quoted this 
statement and applied it to Himself, saying, "They hated 
Me without a cause." (John 15:25.) The brethren of 
Jesus were the Jews, who crucified Him. But there was 
no cause of death found in Him. 

We perceive that it was for envy that they delivered 
Him up and called for His crucifixion, because His works 
were good and theirs were evil; because he taught the 
way of the Lord more perfectly than they; because He 
declared to them that the time would come when they and 
all others would recognize Him as the Messiah— coming 
in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory— and 
would bow the knee to Him. 

As with Joseph, disaster, treachery and shame prepared 
the way for glory and honor on the throne of 
Egypt, so with Jesus. His trying experiences proved Him 
loyal to God and led onward to His exaltation to the right 
hand of Divine Majesty. St. Paul refers to this, saying 
of Jesus, "Who for the joy that was set before Him endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at 
the right hand of the Throne of God." (Hebrews 12:2.) 
Again he says, "Though He was rich, for your sakes He 
became poor, that ye through His poverty might become 
rich" (2 Corinthians 8:9), even as the experiences of 
Joseph— all of his humiliation— prepared the way for him 
to be succored and honored by Pharaoh. Again we read 
of Jesus, that "He learned obedience by the things which 
He suffered; and being made perfect [through suffering], 
He became the Author of eternal salvation to all 
those that obey Him."— Hebrews 5:9. 

"IF WE SUFFER WITH HIM" 

The Scriptures assure us that in God's great Plan, not 
only Jesus is to be exalted to the Throne as the world's 
Messiah, but with Him is to be a company of brethren, 
sharers of the same glory, honor and immortality. And 
these brethren, in God's great Purpose, are required to 
pass through similar experiences to those of their Elder 
Brother Jesus. Their experiences, therefore, are illustrated 
also in Joseph's experiences. They are not on an 
equality with their Elder Brother. He is designated their 
Head, their Chief, the Captain of their salvation. So we 
read again, that God, "in bringing many sons to glory, 
made the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. 
-Hebrews 2:10. 

And all of the company of sons received under this 
great Captain must similarly be perfected through 



sufferings. 

Does not this account for the trying experiences of the 
Church during the past nineteen centuries? The Apostle 
John declares, "As He was, so are we, in this world"; and 
again, "The world knoweth us not, because it knew Him 
not." As Joseph's brethren were blind to the fact that 
their brother would be their savior from famine, as well 
as the savior of the Egyptians, so the world fails to realize 
that only through The Messiah will any have eternal life. 

In the very same connection in which Jesus mentions 
that He was hated without a cause, He plainly forewarns 
all of His elect followers that they must similarly expect 
to be hated unjustly. We read, "If the world hate you, ye 
know that it hated Me before it hated you. If ye were of 
the world, the world would love its own; but because ye 
are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the 
world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the 
word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than 
his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute 
you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep 
yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for 
My name's sake, because they know not Him that sent Me. 
...But this cometh to pass that the word might be 
fulfilled that is written in their Law, They hated Me without 
a cause."— John 15:18-25. 

We give in full the same text from which our Lord 
quoted, "They that hate Me without a cause are more 
than the hairs of Mine head. ..Let not them that 
wait on Thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for My 
sake; let not those that seek Thee be confounded for My 
sake, O God of Israel. Because for Thy sake I have borne 
reproach: shame hath covered My face. I am become a 
stranger unto My brethren, and an alien unto My mother's 
children. For the zeal of Thine house hath eaten Me up; 
and the reproaches of them that reproached Thee are 
fallen upon Me. Reproach hath broken My heart; and 
I am full of heaviness; and I looked for some to take pity, 
but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. 
They gave Me also gall for My meat; and in My thirst 
they gave Me vinegar to drink."— Psalm 69:4-9,20,21. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE FACTS 

We have considered the facts— that Jesus and all of 
His followers, according to Divine intention, have suffered 
shame and contempt. We perceive that, in the case of 
Jesus and of the early Church, the persecution came from 
their brethren according to the flesh— from the Jews. And 
since then, all the way down the Gospel Age, the persecutions 
of the Church, the brethren of Jesus, the Household 
of Faith, have come from their brethren, too. These 
brethren are not Jews, but Christians. As the Jewish religionists 
in Jesus' day persecuted their more righteous 
brethren, so since then nominal Christians have been the 
chief persecutors of the Lord's faithful followers. 

This persecution has come upon faithful souls of 



nearly every denomination. And, sad to say, this persecution 
has come from unfaithful souls of nearly every 
denomination. Presbyterians, Covenanters, Episcopalians, 
Roman Catholics, Methodists and Baptists have all 
endured persecutions from blinded brethren; and blinded 
ones amongst themselves have also shared in the 
persecuting work. In nearly every case the profession has 
been made that the persecuting was done for the glory of 
God. Thus the Lord through the Prophet expresses the 
matter, saying, "Your brethren that hated you, that cast 
you out for My name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified! 
But He shall appear to your joy, and they shall be 
ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 

Already the world in general, including the Jews, realize 
that a great mistake was made in persecuting Jesus 
unto death. Already to some extent similar transgressions 
against the faithful followers of Jesus have been 
recognized. And yet the same blindness, from the same 
envious disposition, leads on to persecution even in our day. 

The majority admit that they do not know very distinctly 
much about God or much about the Bible. They 

R5215 : page 109 

pray for light, and sing, "Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling 
gloom." And yet, if any light appear, if any 
voice of love or tenderness be heard, directing toward the 
dawning of the New Day, and pointing out with clearness 
the riches of God's grace and the lengths and breadths of 
His mercy, immediately their songs for light cease, and 
their stones of ridicule and slander are hurled. And why? 
Lest peradventure there should be any change; lest any 
one should get further light; lest the Divine promise should 
be fulfilled, and a new Dawn should be ushered in. 

But what is the philosophy of these facts of history? 
Why has God permitted, yea, ordained that Christ should 
suffer, and that all who would walk in His steps must share 
in His experiences of ignominy and shame and reproach 
—suffering with Him? In Jesus' case, the Father used the 
trying experiences to test the love and loyalty of His Son, 
and to demonstrate His obedience to angels and to men. 
Intending to confer upon Him very great glory and honor, 
the Father would have all to see, as He saw it, the 
worthiness of the Logos, subsequently Jesus. 

In a symbolical picture the Heavenly hosts are represented 
as acknowledging the propriety of the high exaltation 
of Jesus, because of His faithfulness unto death, saying, 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, 
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and 
glory, and blessing." And if such a demonstration of the 
worthiness of Jesus, the Logos, was necessary or proper, 
much more necessary would it seem that an elect Church, 
being gathered from amongst a fallen race, should be 
proven loyal to God to the very last— even unto death. 
There is a difference, however. 



R5216 : page 109 

In the case of the Master, it was a demonstration that 
He was perfect before He left the Heavenly glory, and 
perfect also when He became the Man Christ Jesus— "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." "In Him 
was no sin." In the case of His followers, the imperfection 
of the flesh still remains; but they are judged, not 
according to the weaknesses of their flesh— of heredity— 
but according to the love and zeal of their hearts. And 
this loving zeal is witnessed to by their endeavor to walk 
faithfully in the footsteps of their Leader and Savior, 
overcoming to the best of their ability the weaknesses 
of their flesh, and "showing forth the praises of Him 
who called them out of darkness into His marvelous light." 



R5216 : page 109 

AFFLICTED, YET A COMFORTER 

-MAY 4.-GENESIS 40 AND 41.- 

"God giveth grace to the humble."— 1 Peter 5:5. 

JOSEPH may well be designated the model 

young man of Old Testament times. In 

some respects, he would be a model for any 

time. There is a distinction to be made, 

however. Joseph lived before the time of 

spirit-begetting, and hence was merely a 

natural man, not a Christian. He lived before 

the time of Bibles, before the time of 

preaching and Sunday Schools. He merely 

inherited from his father a strong faith in 

the God of Abraham, who had promised that, ultimately, 

a blessing should come to all people through Jacob's posterity. 

Joseph, who was one of that family, reverenced 

God and sought to live humbly, nobly. His faithfulness 

to God and his trust in God's Promise served as a rudder 

to guide and direct all the affairs of his life. Whatsoever 

he did was with a view to pleasing God and winning His 

approval. 

Such faithfulness was probably rare at that time, as it 
is today, and the reward came in Joseph's advancement 
to the highest station in the house of his master— that of 
steward. His conscientiousness led him to be careful, 
economical and wise; and his master could and did entrust 
everything to his care. Young men of Joseph's type are 
very much valued everywhere today— yea, they have been 
valued in every period of the world's history— trustworthy 
men, faithful men, economical men, wise men; and all 
these qualities go with godliness— with faith in God, and 
a realization of responsibility to Him. 

But just in the height of Joseph's prosperity, calamity 



came. His steadfastness to principle angered his mistress. 
She falsely accused him; and he was cast into prison and 
made to appear guilty of a heinous crime, disloyal to his 
master and benefactor. Yet all the while he was innocent; 
but only God and himself knew of that innocence. The 
Adversary had made circumstantial evidence to appear so 
strong that Joseph's guilt was not questioned. The poet 
Shakespeare noted this trait of human weakness in these 
words: "Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned." 

How strange it seems that God would allow so terrible 
a blight to fall upon the life of one who was seeking to 
walk in the ways of righteousness! We can imagine 
Joseph's querying why this evil had befallen him, and saying 
with the Prophet, "They that work wickedness are set 
up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered; while 
those who seek to live righteously suffer persecution." 

But evidently Joseph did not permit himself to question 
the Wisdom of Divine Providence which took him to 
prison in Egypt any more than he allowed himself to question 
the Wisdom of the same Providence in permitting him 
to be sold a slave into Egypt. His faith in God endured 
the test. He became stronger as he found himself shut 
away from all earthly hopes and ambitions— dead to the 
world. The more did he cultivate faith in the Almighty; 
the more did he determine that at any cost he would live 
righteously, soberly, reverentially. Even in prison, his 
faithfulness, intelligence and general goodness were recognized. 
He became the prison keeper's trusty man and 
assistant. Such a character, no matter how much traduced, 
misrepresented and slandered, eventually will commend 
itself to those with whom it has close contact. And 
the principle holds good today, as then. 

DREAMS OF BUTLER AND BAKER 

The prison regulations of old were less methodical 
than at present. Joseph had been in prison for years, had 
probably been forgotten, and might have continued there 
indefinitely, had not something occurred to bring his case 
to official notice. When he was twenty-eight years old, 
two high officials were thrust into prison because Pharaoh 
had taken some offence at their conduct. One of these 
was the king's secretary and butler, or cup-bearer. The 
other was head of his culinary department. 

Joseph, as the general overseer of the prison, came in 
contact with these men, noted their sadness of face and 
tendered sympathy. What a noble example! Instead of 
moping about, bemoaning his lot, Joseph was cheerful, 
trusting in God and waiting for some circumstance by 
which God would eventually open up the way before him. 
Such a noble character can always find time to speak a 
word of consolation to those in trouble! What an example 
to worldly men of today! What an example to Christian 

R5216 :page 110 



men of today, who have much advantage over him in 
so many ways. 

There are some who tell us that our race is rising so 
rapidly from brute nature by evolutionary processes, that 
impliedly Joseph, living nearly four thousand years ago— 
two thousand years after Adam's creation— would be 
almost a brute, only a few removes from the monkey. 
But how different a view is given of him by this little 
narrative, which makes no attempt to pointing a moral 
with his experiences, but merely records them as matters 
of fact! 

When Joseph learned that the two official prisoners 
were troubled because of impressive dreams, he volunteered 
interpretations. The one was encouraging, and the 
other discouraging. He told the butler that within three 
days he would be back again in favor with the king, but 
informed the baker that within three days he would be 
executed. Then Joseph, mindful of the fact that he had 
a duty to perform in respect to attaining his own liberty, 
urged upon the butler— the one he had so encouraged and 
befriended— that when at liberty he would remember his 
comforter and do something to bring Joseph's case before 
proper authorities, that he might be heard and, if possible, 
be released. 

But alas, for the hardness of heart so prevalent! The 
butler forgot all about Joseph, his prisoner friend, for two 
years! Then the matter was brought to his attention by 
Pharaoh's dream; for none of the wise men of Egypt were 
able to interpret it. With apologies for his neglect, the 
butler told the king of the dream experiences of the baker 
and himself in prison and of the wonderful young man 
Joseph, who by some god-given power had interpreted 
their dreams, just as these turned out. 

During those two years, Joseph doubtless hoped much 
and waited longingly for some adjustment of his case. We 
doubt not that, instead of growing faint in respect to his 
faith in God, he all the more earnestly laid hold upon 
the Lord, and realized that his experiences must be for 
good. And so they were; for it was when Joseph was just 
thirty years of age— when he had just reached manhood 
under the old-time law— that Pharaoh sent for him to interpret 
his dreams, and rewarded him very highly. 

PHARAOH'S DREAMS INTERPRETED 

Pharaoh related his two dreams. In the first he saw 
seven fine, strong cattle, and a little later the same number 
of very poor, lean cattle— the worst he had ever seen. In 
the dream, the lean cattle ate up the fat ones, and looked 
none the better. In the second dream, the king saw a fine 
stalk of corn grow up out of the earth, bearing seven full, 
healthy ears of corn; and then he saw another stalk with 
seven withered ears, good for nothing. The latter swallowed 
up the former, and looked none the better. 

Young Joseph quickly gave the explanation of the 
dreams; but before doing so, he very distinctly told the 



king that the interpretation came not from himself, but 
from God. Thus he exemplified the Scriptural teaching, 
"In all thy ways acknowledge Him," and "He shall give 
thee the desires of thine heart."— Prov. 3:6; Psalm 37:4. 

Joseph explained that the two dreams referred to the 
same matter— that unitedly they taught that there would 
be seven years of great plenty in the land of Egypt; and 
that these would be followed by seven years of famine, 
which would fully consume all the surplus of the plentiful 
years. Proceeding, Joseph offered the suggestion that 
God evidently meant this information to be used by Pharaoh, 
and recommended that, forthwith, a special agent of 
the king should be appointed to buy up all the surplus 
grain in the seven years of plenty and to store it for use 
during the seven years of famine. 

Pharaoh very wisely acceded, and with manifestation 
of great breadth of mind and desire to serve the interests 
of his people, promptly appointed Joseph himself to 
be the purchaser of the surplus corn of the years of plenty, 
to have full charge of the matter and to attend to its disbursement 
in the following years of famine. 

Thus Joseph stepped out of prison into a fourteen 
years' contract. From suffering because of slander he 
suddenly stepped into a place of highest authority, next to 
Pharaoh, in the greatest empire of those days. Can we 
doubt that God's hand was in the matter of Joseph's success 
and exaltation? Surely not! Nor should we infer 
any lack of Divine favor in Joseph's experiences of adversity. 

R5217 :page 110 

On the contrary, we may feel sure that the lessons 
of his adversity were merely preparations for his 
subsequent experiences as Pharaoh's logos, or mouthpiece, 
throughout the kingdom. 

We are reminded again of the lesson of a week ago— 
that Joseph's experiences were typical of those of Jesus 
and the Church, His followers. The Bible assures us that 
the graces of humility and patience are both closely related 
to love and loyalty. St. Paul reminds us of this when he 
declares, "If ye be without chastisement,... then are 
ye. ..not sons. For what son is he whom the father 
chasteneth not?" He reminds us that "Whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He 
receiveth."— Hebrews 12:6-8. 

It was so with Jesus, and with all the faithful Apostles, 
and has been so with all the followers of Jesus during 
this Gospel Age. It will undoubtedly continue to be true 
in the case of all the consecrated Church. It is because 
the Lord Jesus loves these noble characters that He counts 
them worthy of trials and testings, disciplines, etc. These 
are necessary to qualify them for the positions of honor, 
glory, immortality and great responsibility, to which the 
Father has called Jesus and His brethren, the Church. 

THE VALUE OF ADVERSITY 



Jacob's special love for his son Joseph manifested itself 
in favoritism— the princely coat, or robe, etc. Quite possibly 
he would have spoiled his son, had not Divine Providence 
interfered and taken him entirely out of this father's 
control. Many fathers, especially the rich, have made 
similar mistakes. Hence the sons of the rich are not 
always a credit to their fathers. 

The great Heavenly Father, however, makes no such 
mistakes. His people are assured that trials and difficulties 
are marks rather of their relationship to God and of 
His loving care over them. True, this providential care 
is restricted: "The Lord knoweth them that are His." 
His special dealings are with His consecrated people— 
those who have entered into a covenant with Him, who 
have become His servants and His children. To these 
alone belongs the promise that "all things shall work together 
for good to them that love God, to those who are 
the called according to His purpose."— Romans 8:28. 

While this special call applies peculiarly to the Church 
of this Gospel Age, there is a sense in which it was applicable 
to the Hebrews, since the time of Abraham. 
Joseph belonged to this line which was in covenant relationship 
with God. This accounts for God's dealing with 
him rather than with young men of other families than 
Abraham's. Incidentally, it is worthy of notice that the 
Israelites passed through many trying experiences because 
of being God's people. Many of those experiences they 
might have escaped, had they not come into covenant 
relationship with God. But had they escaped the trials 

R5217 :page 111 

and difficulties, they would have escaped certain privileges 
and blessings also. And the blessings which God gives 
always outweigh the adversities which prepare for them. 

JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN ELECTIONS 

This reminds us that the Bible declares that the Jewish 
people, and subsequently the Christians, are God's Elect- 
God's Chosen People— the Seed of Abraham, natural and 
Spiritual. Both have offers of God's blessings not accorded 
to other peoples; and in both cases the trying experiences 
are to fit the elect ones for the future glories to 
which they have been invited. 

Nevertheless, God has also a great blessing in store 
for the non-elect. During the thousand years of Messiah's 
reign, the elect Church, the saintly only, will be Messiah's 
joint-heirs in the great Kingdom of God, which will then 
take control of the earth. Then also the Elect from the 
Hebrews will be used, in another part of the work, in conjunction 
with the Christian Church, the one on the 
Heavenly plane, the other on the earthly. Through these 
two Israels, God's blessings are to be poured out on all 
nations, kindreds, peoples and tongues. 



Although God has not specially supervised the affairs 
of any except these two elect classes, nevertheless we see 
that He has permitted, in a general way, great lessons of 
adversity to come to the whole human family. As the 
special trials and difficulties of the elect classes are intended 
to work for them special blessing and qualifications 
for their work as God's agencies, so the general tribulations 
of the world will give general lessons that will be 
helpful to all people by giving all experiences with sin and 
death— by teaching all thus the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 

By and by, when Messiah's Kingdom shall be established, 
when Satan shall be bound, when the reign of 
righteousness shall begin, when the curse shall be lifted, 
when the blessing shall flow instead— then the lessons of 
sorrow and tears and crying and dying will all prove valuable. 
Humanity will appreciate the great blessings of God 
in the future very largely by contrast with the evils and 
sorrows of the present time. When, by and by, they shall 
learn fully and conclusively that all these sorrows and 
tears are the results of violation of God's laws and disregard 
of His injunctions, the lesson undoubtedly will be one 
that will never be forgotten. 

Wherever the plowshare of trouble has gone, it has 
served to break up the fallow ground and to make ready 
for the seed of Divine Truth and grace. The next Age, 
under Messiah's beneficent rule, will be the time of sowing 
the seeds of knowledge of God and appreciation of His 
glorious character and Plan. The results will undoubtedly 
be glorious, as the Scriptures declare. Eventually all will 
participate in these blessings everlastingly, except such as 
intelligently refuse them, choosing sin rather than righteousness, 
in that Day when the knowledge of the Truth will 
be given to all and when assistance to righteousness will 
be apparent. 



R5217 :page 111 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 
THE SECRETARY, THE I.B.S.A., 

DEAR SIR: 

Can you let me have a copy of "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages." Helping Hand series? I saw a copy in a cell of the 
Kandy Gaol today. The prisoner said it had been a great 
help and blessing to him. He had spent a fortnight of great 
darkness and doubt, but this book had cheered him up. Yours 
sincerely, (Signed) ROBERT A. CLARKE, 

Captain Salvation Army, Kandy, Ceylon. 

The above is the result of a book placed in a prison library in India. 



page 111 



BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

Series VI., Study XIV. --Sundry Earthly 
Obligations of the New Creation. 

MAY 4 

Read p. 568, par. 2, to p. 571, par. 1. 

(13) What is the Scriptural injunction with respect to 
indorsing notes for others? P. 568, par. 2. 

(14) How should the New Creation regulate their household 
affairs with respect to petty borrowing and lending, as 
between neighbors? P. 569, par. 1, 2. 

(15) How should the borrowing of time by others be 
regarded by the New Creation? P. 570, par. 1. 

(16) What beautiful example did our Lord set us with 
respect to waiting for a positive invitation and assurance of 
welcome before accepting hospitalities? P. 570, par. 2. 

(17) To what extent should New Creatures permit themselves 
to be imposed upon by uninvited guests, whether 
"brethren" or relatives according to the flesh? P. 571, par. 1. 

MAY 11 

Read p. 572, par. 1, to p. 574, par. 3. 

"TAKE NO THOUGHT FOR THE MORROW." 

(18) Does Matthew 6:34,19,20, teach us to make no provision 
for the future? What example has the Heavenly 

Father set us in this respect? P. 572, par. 1. 

(19) What is the proper interpretation of Matt. 6:34? 
P. 572, par. 2. 

(20) What is the difference between carefulness and 
anxious care respecting the morrow, and how is this illustrated 
in Scripture? P. 573, par. 1. 

(21) Does Matt. 6:19,20, imply carelessness in respect to 
the daily interests of the present life? P. 573, par. 2. 

(22) How should all who have "chosen Christ" as their 
Master regard their earthly possessions? P. 573, par. 3; 
P. 574, par. 1. 

(23) How should money be regarded by the New Creation? 
P. 574, par. 2, 3. 

MAY 18 



Read p. 575, par. 1, to p. 578, par. 1. 



(24) What does full consecration to the Lord require of 
the poor as well as the rich? P. 575, par. 1. 

(25) Suggest what further explanation our Lord might 
have given "the rich young man," had he possessed the proper 
heart-condition. P. 576, par. 1, 2. 

(26) Does consecration of our all to the Lord imply that 



all our means must be used exclusively in religious work? 
P. 576, par. 3; P. 577, par. 1. 

(27) What instructions do the Scriptures give with respect 
to making future provision for our families? P. 577, par. 2. 

(28) What is the duty of every parent with respect to 
reasonable provision for his children's present and future 
interests and necessities? P. 578, par. 1. 

MAY 25 

Read p. 578, par. 2, to p. 582, par. 2. 

ORGANIZATIONS FOR MUTUAL BENEFIT. 

(29) Is the question of Insurance a religious or a purely 
business proposition? P. 578, par. 2. 

(30) In a case where the wife is not in sympathy with 
Present Truth, what course would be advisable on the part 
of the husband? P. 579, par. 1. 

(31) In view of the great Time of Trouble, what may 

be expected of Insurance Companies, especially those of a 
fraternal character? P. 579, par. 2; P. 580, par. 1. 

(32) Should the New Creation become members of 
Masonic or other secret societies? P. 580, par. 2; P. 581, par. 1. 

(33) What liberty of choice may the New Creation exercise 
in the matter of joining other mutual-benefit associations, 
not of a religious nature? P. 581, par. 2. 

(34) What advice is suggested regarding membership in 
labor organizations? P. 582, par. 1, 2. 



page 113 
