Questions From Readers
For how long a period of time did Job suffer?
Some people think that Job’s trials extended over many years, but the book of Job does not point to such protracted suffering.
The first phase of Job’s trials, the loss of family members and goods, appears to have been quite short. We read: “Now it came to be the day when [Job’s] sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house of their brother the firstborn.” Job got one report after another that he had suffered loss​—of his cattle, his asses, his sheep, his camels, and of the servants caring for those animals. Apparently, right afterward Job learned of the death of his sons and daughters, who “were eating and drinking wine in the house of their brother the firstborn.” It seems that all of this occurred on one day.​—Job 1:13-19.
The next phase of Job’s trials must have taken more time. Satan approached Jehovah and claimed that Job would fail if the suffering touched him personally​—his own body. Then Job was struck with “a malignant boil from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.” The spread of this disease over his entire body may have taken a while. And it would likely have taken time for the news of “all this calamity” to reach his would-be comforters, who proceeded to come to him.​—Job 2:3-11.
Eliphaz was from Teman in the land of Edom, and Zophar was from an area in northwestern Arabia, so their home territories were not far from Job’s in Uz, which was probably in northern Arabia. However, Bildad was a Shuhite, and it is understood that his people lived along the Euphrates. If Bildad was in his home area at the time, it might have taken weeks or months for him to hear of Job’s situation and to travel to Uz. Of course, it is possible that the three were in Job’s vicinity when his suffering began. In any event, when Job’s three companions arrived, they “kept sitting with him on the earth seven days and seven nights” without speaking.​—Job 2:12, 13.
Then came the final phase of Job’s trials, the details of which fill many chapters of the book. There was a series of debates or speeches by those supposed comforters, and Job often responded. After that ended, the young man Elihu offered reproof, and Jehovah corrected Job from the heavens.​—Job 32:1-6; 38:1; 40:1-6; 42:1.
Hence, Job’s suffering and its resolution may have occurred within a few months, perhaps less than a year. You may know from experience that difficult trials seem to last forever. Yet, we must not forget that they do end, as did Job’s. However long the trials that we face go on, let us keep in mind God’s support, as reflected in the inspired words: “Though the tribulation is momentary and light, it works out for us a glory that is of more and more surpassing weight and is everlasting.” (2 Corinthians 4:17) The apostle Peter wrote: “After you have suffered a little while, the God of all undeserved kindness, who called you to his everlasting glory in union with Christ, will himself finish your training, he will make you firm, he will make you strong.”​—1 Peter 5:10.

