Jehovah​—The True and Living God
PHARAOH of Egypt spoke with defiance and contempt when he asked: “Who is Jehovah?” (Exodus 5:2) As shown in the preceding article, that attitude brought plagues and death upon the Egyptians, including a watery grave for Pharaoh and his military forces.
In ancient Egypt, Jehovah God proved his supremacy over false gods. But there is much more to be learned about him. What are some facets of his personality? And what does he require of us?
His Name and Fame
When he made demands upon Egypt’s Pharaoh, Moses did not say: ‘The Lord says such and such.’ Pharaoh and the other Egyptians thought of their many false gods as lords. No, Moses used the divine name, Jehovah. He himself had heard it spoken from above when he was at the burning bush in the land of Midian. Says the inspired record:
“God went on to speak to Moses and to say to him: ‘I am Jehovah. . . . I, even I, have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I remember my covenant. Therefore say to the sons of Israel, “I am Jehovah, and I shall certainly bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians and deliver you from their slavery, and I shall indeed reclaim you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments. And I shall certainly take you to me as a people, and I shall indeed prove to be God to you; and you will certainly know that I am Jehovah your God who is bringing you out from under the burdens of Egypt. And I shall certainly bring you into the land [of Canaan] that I raised my hand in oath to give to [your forefathers,] Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and I shall indeed give it to you as something to possess. I am Jehovah.”’”​—Exodus 6:1-8.
That is just what Jehovah did. He freed the Israelites from Egyptian bondage and enabled them to occupy the land of Canaan. As promised, God caused all of this to take place. How fitting! His name, Jehovah, means “He Causes to Become.” The Bible refers to Jehovah by such titles as “God,” “Sovereign Lord,” “Creator,” “Father,” “the Almighty,” and “the Most High.” Yet his name Jehovah identifies him as the true God who progressively brings his grand purposes to pass.​—Isaiah 42:8.
If we were to read the Bible in its original languages, we would find God’s name thousands of times. In Hebrew it is represented by the four consonants Yod He Waw He (יהוה), called the Tetragrammaton, read from right to left. Those speaking Hebrew supplied the vowel sounds, but people today do not know for certain what those were. While some favor the spelling Yahweh, the form Jehovah is common and suitably identifies our Creator.
Use of the name Jehovah also distinguishes God from the one called “my Lord” at Psalm 110:1, where one rendition is: “The LORD [Hebrew, יהוה] said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” (King James Version) Acknowledging the occurrence of God’s name here in the Hebrew text, the New World Translation reads: “The utterance of Jehovah to my Lord is: ‘Sit at my right hand until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.’” Those words of Jehovah God refer prophetically to Jesus Christ, whom the writer called “my Lord.”
Jehovah made a name for himself in Pharaoh’s day. By means of Moses, God told that hard-hearted ruler: “At this time I am sending all my blows against your heart and upon your servants and your people, to the end that you may know that there is none like me in all the earth. For by now I could have thrust my hand out that I might strike you and your people with pestilence and that you might be effaced from the earth. But, in fact, for this cause I have kept you in existence, for the sake of showing you my power and in order to have my name declared in all the earth.”​—Exodus 9:14-16.
Regarding Israel’s exodus from Egypt and the overthrow of certain Canaanite kings, the woman Rahab of Jericho told two Hebrew spies: “I do know that Jehovah will certainly give you [Israelites] the land, and that the fright of you has fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land have become disheartened because of you. For we have heard how Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea from before you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites who were on the other side of the Jordan, namely, Sihon and Og, whom you devoted to destruction. When we got to hear it, then our hearts began to melt, and no spirit has arisen yet in anybody because of you, for Jehovah your God is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath.” (Joshua 2:9-11) Yes, Jehovah’s fame had spread.
Jehovah and His Qualities
The psalmist expressed this heartfelt wish: “That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” (Psalm 83:18) Since Jehovah’s sovereignty is universal, Jesus’ persecuted followers could pray: “Sovereign Lord, you are the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them.” (Acts 4:24) And how comforting it is to know that Jehovah is the “Hearer of prayer”!​—Psalm 65:2.
Jehovah’s main attribute is love. Indeed, “God is love”​—the very epitome of this quality. (1 John 4:8) Moreover, “with him there are wisdom and mightiness.” Jehovah is all-wise and all-powerful, but he never abuses his power. (Job 12:13; 37:23) We can also be sure that Jehovah will always deal fairly with us, for “righteousness and judgment are the established place of his throne.” (Psalm 97:2) If we err but are repentant, we can take comfort in the knowledge that Jehovah is “a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abundant in loving-kindness and truth.” (Exodus 34:6) No wonder we can have joy in serving Jehovah!​—Psalm 100:1-5.
The Incomparable Heavenly King
Jehovah’s Son, Jesus Christ, said: “God is a Spirit.” (John 4:24) Hence, Jehovah is invisible to human eyes. In fact, Jehovah told Moses: “You are not able to see my face, because no man may see me and yet live.” (Exodus 33:20) This heavenly King is so glorious that humans would not be able to endure the experience of seeing him.
Though Jehovah is invisible to our eyes, there is plenty of testimony to his existence as Almighty God. Indeed, “his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.” (Romans 1:20) The earth​—with its grass, trees, fruits, vegetables, and flowers—​testifies to Jehovah’s Godship. Unlike valueless idol-gods, Jehovah gives rain and fruitful seasons. (Acts 14:16, 17) Look at the stars in the night sky. What grand evidence of Jehovah’s Godship and organizational ability!
Jehovah has also organized his holy, intelligent spirit creatures in heaven. As a harmonious organization, they carry out God’s will, as the psalmist says: “Bless Jehovah, O you angels of his, mighty in power, carrying out his word, by listening to the voice of his word. Bless Jehovah, all you armies of his, you ministers of his, doing his will.” (Psalm 103:20, 21) Jehovah has also organized his people on the earth. The nation of Israel was well organized, and so were the early followers of God’s Son. Similarly today, Jehovah has a worldwide organization of zealous Witnesses, proclaiming the good news that his Kingdom is at hand.​—Matthew 24:14.
Jehovah Is the True and Living God
Jehovah’s Godship has been demonstrated in so many ways! He humiliated Egypt’s false gods and brought the Israelites safely into the Promised Land. Creation gives abundant evidence of Jehovah’s Godship. And there is simply no comparison between him and the worthless idol-gods of false religion.
The prophet Jeremiah showed the great contrast between Jehovah, the living God, and lifeless man-made idols. That contrast is well expressed in Jeremiah chapter 10. Among other things, Jeremiah wrote: “Jehovah is in truth God. He is the living God and the King to time indefinite.” (Jeremiah 10:10) The living and true God, Jehovah, created all things. He delivered the Israelites languishing in Egyptian bondage. Nothing is impossible for him.
Jehovah, “the King of eternity,” will answer the prayer: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (1 Timothy 1:17; Matthew 6:9, 10) The heavenly Messianic Kingdom, already in the hands of Jesus Christ, will soon take action against the wicked and destroy all of Jehovah’s enemies. (Daniel 7:13, 14) That Kingdom will also usher in a new world of endless blessings for obedient mankind.​—2 Peter 3:13.
There is much more to learn about Jehovah and his purposes. Why not make it your determination to take in such knowledge and act in harmony with it? If you do this, you will be privileged to enjoy eternal life in an earthly paradise under Kingdom rule. You will live when sorrow, pain, and even death have passed away and the knowledge of Jehovah fills the earth. (Isaiah 11:9; Revelation 21:1-4) That can be your lot if you seek, find, and act in harmony with the Bible-based answers to the question, “Who is Jehovah?”
[Picture Credit Line on page 7]
Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.

