Questions From Readers
● Ephesians 5:3 says: “Let fornication . . . not even be mentioned among you.” Therefore, is it not sinful to discuss fornication or publish anything on this subject?—M. N., U.S.A.
At Ephesians 5:1-5, the apostle Paul gave this inspired admonition: “Let fornication and uncleanness of every kind or greediness not even be mentioned among you, just as it befits holy people; neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming, but rather the giving of thanks. For you know this, recognizing it for yourselves, that no fornicator or unclean person or greedy person—which means being an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and of God.” Of course, even in this instance the apostle mentioned fornication, making the powerful point that a fornicator has no “inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and of God.” So, there are times when it is not at all sinful to mention or discuss fornication.
Paul was urging the Ephesians to watch their conduct, speech and thoughts. They were to become imitators of God, who is perfect, clean and upright in every way. Certainly, then, fornication was not to be a subject of regular conversation among them. They should not pruriently describe immoral acts and discuss fornication for the purpose of deriving sensual pleasure in some manner from such discussion.
However, if one took the position that it is always a sin to consider anything about fornication, he would have to delete from his reading material certain portions of the Bible. This would not please God, for there should be no such personal editing of the Scriptures. (Deut. 4:2; Prov. 30:5, 6; Rev. 22:18, 19) Yes; the Bible itself frankly discusses fornication a number of times and condemns those who practice it. For example, the Scriptures state: “Flee from fornication.” “For this is what God wills, the sanctifying of you, that you abstain from fornication.” “But as for the . . . fornicators . . . their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulphur. This means the second death.” (1 Cor. 6:18; 1 Thess. 4:3; Rev. 21:8) Some may think it indelicate to discuss the Scriptural view of fornication. Others may actually oppose ‘letter-of-the-law’ adherence to portions of the Bible, while themselves personally violating what is said at Ephesians 5:3. But Christians know that Scriptural warnings against fornication are a safeguard to individuals who are inclined toward righteousness.
Hence, in its publications the Watch Tower Society at times publishes Biblically-based information regarding fornication. For instance, in Awake! of May 8, 1966, there appears an article entitled “Does Your Minister Approve of Fornication?” While it discloses the startling fact that many clergymen do approve of fornication, this article proves from the Holy Scriptures that Almighty God does not.
Is it important to realize that Jehovah God condemns fornication and is it imperative to shun it personally? Indeed it is, for the apostle Paul candidly wrote under divine inspiration: “What! Do you not know that unrighteous persons will not inherit God’s kingdom? Do not be misled. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men, nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom.”—1 Cor. 6:9, 10.

