Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
How faith strengthening it was for all of us to be present at the Memorial of Christ’s death this spring! The incomplete attendance figures for the continental United States indicate that 1,258,837 were assembled, with 4,293 partaking. Early reports from other countries reveal that over 101,000 attended the Memorial in Japan, which is an increase of about 14,000 over the attendance there one year ago! Peru had 45,647 attending, which is about 7,000 more than last year. Now it is our privilege to encourage and assist the many thousands who attended the Memorial with us to become active praisers of Jehovah.
During the past few months branch committee members and their wives from all over the earth have attended a special five-week Gilead course arranged by the Governing Body. We truly enjoyed our association with these faithful ones. Four classes have been completed with 105 brothers attending. School sessions were approximately six hours daily, with additional time spent working with various departments here at Bethel. The brothers appreciated observing the operation of the factory and the Bethel home so there could be an interchange of ideas for improving the work world wide.
A refreshing treat for the wives of these branch committee members was the opportunity they had each day of joining their husbands for the first session, consisting of a stimulating Bible discussion. In most cases, the married brothers were able to bring their wives. We certainly were encouraged by the experiences these brothers and their wives related to the Bethel family while they were here. Also, we enjoyed very much the worldwide flavor their foreign accents and customs brought into our midst.
On another subject, you will be interested to know that 30 sessions of the Pioneer Service School were conducted in 26 locations throughout the country during March and April. The wives of circuit and district overseers were privileged to attend, as well as many special pioneers and some regular pioneers. So far, more than 1,000 full-time workers have already completed the course. In fact, many of us here at Bethel have enrolled in an abbreviated version of the course, and we appreciate our opportunity to attend along with our brothers and sisters in the pioneer work.
Plans have been made for additional classes to be conducted this fall. Regular pioneers who can serve in areas where the need is greater will be included in the fall classes. If your congregation has a graduate of the Pioneer Service School associated with it, we know you are already aware of the rich blessing this school has been to our pioneers. We send a warm expression of our love and prayers.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

