Presenting the Good News​—By Tactfully Developing Conversations
1 A pleasant conversation with a householder often results in a fine witness being given from God’s Word. However, it is often a challenge to start conversations since people are so preoccupied with their own affairs or have unfounded opinions regarding our work.
2 What might we have in mind that will assist us in tactfully developing conversations? Our own attitude is very important. Have we earnestly prayed to God to help us to find honest-hearted persons and then to aid them spiritually? Do we view each householder as a potential servant of Jehovah? If so, then we will likely be in the proper frame of mind ourselves to convey the truth to others in a loving and tactful manner.
3 It is good to reflect on the loving example of the apostle Paul who was willing to put forth extraordinary effort to adapt himself to the varying circumstances he met in the field. His earnest, heartfelt desire to aid others to understand God’s Word was well expressed at 1 Corinthians 9:22, 23: “To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.” We too, should be willing to expend ourselves in behalf of the householder, not viewing him as an opponent to be overcome, but as a prospective sheeplike person to be helped. (Luke 10:5, 6) Persons can often detect if our attitude toward them is negative. So, we should approach each house in a positive spirit of peace.​—Eph. 4:29; 6:15.
4 Some persons are able to start conversations by commenting on God’s purposes and then pausing to let the householder express himself. Others have found that when they do this the householder may listen politely, but they have difficulty getting him involved in the conversation. If you find yourself in the latter category, why not try asking tactful questions to encourage the householder to participate?
5 Of course, when you ask a question you do not know what the householder will answer and so you should be ready to adjust your theme accordingly. When your comments in response show your recognition of his viewpoint, you may be well on the way to enjoying a lively conversation. Try to keep it going by introducing further information from the Bible dealing with his interests or by asking further thoughtful questions.
6 Begin your conversation with things that you believe are of concern to the householder, briefly showing the problem and then leading him to the Bible’s solution. When he makes an observation, comment on what he says so he will know that you are listening. Your interest in his thoughts and why he feels that way will encourage him to continue conversing with you. Try to find points of agreement and stress these. Remember, in most cases you may have only a few minutes to talk. So, while you will likely not be able to agree with everything he says, it is usually better not to criticize his views quickly. Rather, keep your conversation positive by emphasizing the blessings of God’s kingdom as the solution that the Bible offers for man’s problems.
7 When a differing viewpoint arises, you may regard it as a matter of mutual interest. You can even say that you are glad he brought the subject up. Consider it as a key to continued conversation. If the householder is willing to reason, you might even ask, “Did you ever think of it from this standpoint?” Then, you might share a scripture that shows what God’s Word says on the subject. If you find that you cannot reach him or that he is unreasonable, do not insist that he accept what you have said. Rather, it is best to conclude with a friendly comment or two, thus preparing the way for a future opportunity to present the good news to him.​—Prov. 12:8, 18.
8 When you start a conversation, try to make it a pleasant experience for the householder. Insofar as it depends upon you, try to leave him with a favorable impression, if possible, a more favorable attitude toward God, his Word and his servants than before you called. In this way even if you are not successful initially in reaching his heart, he may be more receptive the next time.
9 Deep concern and a loving desire to help interested ones are important factors contributing to successful and enjoyable field activity. Continue endeavoring to reach the hearts of those you contact, looking to Jehovah to bless your efforts.​—1 Cor. 3:6.

