Reach Others by Evangelizing
1 Jesus felt so strongly about the evangelizing work when on earth that he said: “I must declare the good news [evangel] of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 4:43) Thus, when he engaged in the evangelizing work, he devoted many hours of the day to spreading the good news. At times when he was seeking rest and food, he was willing to forgo both in order to teach the interested ones about his heavenly Father. (Mark 6:31-34) What an aid such an attitude was in reaching others!
2 Paul reflected the same attitude as Jesus toward sharing in the evangelizing work. He felt it was an obligation that he had to discharge. (1 Cor. 9:16) Do you feel the same urgent need to participate in the evangelizing work? Paul was willing to give his “soul” in order to accomplish this work. (Acts 20:24) How helpful such an attitude can be for us as we do the evangelizing work that we have been assigned.
3 There are many ways we can do the evangelizing work and reach those searching for the truth. Jesus stressed personal contact in the homes. (Matt. 10:11-13) He also went from city to city and village to village. (Matt. 9:35) Paul did witnessing “in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.” (Acts 17:17) He witnessed to informal groups also. (Acts 16:13) Philip gave a witness to someone traveling on the road. (Acts 8:26-30) Also, Andrew witnessed to his relative. (John 1:40, 41) So, we have many excellent examples to follow.
4 While you are traveling to a convention, perhaps some of you will find it possible to reach someone by evangelizing. Or, you may be vacationing and have the opportunity to converse with someone in an informal manner. Occasionally vacations may include visits to relatives who may not be in the truth, but who perhaps would be receptive to an informal discussion of the Bible.
5 While traveling from city to city and stopping at a service station to get gas, or stopping at a restaurant to eat, we may find an opportunity to give a witness to an attendant or a waitress. They may ask where we are from and how we are enjoying our trip. Such an occasion may arise when we are traveling to a convention, or returning from one, and could present an opportunity to leave appropriate literature to help to spread the “good news” and plant the seed of truth in the heart of such ones. Or, it may be that, while we are staying at a motel, opportunities will arise to have a conversation with the manager or one of the workers. Of course, how we conduct ourselves while using these facilities also is a way we can give a witness.​—Titus 2:1-14.
6 There may be occasion, too, to work territory that is not frequently covered. For example, some congregations may be able to travel into rural areas and reach persons in this way. Other congregations have territories that include vacation resort areas where many persons will be spending time at a vacation home and could be reached during the summer.
7 We may have the occasion to use some means of public transportation and could start up a conversation with someone sitting next to us on a bus, train or airplane. When traveling, some persons are very willing to talk about world conditions, the breakdown in public services, or other subjects that lead into a Bible discussion.
8 The offer for July, the Watchtower or Awake! subscription for $2.00, with a 384- or 416-page book free to new subscribers, can be used effectively in our July evangelizing. Thus, it would be good to carry some subscription blanks in addition to literature.
9 So there are many opportunities open to us to evangelize as we try to reach all persons searching for the truth. We have fine examples of faithful men in times past who were dedicated to giving a thorough witness because they felt obligated to carry out the commission given to them by Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. Some did this work from house to house and others informally, such as in the marketplace, by the seaside or on the road while traveling. We can do likewise and receive the joys of sharing in the evangelizing work. Our mission is to reach as many persons as we can. The time remaining in this system of things is limited. We should do everything possible to see that we complete the evangelizing work.
10 Would it not then be good to make this work a matter of prayer, individually and as family groups, perhaps praying before we leave our homes? Surely Jehovah will bless our efforts if we let him know of our desire to reach as many as possible in the evangelizing work this summer.

