Select the Best Meeting Times
1 Our Christian meetings are a part of our way of life, are they not? They provide us with the opportunity to receive spiritual food, instruction for witnessing and the best of association. Each one fills a specific need so that all of them together provide us with a balanced spiritual diet. When Paul said “not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together,” he must have had all the above thoughts in mind. (Heb. 10:25) To slight our meetings in any way could result in a loosening of our “tight grip on the word of life.” (Phil. 2:16) That could be disastrous in these final days of the time of the end.​—Luke 21:34-36.
2 It is reasonable that we make the wisest use of our dedicated time. (Col. 4:5) Yet, reports have been received indicating that some desire to rearrange meeting times with a view to providing more “free” time for recreation on the weekends. What basic factors should motivate our thinking when selecting meeting times? Should it be a desire for pleasure? While we may have individual preferences, our prime concern should be selecting meeting times that will enable the majority of our brothers and interested persons to attend. Secondly, because we are interested in the spiritual welfare of the people in our territory, meetings should be arranged so that we share in field service when we can accomplish the most good.
3 Local circumstances must always be taken into consideration when selecting meeting times. In a few cases there is little choice as to meeting times because four or five congregations meet in the same Kingdom Hall. But, when this situation does not exist and it is felt that it is best to have the public meeting and the Watchtower study on a week-night, we want to be sure that the basis for our decision reflects our desire to give spiritual interests first place. What effect will this have on meeting attendance and field service? Is it a time when most of the interested persons could conveniently attend? (Phil. 2:4) When we plan our meetings, can we truly say that we are seeking first the Kingdom? (Matt. 6:33) As we continually “make sure of the more important things,” we are assured of Jehovah’s blessings.​—Phil. 1:10.
4 Therefore, when selecting meeting times, consider carefully what motivates your decision. Will they benefit those associated? Will they allow for good field service arrangements week after week for individuals and family groups? If so, this is a very good thing. If not, it would be good for the elders to consider the matter with the congregation so that spiritual rather than recreational interests will be given primary consideration. Then those in your congregation will rejoice in saying, “To the house of Jehovah let us go.”​—Ps. 122:1.

