Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 2
15 min: Song 16. Local announcements and Branch Letter. May be handled by several brothers appreciatively considering material together.
10 min: Demonstrate current offer using suggested presentation. Have someone demonstrate both regular and abbreviated presentation. Audience may comment on good points they observe in presentation as time permits.
“Good morning. I am calling to discuss the need we have in common for a workable solution to moral and governmental problems. Do you feel that man will be able to solve the growing difficulties in crime, economics and politics? [Mention something of local interest.] Whether one is optimistic about man’s ability or not, the problems we face make some wonder, ‘If there is a Creator, why has he allowed these conditions, and does he offer any solutions?’ I was pleasantly surprised when someone shared this text with me. [Read Proverbs 2:21, 22.] Isn’t it reassuring that the Creator purposes to fill the earth with upright individuals?” (Show how the Watchtower or Awake! subscription will enable a person to learn more about God’s purpose for the earth.)
Another introduction might be: “Good morning. In view of the changing moral standards, a person could at times question whether it is worth while anymore to try living an honest, morally upright life. Have you noticed that tendency among some?” (Then show Creator’s viewpoint.)
30 min: Stimulating review of “Victorious Faith” International Convention. This should be scheduled the week following the assembly that your congregation is scheduled to attend. Brothers should be assigned well in advance to present information on each of the following matters: (1) Things learned regarding field service, including experiences enjoyed on field service day. (2) Things learned relative to family life, including relationships with brothers and sisters basic to Christianity. (3) New things learned from God’s Word. (4) Experiences we enjoyed personally or heard that demonstrate faith. If your assembly has not been held as yet, you may take 10 minutes to discuss the May 15, 1978, Watchtower article entitled, “All Ready to ‘Go.’” Use the remainder of time for local needs.
 5 min: Song 64 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 9
10 min: Song 92. Announcements and local announcements.
15 min: “Reach Others by Evangelizing.” Discuss material with audience, inviting them to tell how they plan to implement suggestions.
25 min: Panel discusses June 15, 1978, Watchtower article entitled, “More ‘Workers’ Needed​—Can You Share?” Discussion followed by 10 minutes of experiences emphasizing not only joys and blessings of pioneer work, but how some have been able to arrange their affairs to become regular and auxiliary pioneers.
 5 min: Accounts report. As time permits, consider appropriate material from May 1, 1978, Watchtower article entitled “How Important Is Christian Giving?”
 5 min: Song 58 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 16
13 min: Song 45. Discuss Question Box. Local announcements.
10 min: Field overseer discusses following material. Arrangements made for evening witnessing during summer months. Emphasize advantages: More people at home, more relaxed and possibly more receptive. Encourage congregation to care for infrequently worked territory. Outline how much is available and definite arrangements for working before summer’s end.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—By Tactfully Developing Conversations.” Questions and answers.
17 min: Demonstration.
(3 min.) Chairman: A major objective in house-to-house work is to reach the hearts of sheeplike persons with the good news. If we can start friendly conversations, we are well on the way to reaching that goal. If you have difficulty starting conversations, you may find it helpful to ask questions. Viewpoint questions are best because they get the householder talking rather than merely answering Yes or No. You may find it helpful to ask someone who is good at starting conversations to work with you in field service so you can develop this ability.
(4 min.) Discussion with audience. Chairman asks: “What questions do you find helpful in starting conversations and keeping them going?” After audience has made suggestions, as time permits consider the following questions that can be used in an introduction: “What kind of future do you want for your children?” “What kind of future do you envision for yourself in the next 10 or 20 years?” “What do you feel is the number one problem in our neighborhood?” “If you had the power to change one thing to benefit mankind, what would it be?” “What do you think is required to have good government?” Scriptural answers to these questions can be found in Bible Topics for Discussion or in current offer itself.
(8 min.) Present brief, realistic demonstrations using the most appropriate questions. Show how additional questions can be asked to keep the conversation going so that a good witness can be given.
(2 min.) Chairman: We are looking for those of honest heart. After we have made an effort to reach people with the Kingdom message, if they are not interested, we can conclude the conversation in a pleasant way and continue our search, confident that Jehovah will direct our efforts.​—Rev. 14:6, 7.
 5 min: Song 10 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 23
10 min: Song 73. Local announcements and Theocratic News.
12 min: “Select the Best Meeting Times.” Questions and answers.
20 min: “‘Let All Things Take Place Decently.’” Talk and interview of parents whose children set good example. Parents may explain what they have done to train children properly. Demonstrate how to greet newcomers at Kingdom Hall. Encourage all to have part. Get comments from audience as to what they can do to assist in keeping hall clean and presentable.
13 min: Talk. “Christian ‘Works’​—What Do They Include?” from June 1, 1978, Watchtower.
 5 min: Song 24 and prayer.

