“Let All Things Take Place Decently”
1 The apostle Paul was an orderly person. He wanted to see “all things take place decently [“well behavedly,” Int.].” (1 Cor. 14:40) We today would do well to follow the principles embodied in Paul’s words in all our conduct.
2 For example, how do visitors feel when they enter the Kingdom Hall? Are they welcomed and made to feel comfortable? Are they introduced to others in the congregation by the first ones to meet them? Or, do they enter and find everyone busily engaging in conversation but not noticing them? Sometimes publishers become so involved in conversations with each other that they fail to notice new ones, or greet visiting brothers. Is this an area where we can better arrange our affairs?
3 Also, it has been noticed that in some Kingdom Halls children could conduct themselves in a more decent manner. Some are found running around in the Kingdom Hall. Others have been talking loudly outside the Kingdom Hall and disturbing neighbors. Of course, parents want to take the lead in correcting such conduct by supervising their children, beginning their training right in the home. But the elders also have a responsibility to help those needing assistance.
4 It has been found that many children are permitted to make frequent trips to the rest room or drinking fountain during the meetings. One congregation count revealed that 40 of the 120 persons in attendance left the meeting to go to the rest room or drinking fountain. Also, some elders are walking around during the meetings. Perhaps leaving our seats unnecessarily could be avoided even during the songs and prayers since such are part of our worship to Jehovah. It has been noted that some are able to engage in recreation for long periods of time, perhaps one hour or more, and not feel the need to discontinue such activity. Is it not more important to value spiritual matters and meetings and remain present while they are in session?
5 In some Kingdom Halls chairs have been damaged. Some have been marked up with writing instruments. Others have been torn or cut. Also, rest rooms have been left in disorder. Could it be that we should give these matters more attention than we are presently doing? Are we proud to show our Kingdom Hall to visitors and new ones since it is kept clean and in good repair, or do we shy away from this due to its poor condition?
6 Perhaps we could all give attention to these matters. It is our responsibility to see that Jehovah’s house of worship is kept clean. We want all to be attracted to the Kingdom Hall because of its cleanness and good condition, inside as well as outside, and also because of the decent conduct carried on within it. Jehovah’s Witnesses have been noted for good decorum wherever they go in the world. Surely we do not want to lose that fine reputation. Therefore, let all of us take an interest in our conduct that it may bring glory to our Heavenly Father, Jehovah.​—1 Pet. 2:12.

