
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Responding to Potential Conversation Stoppers




Why Important: Imagine that you know that a natural disaster is imminent. People will die unless they flee to safety. You go to a neighbor’s home to warn him, but he interrupts you, saying that he is busy. Surely, you would not quickly abandon your efforts to help him! Many in our territory turn us away, not realizing the life-saving value of our message. At the time of our visit, perhaps they are preoccupied. (Matt. 24:37-39) Or maybe they have been prejudiced by untrue rumors. (Matt. 11:18, 19) They might assume that we are no different from the religions that have produced bad fruitage. (2 Pet. 2:1, 2) If the householder initially is not interested, we should not be quick to give up.



How to Do It:
Before preaching from house to house, take a few moments to think about potential conversation stoppers that you may encounter and consider how to respond.

If the householder presents an objection, gently try to continue the conversation. Perhaps you can do that by commending him. For example, if he says that he has his own religion, you might reply, “I was hoping to find someone like you who has an interest in spiritual things.” Sometimes acknowledging the householder’s feelings or circumstances will enable you to continue giving a witness. For instance, if he says that he is busy, you might say: “I understand. But before I leave, I would like to give you this.” Another option is to ask a question if the householder says that he is not interested. You could say, “Do you mean that you are not interested in the Bible, or is it religion in general that does not interest you?”

Use good judgment. Remember that Jehovah does not force people to listen. (Deut. 30:19) Everyone must carry his own load of spiritual responsibility. (Gal. 6:5) If the householder is adamant, it is best to take our leave. By demonstrating respect for his feelings, we may open the door for another publisher to give a witness in the future.—1 Pet. 3:15.




Try This During the Month:
When you encounter a potential conversation stopper, after leaving the householder, discuss with your partner how you might have responded in a better way.



