
Will You Seize the Opportunity?
Upcoming Memorial Enables Us to Show Gratitude




 1. What special opportunity does the Memorial present?
1 The Memorial on April 14 presents a unique opportunity to cultivate and demonstrate gratitude for Jehovah’s goodness. The account at Luke 17:11-18 indicates how Jehovah and Jesus view gratitude. Sadly, only one of the ten cured lepers seized the opportunity to express thanks. In the future, the gift of the ransom will bring about a complete healing of all maladies, making everlasting life a reality! No doubt, we will then thank Jehovah daily for such blessings. But how can we show our gratitude during the coming weeks?
 2. How may we cultivate gratitude for the ransom?
2 Cultivate Gratitude: Feelings of gratitude are generated by thoughts. To help us build our appreciation for the ransom, a schedule for the special Memorial Bible reading can be found in a number of places, such as in appendix B12 of the revised New World Translation, the calendar, and Examining the Scriptures Daily. Why not consider this information as a family? Doing so will heighten our appreciation for the ransom. This, in turn, will have a positive effect on our conduct.—2 Cor. 5:14, 15; 1 John 4:11.
 3. In what ways can we demonstrate our gratitude during the Memorial season?
3 Demonstrate Gratitude: Gratitude is proved by action. (Col. 3:15) The grateful leper made the effort to find Jesus and thank him. Doubtless, he also spoke enthusiastically about his miraculous healing to others. (Luke 6:45) Will gratitude for the ransom move us to share zealously in the campaign to publicize the Memorial? Auxiliary pioneering or increasing our share in the ministry during the Memorial season is another fine way to demonstrate thankfulness. On the evening of the Memorial, an appreciative heart will motivate us to welcome visitors and to make ourselves available to answer their questions.
 4. How can we make this Memorial one without regrets?
4 Will this Memorial be our last? (1 Cor. 11:26) We do not know. But we do know that once it passes, gone will be a unique opportunity to show gratitude. Will you seize it? May the appreciative words of our mouth and the meditation of our heart bring pleasure to Jehovah, the generous Provider of the ransom.—Ps. 19:14.




