VOL. XXXIV AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6041 



CONTENTS 

The Peace of God 227 

God's Emotional Nature 227 

God's Peace Compatible With Sorrow 228 

Our Rich Legacy of Peace 229 

Cultivation of Unwavering Faith 230 

Why There Is Diversity Amongst God's 

People 231 

Doctrines More or Less Important 231 

God's Covenant at Mount Sinai 232 

The Royal Priesthood Proffered 232 

Typical of New Covenant 233 

Deliverance (Poem) 233 

God's Ten Commands 234 

God's Original Law to Man 234 

The Church and the Law 234 

Who Is My Neighbor? 235 

Trans-Continental Tour 236 

Four Great Conventions 237 

An Interesting Letter 239 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 239 

page 226 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



POEMS OF DAWN 

This book of 286 pages contains nearly three hundred 
beautiful poems of consecration and encouragement for 
Christians. It makes an excellent gift for any friend or 
relative not in the Truth, although most appreciated by 
the saintly. It is topically arranged, but you could not 
open at random and read without being refreshed, comforted, 
drawn nearer to God. The Karatol-bound edition 
is exhausted, but we still have a good supply on hand of 
the cloth-bound edition, 25c, and the India paper, leather 
bound, 50c. 



PRIZE PUZZLES 

We still have Prize Puzzles for judicious use. Order 
only so many as you can use, free. Lay a few each week 
on hotel writing tables and in other conspicuous places, 
where they will come under the eye of intelligent and 
good people. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. 
At the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns 
for September follow: (1) 235; (2) 333; (3) 128; (4) 40; (5) 
163; (6) 299; (7) 272; (8) 312; (9) 330; (10) 259; (11) 112; 
(12) 307; (13) 109; (14) 304; (15) 249; (16) 165; (17) 15; 
(18) Vow; (19) 313; (20) 209; (21) 42; (22) 155; (23) 4; (24) 
238; (25) 82; (26) 16; (27) 12; (28) 3; (29) 25; (30) 166. 



R5284 : page 227 

THE PEACE OF GOD 

"And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall 
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus."— Phil. 4:7. 

PEACE is defined to be a state of quiet, or 
tranquility, freedom from disturbance or 
agitation— calmness, repose. Such a state 
of mind our text affirms of God. His is a 
mind tranquil, calm, undisturbed, never agitated, 
nor even wearied nor perplexed by 



any of the cares of His vast dominion. Yet 

this perfect peace of God, the Scriptures 

show, is due neither to the fact that there 

are no disorders in His vast domain, nor 

yet to any stoical indifference to pain or pleasure, but 

rather to that perfect poise of His glorious attributes 

which makes Him Master of His situation as Sovereign 

of the whole universe. 

Have we admired the coolness and calm self-possession 
of a great general, such as Grant or Napoleon, in 
the midst of the confusion and smoke of battle? or of a 
great statesman, such as Gladstone or Bismarck, in the 
midst of national perplexities and perils? or of skilled 
physicians or others in critical times and places? These 
are only faint illustrations of the peace of self-possession 
and self-confidence which rules in the mind of God. He 
is never confused, bewildered, perplexed, anxious or 
care-worn, nor in the least fearful that His plans will 
miscarry or His purposes fail, because all power and wisdom 
inhere in Him. 

The scope of His mighty intellect reaches to the utmost 
bounds of possibility, comprehends all causes and 
discerns with precision all effects; consequently, He 
knows the end from the beginning, and that, not only 
from philosophical principles, but also by intuition. As 
the Creator of all things and the originator of all law, 
He is thoroughly acquainted with all the intricate subtleties 
of physical, moral and intellectual law, so that no 
problem could arise the results of which are not manifest 
to His mind. "God is light, and in Him is no darkness 
at all. "-I John 1:5. 

God, the Creator of all things, is also the competent 
Sustainer of all things. In silent grandeur, from Age to 
Age, the whole physical universe fulfils His will, without 
a suspicion of disorder or mishap; and the same 
Power is pledged for its sustenance throughout the eternal 
future. 

Thus from His own vast, inherent resources of Power 
and Wisdom, springs the peace of God. But not from 
this source alone is the Divine peace; for peace is the 
certain concomitant of inherent goodness. God is the 
impersonation of every virtue and every grace; and consequently 
He has the blessed satisfaction and peace of 
conscious moral perfection as well as inherent Wisdom 
and Power. 

GOD'S EMOTIONAL NATURE 

Yet we find this peace of God coexisting with much 
of disorder and trouble. As a Father He shows us that 
He bears a father's love to all His intelligent creatures 
—"the whole family [of God] in Heaven and in earth"— 
and that for His "pleasure they are and were created." 
(Eph. 3:15; Rev. 4:11.) He created them in His own 
likeness— with the same mental and moral attributes, so 
that He might have communion and fellowship with them 



as sons, and they with Him as a Father, that thus, in 
mutual fellowship and communion, the Creator and the 
creature might find pleasure, happiness and delight. 

This likeness of God includes in all not only the same 
mental faculties, but also the free exercise of the same 
in the formation of character. A creature incapable of 
thus forming character would not be in God's likeness. 
And for the purpose of developing character, the alternative 
of good and evil must be placed before him. The 
right and the wrong principles of action must be discerned 
and the individual left free to his own choice in 
the matter, that the pleasure of God may be realized in 
the virtuous character resultant from the free choice of 
righteousness. 

Since the love of God for His newly created and innocent 
creatures is akin to, but much stronger than, the 
love of an earthly parent for an innocent infant; and 
since that loving interest and solicitude does not grow 
cold as the creature advances in years, but earnestly 
watches for the development of the principles and fruits 
of righteousness, it is manifest that, like an earthly parent, 
God experiences the sense of either pleasure or pain, 
according as His free, intelligent creatures choose the 
right course or the wrong. Of this we are fully assured, 
not only by thus reasoning from the fact of His Fatherhood, 
but also by all of those Scriptures which speak of 
some things as abominable, displeasing, hateful and despicable 
to Him and as giving Him no pleasure; which 
say that His anger burns against them, and that His indignation 
and wrath wax hot, even to their destruction. 
Other Scriptures speak of His pleasure, love, joy and 
delight in pleasing things— in the principles of righteousness 
and those who obey them— the appreciation of 
pleasurable emotions of an opposite character, for pain 

R5284 : page 228 

and pleasure may properly be considered the ebb and flow 
of the same emotion. 

These exhibitions of the mind of God indicate clearly 
an emotional nature in the Divine Being, of which fact 
we might also judge from the realization of our own 
emotional nature, since man was created in God's image. 
No, dear friends, God is not a God of stoical indifference, 
insensible to the emotions of pleasure and of pain; but 
the perfect poise of His attributes preserves the equilibrium 
of peace under all circumstances, whether of 
pain or pleasure. 

GOD'S PEACE UNBROKEN BY EXTERNAL DISCORD 

With this thought, then, let us consider the circumstances 
under which the marvelous Peace of God has 
been perpetually maintained. The deep-laid Plan of God 
in all His creative works required long aions [ages] for 
its accomplishment. Across the vista of ages He saw in 



His purpose the glory of an intelligent creation in His 
own likeness, established in righteousness and worthy of 
His gift of eternal life. He therein saw the mutual 
pleasure of the Creator and the creature, and with a 
peaceful patience He resolved to wait for the glorious 
consummation. 

As the Plan developed and time rolled on, the free 
moral agency of His creatures, misused by some, was 
enabling them to develop evil characters. By this means 
discord was introduced into His family— "the family [of 
God] in Heaven and in earth"— all His creatures, angels 
and men; and the family was divided, some holding to 
righteousness and some choosing to do evil. But such 
a contingency was one of the foreseen necessities of the 
far reaching Plan, the glorious outcome of which, was, 
in the Divine judgment, worth the cost of all the trouble 
and loss which He foresaw. 

What a dreadful thing is family discord! How a 
prodigal son or a wayward daughter often brings the 
gray hairs of the human parent down with sorrow to the 
grave! Ah, the Heavenly Father knows something of 
such sorrow; for He saw Satan, one of His sons (Isa. 14:12), 
an angel of light, fall as lightning from Heaven. 
(Luke 10:18.) For six thousand years, at least, that son 
has been in open, defiant rebellion against God, and most 
actively and viciously engaged in inciting further rebellion 
and wickedness. He saw many of the angels leave 
their first estate (Jude 6) and become the allies of Satan, 
and then He saw also the whole human race fall into sin. 
Did ever any human parent find such a conspiracy— so 
virulent and hateful— spring up in his family? Surely 
not! 

Then God found it necessary to perform the unpleasant 
duties of discipline. In His Justice He must disown 
the disloyal sons and deal with them as enemies. Though 
all the while His Fatherly Love was preparing to bless 
the deceived and fallen ones when the purposes of redemption 
should restore the repentant to His favor, Love 
must be veiled, while only stern, relentless Justice could 
be manifested. This has been no happifying duty, nor 
has the attitude of the sinner been pleasing to Him. 

Consider the Love against which these recreants 
sinned. Though from God cometh every good and perfect 
gift, His favors have been despised, His love spurned, 
His righteous authority conspired against and defied, His 
character maligned, misrepresented, made to appear 
odious, hateful, unrighteous and even despicable. Yet, 
through it all the peace of God continues, and for six 
thousand years He has endured this contradiction of sinners 
against Himself. And still, O wondrous grace! His 
Love abounds; and it is written that He so loved the 
world, even while they were yet sinners, that He gave 
His Only-Begotten Son to die for them; and that through 
Him judgment (trial) is also to be extended to those 
angels that fell, with the exception of Satan, the leader 
and instigator of the whole conspiracy— the father of 



lies.-John 3:16; I Cor. 6:3; Jude 6; Heb. 2:14; 
Rev. 20:10,14. 

GOD'S PEACE COMPATIBLE WITH SORROW 

This gift of Divine Love was another indication of 
the cost to our Heavenly Father of His great and marvelous 
Plan. Not only did He behold the fall into sin of 
a large proportion of His family, but their recovery cost 
the sacrifice of the dearest treasure of His heart, and the 
subjection of this beloved One to the most abject humiliation, 
ignominy, suffering and death. Again the illustration 
of a parent's love assists us in comprehending the 
cost of this manifestation of Jehovah's Love. With what 
tender and yearning emotions of Love must He have made 
this sacrifice of His beloved Son, in whom He was well 
pleased! In addition to all the graces of character manifested 
since the very dawn of the being of the Logos, 
was now added the further grace of full submission to 
the Divine will, even when the pathway pointed out was 
one of humiliation and pain. 

Ah, did the Father let Him go on that errand of 
mercy without the slightest sensation of sorrowful emotion? 
Had He no appreciation of the pangs of a father's 
love when the arrows of death pierced the heart of His 
beloved Son? When our dear Lord said, "My soul is 
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death," and again, 
"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me: 
nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt," did it touch 
no sympathetic chord in the heart of the Eternal? Yea, 
verily; the unfeigned love of the Father sympathetically 
shared the Lord's sorrow.— Matt. 26:38,39. 

The principle taught in the Divine Word, that true 
love weeps with those that weep and rejoices with those 
who rejoice, is one which is also exemplified in the Divine 
character. The immortal Jehovah could not Himself die 
for us, His Divine nature being proof against death. 
And even if He could have died, there would have been 
no higher power to raise Him out of death. Thus all 
creation would have been left forever without a Governor, 
and only disaster and ruin could have ensued. But 
God could and did sacrifice at great cost to His loving, 
fatherly nature, the dearest treasure of His heart; and 
thus He manifested (I John 4:9) the great Love wherewith 
He loved His deceived and fallen creatures. If this 
sacrifice cost Him nothing, if it were impossible for His 
mind to realize any painful emotion even under such a 
circumstance, then the gift of His Son would be no manifestation 
of His Love; for that which costs nothing, 
manifests nothing. 

Our Lord Jesus also manifested His great sympathy 
for the Father in the misrepresentation of His character 
which He has so patiently endured for ages. It was the 
one effort of His life to glorify the Father and to rectify 
among men the false impressions of His glorious character 
—to show to men His goodness, benevolence, love 



and grace, and to lead them to love the merciful God who 
so loved them, even while they were yet sinners, as to 
seek them out and to plan for their eternal salvation. 

GOD'S PEACE SELF-CENTERED 

Yes, there has been great commotion in the disrupted 
family of God— commotion in which the Lord declares 
He has had no pleasure (Psa. 5:4); but, nevertheless, 
the Peace of God has never been disturbed. In the full 
consciousness of His own moral perfection, His unerring 

R5284 : page 229 

Wisdom, His mighty Power, and with the fullest appreciation 
of Justice and the keenest and most ardent love 
of the beauty of holiness, patiently and peacefully, and 
even joyfully in the midst of tribulation, He has endured 
the contradiction of sinners against Himself for six 
thousand years. 

But during the seventh millennium, according to the 
Divine purpose, it will be the joyful privilege of our Lord 
Jesus fully to manifest to all creatures in Heaven and in 
earth the Father's glorious character. Then will the Father 
rejoice in the grandeur of His finished work and in the 
everlasting peace and happiness of His family in Heaven 
and on earth, "reunited under one Head."— Eph. 1:10. 
-Diaglott. 

This blessed consummation will not be realized, however, 
until the incorrigible fallen sons of God, disowned 
and disinherited because they loved unrighteousness and 
would not be reclaimed, shall have been cut off. This 
will be the last unpleasant duty of the Creator and Father 
of all, who positively declares that it is a sad duty, yet 
nevertheless one which He will have the fortitude to 
perform in the interests of universal righteousness and 
peace. Hear Him: "As I live, saith the Lord God, I 
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the 
wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from 
your evil ways; for why will ye die?"— Ezek. 33:11. 

Thus we see that the Peace of God is compatible with 
great commotion and with sorrow and pain of any kind; 
for it is not dependent upon outward circumstances, but 
upon the proper balancing of the mind and the conditions 
of a perfect heart. Such peace— the Peace of God— was 
enjoyed also by our Lord Jesus in the midst of all the 
turmoil and confusion of His eventful earthly life. And 
this brings us to the consideration of our Lord's legacy 
to His disciples, when He was about to leave the world, 
as expressed in His own words: 

"Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giveth [in stinted measure or in perishable 
quality], give I unto you. Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid."— John 14:27. 

OUR LORD'S LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT 



Thus with abounding compassion and tenderness, did 
our Lord, on the last night of His earthly life, bestow 
upon His beloved disciples His parting blessing, His legacy 
of Peace. It was the richest legacy He had to bequeath, 
and was one of priceless value. It was the 
promise of that tranquility of soul, that rest and ease of 
mind, which He Himself possessed— the Peace of God. 
It was the same peace which the Father has Himself 
always enjoyed, even in the midst of all the commotion 
which the permission of evil has brought about; but it 
was not derived from the same source. In Jehovah this 
peace was self-centered; He realized in Himself the omnipotence 
of Power and Wisdom; while the peace of 
Christ was centered, not in Himself, but in God, by faith 
in His Wisdom, Power and Grace. So also if we would 
have the Peace of God, the peace of Christ— "My peace" 
—it must, like His, be centered in God by faith. 

Yes, the peace of Christ was a priceless legacy. Yet 
how quickly the stormcloud of trouble, which was even 
then growing very dark, burst in its fury upon the heads 
of those very disciples to whom the words were directly 
addressed. It followed almost immediately the gracious 
bequest, and struck consternation, bewilderment, confusion, 
to their hearts and shook their faith from center to 
circumference. Then, where was the peace? While the 
Lord was speaking the words, the foul betrayer, Judas, 
was out on his murderous errand. Then followed the 
agony in Gethsemane, and the terror and consternation 
among the disciples as they began to realize the fate of 
their beloved Lord. Soon their almost breathless suspense 
deepened into more fearful forebodings as He stood alone 
before His merciless accusers and persecutors in the Hall 
of Pilate and the Court of Herod, while they were powerless 
to shield Him. Then came the tragic end— the horrors 
of the crucifixion. 

WHAT HAD BECOME OF THE PEACE? 

Where was the promised peace under such circumstances 
—when, overcome with fear and dread, they all 
forsook Him and fled; and when St. Peter, although anxious 
to defend Him, was so filled with fear that three 
times he denied his Lord and with cursing declared that 
he never knew Him? The explanation is, that the peace 
had not yet come; for as the Apostle Paul tells us, "Where 
a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death 
of the testator. For a testament [a bequest] is of force 
after men are dead; otherwise it is of no strength at all 
while the testator liveth." (Heb. 9:16,17.) But as soon 
as the tragic scene was over and the cry, "It is finished," 
fell upon their eager ears, strange as it may seem, there 
is evidence that peace began to steal into their grieving 
hearts. The darkened heavens, the quaking earth, the 
rending rocks, the torn veil of the Temple— all spoke to 
them a message of comfort which the world could not 



receive. 

To the world (Jews and Gentiles, both participating 
in the crime) the language of these events was that of 
Divine wrath and indignation against them. And as fear 
fell upon the people, and the clamor and excitement of 
that awful day died away, they smote upon their breasts 
and returned to their homes. The Roman centurion and 
they that were with him, fearing greatly, said, "Truly this 
was the Son of God!" 

But to the disciples of the Lord these events spoke a 
very different language. The cause of their blessed Master 
was their cause and it was God's cause. To them 
these supernatural demonstrations were evidences that 
God was not regarding this matter with indifference; 
and though through the veil of darkness they could not 
read His bright designs, in these events there was to them 
a whisper of hope. 

Three days later hope was revived by the news of our 
Lord's resurrection, confirmed to them by His appearance 
in their midst. Again forty days later hope was strengthened 
by His ascension after His parting counsel and blessing 
and promised return, and the instructions to tarry in 
Jerusalem until they received the promise of the Father, 
the Comforter, the Holy Spirit of adoption, not many 
days thence— at Pentecost. Then the peace of Christ, 
the Lord's rich legacy, began to be realized, and the tarrying 
days of prayer and expectancy were days of abiding 
peace— peace which flowed as a river. But when on the 
day of Pentecost the promised Comforter came, the river 
of their peace found a deeper bed; and their joy knew 
no bounds! 

"Like a river glorious is God's perfect peace, 
Over all victorious in its glad increase. 
Perfect; yet it floweth fuller every day; 
Perfect; yet it groweth deeper all the way." 

OUR RICH LEGACY OF PEACE 

But not alone to the early Church was this legacy of 
peace bequeathed. It is the blessed inheritance of the 
entire Church, even to the end of the Age. The Lord 
showed His thought for us all on that very day, when 
in His prayer He said, "Neither pray I for these alone, 

R5284 : page 230 

but for all those who shall believe on Me through their 
word."— John 17:20. 

The peace promised, observe, is not the short-lived 
peace of the world, which is sometimes enjoyed for a 
little season— while fortune smiles and friends abound 
and health endures, but which quickly vanishes when 
poverty comes in and friends go out, when health fails 
and death steals away the treasures of the heart. "My 
peace," the peace of God which Christ Himself by faith 
enjoyed, who, though He was rich, for our sakes became 



poor, who lost friend after friend, and in His last hour 
was forsaken by all of the few that remained— His peace 
endured through loss, persecution, scorn and contempt, 
and even amidst the agonies of the cross. This peace is 
something which none of the vicissitudes of the present 
life can destroy, and which no enemy can wrest from us. 

What richer legacy could the Lord have left His beloved 
people? Suppose He had bent His energies during 
His earthly life to the accumulation of money; and that 
in so doing He had amassed an immense fortune to leave 
in the hands of His disciples wherewith to push forward 
the great work of the Age when He should be taken from 
them; money to pay the traveling expenses of the Apostles 
and to defray the numerous expenses incidental to the 
starting of the work in various places, such as the renting 
of lecture rooms, the payment of salaries to traveling 
brethren, etc., etc. How soon would it all have vanished, 
and how poor would be our inheritance today! "The 
Man of Sin" would surely have gotten hold of it in some 
way, and not a vestige of the legacy would have reached 
this end of the Age. But, blessed be God, His rich legacy 
of peace still abounds to His people! 

The peace promised is not such as the world can always 
recognize and appreciate; for the possessor of it, 
like the Lord Himself, and like the Heavenly Father as 
well, may have a stormy pathway. Indeed, that it must 
be so to all the faithful until the purposes of God in the 
permission of evil are accomplished, we are distinctly 
forewarned, but with the assurance that through all the 
storms this peace shall abide— "In the world ye shall have 
tribulation, but in Me ye shall have peace." 

FAITH THE BASIS OF PEACE 

If we would know the foundation and security of this 
abiding peace which is able to survive the heaviest storms 
of life, we have only to look to the teaching and example 
of the Lord and the Apostles. What was it that held 
them so firmly and gave them such rest of mind while 
they suffered? It was their faith— their faith in the 
Love, Power and Wisdom of God. They believed that 
what God had promised, He was able also to perform, 
and that His righteous and benevolent Plan could know 
no failure. By the mouth of His Prophets He had declared, 
"My counsel shall stand, and I will do all My 
pleasure.. ..Yea, I have spoken it and I will bring it 
to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it." "The Lord 
of Hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?" 
(Isa. 46:9-11; 14:27.) On the assurances of God they 
rested. In Him their faith was anchored; and it mattered 
not how fiercely the storms raged or how they were 
tossed by the tempests of life while their anchor still held 
fast to the Throne of God. 

The language of our Lord's faith was, "O righteous 
Father, the world hath not known Thee; but I have 
known Thee." He had been with the Father from the 



beginning, had realized His Love and His goodness, and 
had seen His Power, and had marked His righteousness 
and His loving kindness and Fatherly providence over all 
His works. And so it is written, "By His knowledge 
shall My righteous Servant justify many; for He shall 
bear their iniquities." (Isa. 53:11.) The knowledge 
which He had of the Father gave to Him a firm footing 
for faith in all God's purposes concerning the future. 
Hence He could and did walk by faith. And that faith 
enabled Him to overcome all obstacles and to secure the 
victory even over death. 

So also it is written for our instruction— "This is the 
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith"— that 
faith in God built, in our case, upon our Lord's testimony 
of the Father; and again it is written that, "Without faith 
it is impossible to please God." It is only through steady, 
unwavering faith that the peace of God— the peace of 
Christ— will abide with His people. While the Lord was 
with His disciples, and they saw in Him the manifestation 
of the Father, their faith was strong and they had 
peace in Him, as He said, "While I was in the world I 
kept them." But not until after He had left them was 
their faith anchored in God. After Pentecost they experienced 
the same peace that Christ had enjoyed— the 
blessed peace that came from a knowledge of the fact 
that God acknowledged them as sons and heirs, and joint-heirs 
with Christ, if they would continue faithfully to 
follow in the steps of the Redeemer. 

CULTIVATION OF UNWAVERING FAITH 

Herein is also the basis of our peace. No matter how 
fiercely the storms of life may assail us, we must never 
let go our anchor and allow ourselves to drift, but always 
remember that "the foundation of God standeth sure"; 
that "His Truth is our shield and buckler"; that "what 
He has promised He is able also to perform," notwithstanding 
our human imperfections and frailties; that covering 
these we have the imputed righteousness of Christ, 
our Surety and Advocate; and that "the Father Himself 
loveth" us, "He considereth our frame and remembereth 
that we are dust," and so has compassion for the sons of 
His Love and is very pitiful and of tender mercy. Indeed, 
"What more can He say than to us He hath said," 
to assure our faith and to steady and strengthen our 
hearts to patient endurance in the midst of the trials and 
conflicts of the narrow way of sacrifice. 

There is nothing which puts the Christian at greater 
disadvantage in the presence of his foes than for him to 
let go, even temporarily, his grip upon the anchor of faith. 
Let him do so for a moment, and of necessity darkness 
begins to gather round him. He cannot see the brightness 
of his Father's face; for "without faith it is impossible 
to please God"; and while he grapples again for 
the anchor, the powers of darkness fiercely assail him 
with doubts and fears. These attacks are generally based 



upon his human imperfections, which he should ever bear 
in mind are covered by the Robe of Christ's righteousness. 

If we would have the peace of God reign in our hearts, 
we must never let go our anchor, "nor suffer Satan's 
deadliest strife to beat our courage down." The language 
of our hearts should always be, "Though He slay me, 
yet will I trust Him." With this faith the peace of God, 
the peace which the Master bequeathed to us, ever abides. 
Thus "the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
will keep our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus"; 
for it is written again, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect 
peace whose mind is stayed on Thee." 

In the midst of the Christian warfare let our hearts 
be cheered and our minds be stayed, not only with such 
assurances that all the Divine purposes shall be accomplished, 
but also with such promises of personal favor as 
these: 

"Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 

R5284: page 231 

pitieth them that fear Him; for He knoweth our frame; 
He remembereth that we are dust." "Can a woman forget 
her sucking child?... Yea, they may forget; yet 
will I not forget thee. Behold I have engraven thee upon 
the palms of My hands." "The Father Himself loveth 
you," and "It is the Father's good pleasure to give you 
the Kingdom." "Such as are upright in their way are 
His delight." "Delight thyself also in the Lord, and He 
shall give thee the desires of thine heart"— the peace of 
God, even in the midst of storm and tempest. 



R5284: page 231 

WHY THERE IS DIVERSITY AMONGST GOD'S PEOPLE 

"Who maketh thee to differ from another? And what 
hast thou that thou didst not receive?"— 1 Cor. 4:7. 

WHILE it is true that all men are born with 

inalienable rights and privileges, yet no man 

is born without sin. The Scriptures very 

properly declare that the race in Adam was 

sold under Sin six thousand years ago. In 

this sense, therefore, we were not born free, 

but slaves of Sin. Neither are we born 

equal. No two persons are exactly alike in 

opportunity, talent and ability. We differ 

from one another. God did not create some 

better and some worse— some more richly endowed and 

some less richly endowed. We are to take the Bible 

statement of the origin of humanity, and understand that 

God made Adam perfect. All the imperfections which 

encumber the human race are the results of the dying 



process. Sin has made us all to differ, then, from the 
original image and likeness of God. Satan brought about 
this difference through Mother Eve. 

In our text, however, the Apostle Paul has in mind 
a New Creation in Jesus Christ— a new order— amongst 
whose members there is a difference. Some in the Church 
have many talents, others, few talents; some have special 
talents, others have ordinary talents. But Satan is not 
charged with having given the greater or lesser talents 
to these. The Apostle says that it is God who has set 
the various members in the Body as it has pleased Him; 
and that both this setting, or apportioning, of the different 
members of the Body and the bringing forth of the 
different degrees of fruitage are manifestations of God's 
grace in our hearts. Thus we are made to differ from 
each other. 

CAUSE OF DIVERSITY OF ATTAINMENTS 

The matter of growth in the Holy Spirit is one that 
is dependent in large measure upon each one's zeal to 
know, to do, the will of God. We are put into the 
School of Christ to learn of Him. Some learn more 
rapidly, others less rapidly. In proportion as they learn, 
they have greater opportunities and blessings. All are 
granted a measure of the Holy Spirit— all granted some 
blessing. Those who are anxious to know the will of 
the Lord and to study it grow the more rapidly, and 
thus have more of the Holy Spirit. These are zealous 
to do the Lord's will. Their progress is not attributable 
wholly to themselves, but especially to the favor of God. 

The Apostle goes on to say, Ye are God's workmanship; 
"it is God which worketh in you both to will and 
to do of His good pleasure." We could not do this 
work ourselves. The power that is working in us is of 
God. He is preparing a glorious Temple. He has provided 
who shall be the chief corner-stone of this Temple, 
and who shall be the members of the Temple class. We 
could not choose the place for ourselves. But in God's 
providence we each responded to the call to be a living 
stone. The stones were first cut out of the dark quarry, 
and now they are being shaped and prepared for places 
in the glorious building. 

DIVERSITY OF ANOTHER KIND 

The great Master-Workman is doing a work upon us. 
He is chiseling and fashioning us. He is making us what 
we are. Consequently there is to be no boasting. There 
is a certain amount of personality connected with each 
one, however, and if there is too much cross-grain in 
the stone it will be abandoned. As the Apostle Peter 
exhorts, we are to humble ourselves under the mighty 
hand of God, that He may exalt us in due time. The 
same Apostle also reminds us that we should look up to 
God and give Him praise for all that we have and 



are.-IPet. 5:6; 4:11. 

We are colaborers with God. We give God the praise 
that He has made us to differ from our former selves, 
that He is making us thus to differ more every day, and 
that He will continue the good work as the days go by 
and as we seek to do His will. What have we of ourselves? 
Nothing ! We were wholly dead through Father 
Adam's disobedience; we were born in this condition, 
having no right to everlasting life. But God has a Plan 
which is world-wide in its scheme of blessing. He has 
proffered the blessings of the highest feature of this 
Plan to us, and invited us to come to Him in advance 
of the world. And this we receive through His grace. 



R5284: page 231 

DOCTRINES MORE OR LESS IMPORTANT 

THERE are certain features of the doctrine of 

Christ which are fundamental and indispensable, 

and without which none would 

be recognized of the Lord as one of His followers. 

There are other features which 

would seem to be useful, helpful, blessed, but 

not fundamental— not essential to membership 

in the Body of Christ. The fundamentals 

have been enjoyed by good, saintly 

ones from the Day of Pentecost until now. 

We, the same class now, have the same fundamentals, 
and are permitted to have other privileges, truths, "meat 
in due season," for our strengthening. These latter are 
not necessarily essential to our membership in the Body of 
Christ; otherwise our forefathers who did not have them 
would not have been members of Christ, and there would 
have been no Christ Body for centuries. 

The fundamental theory of the Atonement is as 
follows: 

(1) All men— all of Adam's children— are sinners. 

(2) None can be reconciled to God without a Redeemer's 
sacrifice. 

(3) Jesus came into the world to be that Sacrifice— 
and later to apply that Ransom-price for the sins of the 
world. 

(4) On the basis of faith in the Redeemer's work, the 
believer may consecrate himself to the Divine service, in 
acceptance of the Divine invitation, "Present your bodies 
a living sacrifice." 

(5) So doing, the believer may— up to the time of the 

R5284 : page 232 

completion of the Elect number— exercise full assurance 
of faith that his sacrifice will be accepted of the Father; 
and that he will receive a share of the anointing of the 



Holy Spirit— the begetting. 

(6) Such as meet these conditions are to be accepted 
as brethren in the highest sense of the term. This much 
would seem to have been always necessary, and more than 
this we believe is not necessary today. But if by reason 
of our favorable day we have more knowledge, we may 
also have corresponding trials, which our greater knowledge 
will offset. 

Our advice to the Lord's dear people everywhere is that 
they put no yoke upon each other, beyond the fundamentals 
specified above— that otherwise they stand free, and leave 
each other free, and fellowship and agree as much as they 
can with each other. 

If there be a disposition to crowd each other on more 
than this basic faith, and if it be considered necessary to 
separate in order to the progress of either of the parties, 
then doubtless rather than a continual contention a 
separation would be the wise course. 

We are not criticising the views of any one. Each 
has a perfect right to hold whatever he believes the Bible 
to teach, and our views are doubtless well known to all of 
our readers. Briefly stated, they are as follows: 

(1) That the one that sinned was Adam, and that he 
and all his posterity were involved. 

(2) That a Redeemer was necessary, that Jesus became 
that Redeemer, and "gave Himself a Ransom for all." 

(3) That God has invited some of the redeemed sinners 
—not to be the Ransom-price, nor to redeem anybody else, 
but— to be associates of the Redeemer, members of His 
Body, His Bride. 

(4) The terms and conditions upon which these may 
have fellowship are that Jesus as the great Advocate shall 
accept them as His members— their flesh as His flesh— 
and that He shall impute to them the share of His merit 
which would be coming to them as members of the Adamic 
race. Then they are legally justified from all the shortcomings, 
weaknesses and imperfections inherited by them; 

and their own wills and all their remaining powers and 
talents being consecrated, their sacrifice may be acceptable 
to God— as part of the Sin-Offering by the great High 
Priest. 

(5) Sharing thus in the Redeemer's death, these are 
privileged to share in His life, by the First Resurrection. 
The Redeemer does not now make application of His merit 
to the world, aside from the newly-accepted and added 
members. He will carry out the Divine Program, and 
sacrifice all His members before presenting, at the end of 

R5285 : page 232 

the Age, the merit of His sacrifice on behalf of the sins 

of the whole world, and will thereby seal the New Covenant 

for them. 

In our judgment many err in attaching too much value 
to the Church's sacrifice; whereas other dear brethren err, 
we think, in that they do not see any value in the Church's 



sacrifice, nor that she is permitted a share in the Master's 
sacrificings at all. To us it seems like the swing of the 
pendulum from one extreme to the other; whereas our 
view lies in the center, as we have stated the matter. 

If after fully considering these matters, a class finds 
that it cannot agree, and would make better progress as 
two classes, we would concur in that conclusion as a wise 
one, as much as we would deplore the necessity of a division. 
Such a separation would not necessarily alienate 
either class from the Lord's people, nor from the Society, 
because both acknowledge Jesus as their Redeemer, and 
both acknowledge that His blood is primarily efficacious. 



R5285 : page 232 

GOD'S COVENANT AT MOUNT SINAI 

--AUGUST 31. --EXODUS 19:1-6.- 

"Let us have grace, whereby we may offer service well-pleasing 
to God, with reverence and awe."— Hebrews 12:28. R.V. 

TWO months after the Passover deliverance, 
the Israelites arrived at Mt. Sinai, but on 
their way they had two valuable lessons 
respecting God's Grace and Power. When 
they reached the Valley Rephidim, they 
were thirsty and found no water. Here 
Moses, in the name of the Lord, smote the 
rock with his rod, and from it gushed water, 
abundantly refreshing Israel at this time, 
and as a rivulet following them through 
much of their subsequent journey. 

St. Paul, by inspiration, points out to us that that rock 
represented Christ, that the smiting of the rock represented 
the putting of Christ to a shameful death, but that 
only by this means is the Water of Life provided for those 
who desire to be the people of God. As the waters of 
that rock followed the Israelites, so the stream of God's 
favor, through the sacrifice of Christ, refreshes Christ's 
disciples throughout their wilderness journey. 

Refreshed in body and in faith, Israel journeyed onward, 
but encountered new obstacles. The Amalekites, a 
warlike people, considered the coming of Israel as an 
invasion of their country, and attacked them in battle. 
A people used to peaceful pursuits, as the Israelites had 
for centuries been, would naturally be at a disadvantage 
in a conflict with such opponents. Yet God gave them 
the victory. He indicated, however, that it was not by 
their prowess or skill, but of His grace that they 
conquered. 

Moses, stationed upon a high hill, lifted up his hands 
in prayer to God for the people. While he did so, success 
was theirs; but when he ceased thus to pray, the Amalekites 



were the victors. Perceiving this, Aaron and Hur 
assisted in holding up the hands of Moses until the battle 
terminated with success for Israel. God thus indicated 
that Moses was the advocate or representative of Israel, 
and that without him they could do nothing. 

In the antitype, we realize that Spiritual Israelites 
have conflicts with enemies too mighty for them without 
the Lord's assistance. The world, the flesh and the Devil 
make common cause against all who are seeking the 
Heavenly Canaan. We who are followers of Jesus have 
success in our warfare only as we have Him as our Advocate 
—"We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the Righteous." Through Him we may come off 
conquerors, yea, more than merely conquerors, victors 
in the highest sense— "through Him who loved us and 
bought us with His precious blood." 

THE ROYAL PRIESTHOOD PROFFERED 

All of God's dealings with the Israelites were in accord 
with His great Covenant made with Abraham, and 
certified with the Divine Oath— "In thee and in thy Seed 
shall all the families of the earth be blessed." Neither 
Moses nor any of those who followed him could possibly 
have understood the full import of this great oath-bound 
Promise; for it is a double Promise, the spiritual portion 
of which was hidden until God's due time— at the First 
Advent. Even since then, St. Paul assures us, it is a 

R5285 : page 233 

hidden mystery, appreciated only by the very few. "The 
secret of the Lord is with them that reverence Him, and 
He will show them His Covenant." 

The Promise is divided into three parts: (1) Abraham 
himself (and all the Ancient Worthies, whom he represented) 
was to have a share; (2) Abraham's Seed was 
to be the chief agent, or channel, of blessing; and (3) all 
the families of the earth were to be blessed as recipients 
of God's favor through these channels. But only by the 
light of the Holy Spirit during this Gospel Age are these 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the Abrahamic 
Covenant made manifest. 

When inviting the Israelites to come out of Egypt, 
God did not explain the Covenant to them nor tell them 
which portion they might have a share in. But when 
they had come to Mt. Sinai, God made inquiry as to 
whether or not they could keep the Divine Law, and thus 
prove themselves eligible to the highest favor included in 
that Covenant. 

In other words, the Lord said to them at Mt. Sinai, 
Are you ready now to enter into a Covenant of full consecration 
to do My will? You have seen how I dealt 
with the Egyptians in delivering you. You have seen 
how, ever since then, I have borne you on eagles' wings 
over all the trials and difficulties of your journey to this 



place. Have you faith? Have you loyalty? Do you 
wish to enter into a Covenant? "If ye will obey My 
voice indeed, and keep My commandments, then ye shall 
be a peculiar treasure unto Me above all people... 
and ye shall be unto Me a Kingdom of priests and an 
holy nation." 

While the Israelites knew that they were the favored 
seed of Abraham, the natural heirs of the promises, it 
was proper that they should know also that they would 
be unsuitable for the Lord's use in blessing the other nations 
with His Law unless they themselves were able to 
keep that Law and to instruct others how to keep it. With 
this understanding, that they were ready to do the Lord's 
will and thus to be separated by Him to be the kings and 
priests of the whole world, a Law Covenant was made 
with them, and Moses was appointed its mediator. Whoever 
would keep those commandments might live forever; 
and in proportion as he kept them he would be entitled to 
earthly favors. 

TYPICAL OF NEW COVENANT 

St. Paul, in Hebrews 12:18-24, points us to the antitype 
of today's Study. As Israel was delivered from Pharaoh 
and his hosts, so ultimately all mankind is to be delivered 
from Satan and his hosts, the fallen angels, and 
from all evil influences. As the journey to the Promised 
Land brought the Israelites to Mt. Sinai and the Law 
Covenant, so the journey of God's people will ultimately 
bring all the willing, obedient and faithful to the antitype 
of Mt. Sinai; namely, Mt. Zion, God's Kingdom, for 
which Jesus taught us to pray, "Thy Kingdom Come; Thy 
will be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

Meantime, Jesus has become the antitypical Moses and 
Leader of the people, and in harmony with Jehovah's 
program, He has been selecting the members, or associates 
and joint-heirs. St. Paul explains this to us, saying, 
"God gave Jesus to be the Head over the Church, 
which is His Body." St. Peter explains that this great 
antitypical Moses must be raised up from amongst the 
brethren first, before the blessing of Restitution can come 
to mankind in general.— Acts 3:22,23,19-21. 

This entire Gospel Age has been devoted to the gathering 
of the members of the Christ Body. And when the 
last member shall have made his calling and election sure, 
this Age will end, and the more glorious work of the 
Messianic Age will begin. 

SHAKE HEAVENS AND EARTH 

The antitype of our lesson will be the inauguration of 
the New Covenant, at the Second Advent of Jesus. The 
basis of this new and better Covenant was completed at 
Calvary by our Lord's sacrifice of Himself. He has since 
been completing His "better sacrifices" by presenting the 
bodies of His saints, holy and acceptable, to God (Rom. 12:1). 



Soon the "better sacrifices" will be completed, and 
the greater Mediator will have been fully raised up from 
amongst the brethren. Then everything will be ready for 
the inauguration of the New Covenant, to bless the world 
of mankind with knowledge, and with opportunity for 
Restitution to earthly blessings and perfection. 

St. Paul points out that this is what we are coming to 
—approaching— "the General Assembly and Church of 
the First-born," whose names are written in Heaven. He 
declares that we may expect an antitype of the stirring 
scenes mentioned in our lesson. As at Mt. Sinai the literal 
mountain shook, lightnings flashed, and the voice of 
God was heard as the sound of a great trumpet, so here 
the antitype will come. The great trumpet here will be 

R5286 : page 233 

the seventh trumpet, the trump of God. The storm and 
tempest and shaking here in the antitype will mean the 
shaking of the ecclesiastical heavens and the social, political 
and financial earth. 

The Apostle prophetically assures us that everything 
shakeable will be shaken to its destruction, that only the 
unshakeable things will remain. That is to say, the Messianic 
Kingdom then to be established will completely 
overturn everything not in harmony with righteousness, 
justice and truth. This is merely a prelude to the great 
blessing of the Abrahamic Covenant then to be fully ushered 
in, for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

THE HEIRS OF THE KINGDOM 

The Body of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, of which 
Christ Jesus is the Head— His faithful, saintly followers- 
are now being tested as respects their worthiness for so 
high a station. St. Paul's words in our Golden Text are 
very forcefully applied to these: "Let us have grace, 
whereby we may offer service well-pleasing to God, with 
reverence and awe." 



DELIVERANCE 

"Still o'er Earth's sky the clouds of anger roll, 
And God's revenge hangs heavy on her soul; 
Yet shall she rise— though first by God chastised— 
In glory and in beauty then baptized. 

"Yes, Earth, thou shalt arise; thy Father's aid 
Shall heal the wound His chastening hand hath made; 
Shall judge the proud oppressor's ruthless sway, 
And burst his bonds, and cast his cords away. 

"Then on your soil shall deathless verdure spring. 
Break forth, ye mountains, and ye valleys, sing! 



No more your thirsty rocks shall frown forlorn, 
The unbeliever's jest, the heathen's scorn. 

"The sultry sands shall tenfold harvests yield, 
And a new Eden deck the thorny field. 
E'en now we see, wide-waving o'er the land, 
The mighty angel lifts his golden wand, 

"Courts the bright vision of descending power, 
Tells every gate and measures every tower; 
And chides the tardy seals that yet detain 
Thy Lion, Judah, from His destined reign."— Heber. 



R5286 : page 234 

GOD'S TEN COMMANDS 

-SEPTEMBER 7. -EXODUS 20:1-11.- 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind." 
-Luke 10:27. 

GOD'S COVENANT with Israel at Mt. Sinai 
was that if they should keep perfectly the 
Decalogue— the Ten Commandments— they 
would thereby demonstrate that they were 
perfect men, worthy of everlasting life. 
Then it would be possible for them to attain 
the chief blessing under the Abrahamic Covenant 
—to become the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, 
through whom God had promised that 
He would bless the world. 

St. Paul represents to us the spirit of the worthiest of 
the Jews, who were anxious to do God's will and to obtain 
the blessing, as crying out in anguish of soul, "O wretched 
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this dead body!" 
Their minds were certainly alive to the promises and 
prospects, but their flesh was imperfect, depraved through 
the fall— like that of all other people. "Ye cannot do the 
things that ye would."— Gal. 5:17. 

Bible students look in amazement at the simplicity of 
the Decalogue, and at first wonder which of its features 
the Jews and others were unable to perform fully, satisfactorily. 
The whole matter seems very simple indeed, 
just as it did to the Jews, until we perceive that the wonderful 
Law of God, represented by the Ten Commandments, 
has a depth of meaning not seen on the surface. 

The lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the meaning of this Law were apparently seen by none 
until Jesus "magnified the Law and made it honorable." 
He says that hatred toward a brother is incipient murder, 
and that adulterous desire in the heart is a violation of 
the seventh commandment. This throws a new light on 



the whole matter, and explains to us why none of the 
Jews or Gentiles have ever been able to keep this Law, 
except Jesus, since the fall of Adam. 

The Great Teacher also explains that the first table of 
the Law, appertaining to man's duties toward his Creator, 
means more than merely avoiding image worship and profane 
swearing. It means that the True God shall be recognized 
and have first place in the human heart. It means 
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with 
all thy mind." Any division of the heart or strength or 
mind or soul violates this commandment. 

GOD'S ORIGINAL LAW TO MAN 

God's Law to man was not originally given at Mt. 
Sinai. Indeed, the Mt. Sinai statement of the Law was 
given not to mankind in general, but merely to the Jewish 
nation— as a statement of the terms upon which they 
might become God's Royal Priesthood for the blessing of 
all nations. 

God's original Law to man was given in Eden, when 
man was created. God's Law was written in Adam's 
heart, in the sense that he was created in the Divine image 
—with attributes of mind and heart fully in accord with 
his Creator. He loved righteousness, and would have had 
a hatred for iniquity, had there been any to hate. But 
up to that time there was none. 

We marvel at the change that has come, under which 
the children of Adam are not in God's image and do 
not love righteousness, but on the contrary, love sin. As 
the Prophet declares, "They go astray from the womb." 
He tells us where the change came in, saying, "Behold, I 
was shapen in iniquity; in sin did my mother conceive 
me."— Psalm 51:5. 

After the fall of man, the work of degeneracy progressed 
so rapidly that Adam's first-born son, Cain, became 
a murderer. Doubtless the chagrin of Mother Eve in the 
loss of Eden, and in the battling with the thorns and 
thistles of the earth under the curse, embittered her mind, 
arousing anger and resentment, which marked her child. 
From then till now the course has been downward in 
general, with occasionally a well-born child less seriously 
marked by sin— less depraved. Still the Scriptures inform 
us that "there is none righteous, no, not one." 

THE HOPE OF THE FUTURE 

The experiences of the whole race for six thousand 
years forbid that we should expect that any could commend 
himself to God upon the terms of human perfection 
and of ability and willingness to keep the Divine Law. 
Jesus alone has kept that Law, and He, because His life 
was not derived from Adam— because His life was from 
the Father directly. He became a man by a change of 
nature. Because thus begotten miraculously He was 



"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 

God refuses to grant everlasting life to any except the 
perfect, who will keep His law perfectly and gladly. 
What hope then is there for our race? There is one 
hope for the world in general, and another different hope 
for the Church of Christ, instituted at Pentecost. The 
hope for the world is that God in His own due time will 
establish the Messianic Kingdom. It will be a righteous 
Kingdom, its rulers and judges being the Royal Priesthood. 

This Messianic Kingdom will begin by deposing the 
Prince of this world, and binding him for a thousand 
years. Speedily the iniquities of earth will be set aside, 
and the rule of the "rod of iron" will begin. Everything 
opposed to righteousness will be dashed to pieces. Instead 
of darkness, ignorance, superstition, doubt and fear, will 
come in the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. 
Soon it will fill the entire earth. Under its influence 
everything sinful will be discouraged by chastenings, and 
everything righteous will be encouraged by rewards of 
blessing. The judgments of the Lord will be abroad in 
the earth, and the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness.— Isa. 26:9. 

As a result, soon every knee will be bowing to God 
and every tongue confessing His praise. But all of the 
wilfully rebellious, lovers of sin, will be destroyed in the 
Second Death— "everlasting destruction." Under that administration, 
the world will reach again the condition of 
human perfection from which Adam fell. The privilege 
to thus return to the image of God with His Law rewritten 
in their hearts, was secured for all by the sacrifice 
at Calvary. "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted 
death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

These all, being perfect again as Adam was at first, 
plus the experiences of good and evil gained during the 
seven thousand years, when finally approved of God will 
have everlasting life, nor be in the slightest danger of 
ever again mistakenly choosing sin as the road to 
happiness. 

THE CHURCH AND THE LAW 

The Church of Christ is selected from mankind, who 
were born in sin. The members are not put under the Law 
of Sinai in the sense of being required to keep it perfectly 
in order to get everlasting life. "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace." (Romans 6:14.) Nevertheless, 
the Law is very precious to the Church; for, looking at 
the spirit of it, she sees what she ought to be if perfect, 
sees what she ought to strive for to the best of her ability, 

page 235 

sees how far short of perfection she is in the flesh, and 
sees, additionally, how the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ 
covers her fleshly imperfections. So fully is all this true, 
that the Apostle declares that the righteousness (true 



import, or spirit) of the Law is fulfilled in us, who are 
walking not after the flesh, but after the spirit— 
Romans 8:4. 

In other words, those who consecrate their lives to 
follow Jesus, sacrificing all of their earthly rights in order 
to do the will of God, are doing more than the Law could 
require. The Law required no man to lay down his life 
for another, but merely to love his neighbor as himself. 
Hence Christ and the Church, walking in the narrow way 
of sacrifice, are fulfilling the requirements of the spirit 
of the Law, and more, even though in the flesh of the 
Church, because of inherited weaknesses, there is no perfection. 
These having sacrificed the earthly nature are 
dealt with by the Father as New Creatures, and judged, 
not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit- 
according to their heart intentions. 



R5287 : page 235 

WHO IS MY NEIGHBOR? 

-SEPTEMBER 14.-EXODUS 20:12-21.- 

"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

THE Ten Commandments delivered to Moses 

were written upon two stone tablets. One 

bore the first four commandments, which 

appertain to God; the other bore the remaining 

six, which appertain to humanity. 

The essence of these last six, constituting 

the Study of today, was expressed in Jesus' 

words, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." 

The "thou shalt nots" might be multiplied 

indefinitely to fit the thousands of 

occurrences in daily life, but the one "thou shalt" covers 

the entire situation. Whoever loves his neighbor will not 

intentionally injure him, in act, in word or in thought. 

Hence love expresses the full measure of the Law's requirements. 

(Rom. 13:10.) Love is at liberty to do more 

than the Law requires, but it cannot do less. 

While only Christians are credited by the Lord with 
fulfilling the requirements of the Law— and they only because 
of the allowance made for their weaknesses on 
account of their relationship with Christ— nevertheless, 
the Jews and many others have obtained partial blessings 
in proportion as they have endeavored to fulfil the Divine 
Law. The natural man, not spirit-begotten, and therefore 
not a son of God, but still in alienation, receives a blessing 
of character-development in proportion as he recognizes 
the principles of righteousness and seeks to conform to 
them. Hence it is wise and proper at all times and before 
all people to lift high the Divine standards. 



HONOR FATHER AND MOTHER 

No matter how old, or ignorant, or stupid, or vicious, 
parents may be, they are deserving of consideration from 
their children. Yet, of course, the kind or degree of respect 
must depend upon the character of the parent to 
some extent. With disobedience to parents rank and 
rampant everywhere, it may seem a hard saying, but we 
believe it a true one, that the disobedience is due to the 
parent, or the guardian, of the child. 

The child may have been ill-born. Discontent and 
rebellion in the mind of the mother during the period of 
gestation may have marked the child before its birth, so 
that no amount of training may ever fully recover it. 
In such a case, the parents may well be patient and long-suffering 
with such unhappy, disobedient dispositions in 
their children. 

And perhaps the parents were only partially to blame; 
perhaps their minister preached not the laws of God, their 
human operation and the penalties of their violation, but 
instead, gave flowery essays and anecdotes containing 
neither food for the spiritual nature nor assistance in 
understanding and combating the weaknesses of the human 
nature. Perhaps the fault was not wholly the mother's. 
The father may have forgotten that he, too, had a duty 
toward his offspring, chiefly served by assisting his wife 
at the critical period to thoughts of kindness, gentleness, 
nobility, etc. 

At any rate, the conscientious parent has a wonderful 
task to train the perverted child in the nurture and admonition 
of the Lord. Those who strive faithfully in 
this direction cannot be too much appreciated and encouraged; 
and more and more we should think of esteeming 
the parents of every noble man and woman of our 
acquaintance. And if strangers should appreciate the 
parents, much more should the child. 

THE EFFECT OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS 

A modern writer of considerable force and influence 
holds that Sunday Schools, while accomplishing good in 
one direction, may have done considerable harm in another 
—by weakening the respect of the children for their 
parents, and by releasing the parents from an appreciation 
of their responsibilities toward their children. The 
parents are, in the Divine arrangement, the priests of 
God, particularly in respect to their children. To whatever 
extent they shirk this responsibility, or to whatever 
extent the honor of this station is ignored, their 
influence over the child is lost; and one hour's time per 
week in a Sunday School class can never take the place 
of a continual parental supervision. 

Statistics show that boys of from sixteen to twenty 
years of age constitute about one-third of all the dangerous 
criminals, and that their proportionate number is increasing. 
Hence all benevolent people should be on the alert 



for the right training of the rising generation. All should 
especially co-operate with the Divine commandment by 
urging and encouraging parental authority and obedience 
thereto. Long life and prosperity were the rewards 
promised to the Jews under this commandment. 

"THOU SHALT DO NO MURDER" 

Nothing in this commandment forbids the killing of 
animals when necessary to the interests of the human 
family, either to abate pests or to sustain life. Neither 
does it forbid the execution of criminals; for thus it 
would be in conflict with the Divine Law elsewhere expressed, 
and practised under the guidance of Moses and by 
Divine direction. 

This commandment, however, does teach that life is to 
be prized, not jeopardized. The spirit of this commandment, 
Jesus declared, includes the thought that we are 
not to have an angry spirit of murder, restrained merely 
by fear of consequences. We may thus see that the spirit 
of this commandment would make it incumbent upon those 
who employ labor or who have any supervision of their 
fellowmen to take all reasonable precaution for safeguarding 
against accidents of any kind. To allow self-interest 
or a love of money to perpetuate dangerous conditions 

R5288 : page 236 

would be to lack the proper spirit of obedience to 
this command— unchristian. 

COMMIT NOT ADULTERY 

One result of the fall has been a depravity of the 
sexual appetites. The result is impurity, unchastity, a 
lack of self-control. All of these tendencies lead away 
from God, from righteousness and from true happiness. 
The family unit of one husband and one wife, originally 
established by the Almighty in Eden, seems to be a cornerstone 
of righteousness, in the family and in national life. 
Purity, no adulteration, is the Divine requirement. 

"THOU SHALT NOT STEAL" 

To steal is to take from another his possessions. Had 
not inventions in the line of electricity and steam kept 
pace with our increase of knowledge, the world today 
would be a thieves' paradise. But while buccaneering, 
piracy, robbery, burglary are reprobated by all intelligent 
people, many have a chance for a more subtle form of 
stealing, through stock speculations, organization of fake 
companies with glittering prospects, according to description, 
but really organized to take advantage of the less 
informed or weaker minded. This is stealing. 

Making false returns to tax assessors is stealing. Attempt 
to smuggle without proper payment of customs duty 



is stealing. Failure to give agreed upon services for 
wages received is stealing. But the worst form of stealing, 
the one that does more harm than all the rest combined, 
is the one indicated in Shakespeare's words: 
"Who steals my purse, steals trash, 

But he who filches from me my good name 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
And leaves me poor indeed." 
The Scriptural instruction to "speak evil of no man" 
seems to be comparatively unknown. As a result, many 
defile their own characters ignobly, blight the happiness 
of others and add to the distress of the already groaning 
creation. 

"BEAR NO FALSE WITNESS" 

In a thousand ways the spirit of this injunction may 
be violated, and is violated every day, not only by misrepresenting 
the goods we sell, or the goods we wish to 
buy, but in a thousand ways of slandering a neighbor. 

"THOU SHALT NOT COVET" 

Covetousness comes in first before the stealing, before 
the murdering, before the injury of slander. Covetousness 
is a heart disease which has to do with every other crime; 
for all sins have their basis in selfishness, and selfishness 
is covetousness. Well is this placed at the conclusion of 
the list. Whoever would keep the spirit of God's Law 
must guard his heart against covetousness. 



R5288 : page 236 

TRANS-CONTINENTAL CONVENTION TOUR 
CONTINUED FROM OUR LAST 

We left Vancouver, B.C., near midnight, June 22. 
Many of the dear friends accompanied us to the train, 
loading us with flowers and bidding us God-speed. The 
journey to Calgary, Alta., required a day and a half. It 
afforded beautiful views of the Rocky Mountains and the 
glaciers, at the same time giving the Editor and his stenographer 
opportunity for literary work. 

Calgary, June 24.— We were warmly welcomed by the 
brethren here and greatly enjoyed fellowshiping with 
them in the afternoon. The great interest centered in the 
evening meeting, which had been well advertised. We 
were not disappointed in the results. Approximately 1,500 
heard with the closest attention the story of the Love of 
God— His wonderful provision for His Elect Church on 
the Heavenly plane, and His Restitution provision for the 
non-elect world on the earthly plane. 

While pointing out the blessings of the coming Age 



for the world of mankind, at the hands of the glorified 
Redeemer and the saintly Church, His Bride, we failed not 
to call special attention to the great privilege of the present 
time— the only opportunity that will ever be offered 
to any for attaining glory, honor, immortality and joint-heirship 
with the risen Master, as "partakers of the Divine 
nature." (2 Pet. 1:4.) We considered the attendance 
very remarkable for a week night and a religious subject. 
That considerable interest was developed was manifested 
by the fact that 270 addresses were handed in making request 
for literature. 

Edmonton, Alta., was our next stop. It was our most 
northern appointment, and was our first visit to that city. 
Out of a total population of 55,000, the attendance at our 
public address included 2,000 adults; very astonishing results 
for a week night religious meeting. Who will say 
that the public has no interest in religion! More and 
more we are convinced that may souls are hungering because 
unwilling to feed upon the chaff of human speculations 
evolved into creeds and nonsense of the Dark Ages. 
The real Message of the Gospel, "good tidings of great joy 
which shall be to all people," has a charm, an attraction, 
for intelligent, thinking people. Here we had 372 addresses 
handed in expressing desire for further 
information. 

We spent a pleasant time with the friends here also, 
and left them apparently encouraged, as we, of the Excursion 
party, were encouraged also by meeting them. We 
had another long ride to Regina, Sask. The mountain 
scenery was gone and, instead, we traversed vast prairies. 
A full day's journey afforded another good opportunity 
for literary work. 

Regina we should have reached at 5 p.m. Our schedule 
at Regina was, too, a limited one. The meeting had 
been arranged for 8 p.m. Anxiety increased as we ascertained 
that the train would be an hour, and yet another, 
and another, late. We could not hope that an audience 
assembling from 7:30 to 8 o'clock would remain long under 
such uncertainties, especially not until 10 o'clock! We 
were disappointed, and wondered why the Lord had 
allowed matters to be so. But on arriving we were met 
by some of the friends who advised us that the meeting 
was waiting for us! Street cars and automobiles soon 
hurried us to the place of meeting. 

We were pleasantly surprised to find that the Editor 
of the local newspaper had taken the platform in our interest; 
this had helped to entertain the audience during 
the waiting period. Already we were introduced before 
going on to the platform. Without preliminaries— other 
than a brief supplication for the Divine blessing— we 
proceeded with the topic announced, BEYOND THE GRAVE. 
Our audience numbering altogether about 800, remained 
to the close, 11:30 p.m., and handed in 168 requests for 
further information. 

We considered the meeting a very remarkable manifestation 
of interest. The very Editor who presided explained 



that some time ago he had published our sermons 

weekly, but under certain arrangements made with him 

by local ministers he had discontinued them. The ministers 

had not been able to point out anything wrong with 

the sermons, but they had taken up certain slanderous misrepresentations 

R5288 : page 237 

regarding "Pastor Russell," and shot out 

at him their evil "arrows, even bitter words."— Psa. 64:3. 

Brandon, Manitoba, was reached the next morning. It 
was not a favorable time for a public meeting, but was 
the only time at our disposal and the friends there had 
arranged for a public meeting at 10:30 a.m., Friday, June 
27, in the Sherman Theater. We were surprised at so 
good an audience as 900, with 88 requests for further information 
handed in. For a small city, on a week-day and 
for a religious topic, was not that a wonderful attendance 
at a morning meeting? Thus it seems to us. Our Convention 
party constituted nearly 200 of the above number. 

Winnipeg, Manitoba, was reached the same afternoon, 
and a public address was given at the new Convention 
Hall. The attendance was estimated at 3,000. Closest of 
attention was given and 314 requests for further information 
were handed to the ushers. On the next day we had 
quite an interesting little Convention at Odd Fellows 
Temple. These meetings were not advertised and were 
attended only by already interested Bible Students. The 
friends were very enthusiastic and appeared greatly to 
enjoy the addresses, not only from Brother Russell, but 
also from several of the Convention-Train party. 

Saturday evening when we were leaving, many of the 
local Bible Students crowded about the Convention-Train 
of eleven cars, singing hymns to us and we to them, respecting 
the precious tie that binds our hearts in Christian 
love, and praying in song, "God be with you till we meet 
again!" 

Sunday, June 29, brought us to Minneapolis for the 
afternoon meeting and to St. Paul, the sister city, for the 
night meeting. A wave of hot weather met us there and 
much decreased the attendance at both meetings. In the 
afternoon we had approximately 1,200; in the evening 
about 900— a phenomenal attendance for such extremely 
sultry weather. We were not discouraged, nor were the 
dear friends who had worked very earnestly and faithfully, 
expecting cooler weather, in which event the attendance 
at these meetings would have been at least 
3,000; 290 requests for further information were handed 
to the ushers. 

At midnight we left for the Madison, Wisconsin, 
Eight-Day Convention; a car-load of Minneapolis and St. 
Paul friends accompanied us. We stopped but one day 
at Madison, and then the Convention-Train made its next 
appointment at Rockford, Illinois. Here, approximately 
1,000 of the public gave us the closest attention, after 
we had been introduced by His Honor, the Mayor. Requests 



for further information here handed in, numbered 

74. The Convention-Train then returned to Madison, terminating 

thus our Trans-Continental Convention Tour. 

Almost the entire party declared that Dr. L. W. Jones, 
the conductor and manager of the Excursion and train, 
deserved great credit for the way in which he handled 
every detail of the trip. They agreed, as with one voice, 

R5289 : page 237 

that the Convention Tour had been one of the greatest 
events of their lives— spiritual from first to last. Their 
association with the dear friends at different points on 
the way had done them good, and their endeavors put 
forth to refresh and encourage others had also done them 
good. 

The Editor expressed to Dr. Jones special thanks for 
his many kindnesses en route— among other things, putting 
at his disposal for the entire journey a most comfortable 
compartment. This latter not only conduced to rest and 
refreshment as to sleeping, but the better enabled him to 
utilize his time in dictation during the journey. And for 
all this the doctor refused to receive compensation, declaring 
that it was a privilege to be thus permitted to 
serve the Lord's Cause. 



R5289 : page 237 

FOUR GREAT CONVENTIONS 

We believe that the result stamps approval on the 
method adopted this year of having a number of Conventions, 
instead of one or two. We have already reported 
General Conventions at Pertle Springs, Missouri; 
Hot Springs, Arkansas; Los Angeles, California, and 
San Francisco, California. They were all large enough 
to be good, deeply interesting, spiritual, profitable. The 
four we are now reporting, being more favorably located 
as respects population and railroad facilities, had larger 
attendance, yet were not too large for comfort, and 
afforded abundant opportunities for social entertainment 
and spiritual fellowship. 

MADISON, WISCONSIN, JUNE 29-JULY 6 

The Madison Convention seemed to be greatly enjoyed 
by all in attendance— about 1,400. We have never 
had a Convention more comfortably situated than was 
this. Madison itself is a beautiful little city, surrounded 
by small lakes. The Convention grounds being just across 
one of these lakes from the city, were in every way 
ideal. Little gasoline launches conveyed the Conventioners 
to and from the grounds, which were supplied 
with a fine auditorium, well adapted for Convention 



purposes. The auditorium is owned by the city, and was 
placed at our disposal, gratis, when the invitation to hold 
the Convention at Madison was given. 

Following the custom of the last few years, we avoided 
evening meetings. The full day was spent in Convention, 
with merely an adjournment for luncheon, which was 
supplied nearby at moderate price. There were about six 
addresses daily, during the Convention— eight days. The 
public doubtless wondered at the enthusiasm of the friends 
—as they always do— not knowing, generally, what it 
means to have a real live religion; one which has for its 
center and inspiration "exceeding great and precious 
promises," from an exceedingly wise, all-powerful, just 
and loving God. 

Brother W. E. Van Amburgh served as chairman during 
the entire eight days' Convention. The Conventioners 
surely had a grand, though quiet season of spiritual refreshment. 
There were no side attractions or disturbances. 
Every day was a quiet, joyful, happy Sabbath, and 
there was surely a "feast of fat things." The evenings 
were spent in the city with the parties with whom the 
friends were lodged. Some were invited to go out with 
their hosts for a boat ride on the lake; some took automobile 
rides; others went to give Chart Talks and explain 
the Divine Plan. Still others of the friends visited with 
each other, renewing former acquaintances and cementing 
new friendships. 

We heard some very complimentary remarks passed 
in respect to the Conventioners. The owner of the gasoline 
launches was heard to say that there never had been 
such a Convention there before. Some of those who entertained 
the friends, meeting the sisters who had engaged 
the rooms, thanked them for sending such nice people, 
and said they had appreciated them much. Surely this was 
only as it should have been. As the Apostle Peter questioned, 
"What manner of persons ought we to be in all 
holy living and Godliness?" 

If those who have a true knowledge of God and who 
have consecrated their lives to the service of righteousness, 

R5289 : page 238 

and to opposition of iniquity do not manifest the 

fruits of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, longsuffering 

brotherly kindness, love— then where, pray, 

should we expect to find these graces exemplified? 

Those who attended the Madison Convention unanimously 
declared it to be the "best ever!" Yet this is the 
same general sentiment attaching to our Conventions. 
The last always seems to be the best. And why should it 
not really be so? If the Lord's people are growing in 
grace, knowledge and love daily, as we trust is the case, 
then each Convention should be a little better than its 
predecessor. 

SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, JULY 13-20 



Brother J. F. Rutherford served as chairman during 
the eight delightful days of this Convention. The list of 
speakers was excellent, numbering in all about forty. 
Several dear friends were heard to remark that this was 
the "sweetest" Convention they had ever attended, in that 
everything passed off so quietly, comfortably, happily. 
Our comfortable meeting place undoubtedly contributed 
greatly to the charm of this Convention. The city of 
Springfield invited the Conventioners to be their guests, 
and placed at the disposal of our Association for the period 
of their sojourn their elegant new Auditorium, just finished. 
It is handsomely decorated in white and gold, is 
spacious and the acoustics are good. 

Our Convention attendance averaged about 2,000, the 
Sunday service running the attendance up to 2,400 or 
3,000. The Convention proper, without the public, numbered 
about 1,800. The majority of the Bethel family 
attended this Convention and were the guests of the 
Springfield Class of I.B.S.A. Thus being left free, the 
Bethelites had all the better opportunity for rendering 
service to others. But, indeed, this spirit of service seemed 
to pervade all the dear friends in attendance. Each 
seemed on the lookout to see in what manner he or she 
could serve others and make them more happy or more 
comfortable. As a result, all were happy. A sweet spirit 
of peace and order prevailed, which reminds us very much 
of the Great Convention which we are all hoping soon to 
attend. 

Although the Convention Hall is in the very center of 
the city, it is so roomy and of such excellent construction 
that it was pleasantly cool and was in every way a delightful 
place for a Convention. The people of this city 
treated us very cordially, although not very many of them 
attended our meetings, of course; nor did we expect them 
so to do. These Conventions are particularly intended to 
give opportunity for Bible Students to become specially 
acquainted with each other, with their Bibles and with 
its great and glorious Plan of salvation, which more and 
more appeals to their hearts, and assists them in making 
their calling and election sure. 

TORONTO, ONTARIO, CONVENTION, JULY 20-27 

We have had a Convention in Toronto before. Indeed, 
the city, so far as respects the attendance of our Canadian 
brethren, is very centrally located. Favorable railroad 
rates are always granted. This year's Convention 
surprised us by its size— about 1,200. We had not expected 
nearly so many when the appointment was made. Of this 
number about one-half were from the United States, the 
friends taking advantage of some of the low priced 
excursions. 

Notwithstanding certain adverse conditions, stirred up 
by those Scripturally termed "sons of Belial," the Convention 
was in every way a success. If some of the public 



had their minds poisoned by slanderous misrepresentations 
and were thus hindered from availing themselves 
of the opportunity of sharing the blessed privileges 
afforded them, others, we are sure, were profited thereby. 
Some attended this Convention largely because they perceived 
that an evil spirit of slander and misrepresentation 
was for some reason endeavoring to do injury to a religious 
work. Satan and his blinded and misguided servants 
overdo in their endeavors to injure the Lord's cause. 
Sometimes the Lord overrules the wrath of man for His 
own praise and for the forwarding of the Truth. As for 
instance, in the case of a man who, being told that Pastor 
Russell was Antichrist, went to see what Antichrist might 
look like. Hearing the joyful Message of the Gospel, his 
heart was captured and now he rejoices. 

Brother A. I. Ritchie served as the chairman of the 
Toronto Convention. A strong corps of speakers was 
provided, and the more than forty addresses at the Convention 
were up to a high standard, both for grace and 
truth, spirituality and power. That "It is good to be here" 
was surely the sentiment of many hearts; and the season 
of refreshing undoubtedly provided blessings not only for 
those in attendance at the Convention, but for other thousands 
at their homes, upon whom doubtless was poured 
forth a share of the blessings. The Lord arranges it so 
that those who give out to others grace and truth received 
by themselves have an increased supply, even as with 
the widow's cruse of oil. 

ASHEVILLE, N.C., CONVENTION, JULY 20-27 

All in attendance at the Asheville Convention will 
surely agree that the Auditorium so kindly placed by the 
city at the disposal of the Association furnished a delightful 
Convention hall. Situated high up in the mountains, 
Asheville has a delightful climate greatly enjoyed by the 
visitors, who were estimated at 1,200, the larger attendance 
at the public meeting being principally made up of 
people from the city and immediate vicinity. The railroads 
gave us specially good terms, as gradually they are 

R5290 : page 238 

learning that our Conventions are quite worth their while 
—larger than the majority of Conventions and always up 
to advance statements. 

If some of our enemies did seek to poison the minds 
of the public in advance, the prejudice easily broke down 
as the hosts became acquainted with their visitors. There 
is a power to the Truth, and it gives the spirit of a sound 
mind, which surely commends itself to all thinking people. 
It gives moderation, meekness, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. These graces of the Spirit are growing, developing, 
ripening amongst the Lord's people, and proportionately 
their influence is stronger, deeper, better. We 
feel sure that the people of Asheville have received a quiet 



testimony from their visitors which will be helpful to 
them, just as at the other Convention places. We feel 
confident, too, that the inhabitants in all these places 
would make us very welcome should we desire to return at 
a future time. 

This Convention was a model one in every respect. 
Brother C. J. Woodworth served as chairman, and a fine 
corps of speakers gave, approximately, fifty addresses. 
They were spiritual, Biblical, uplifting. The hearers were 
certainly refreshed, and undoubtedly carried with them to 
their homes a blessing to be poured in turn upon those 
who were not privileged to be in attendance. 

As was expected from the first, it was especially a 
Southern Convention. It gave opportunity for some of 
the dear friends, who had never before had such a privilege, 
to attend a Convention. Indeed this was true respecting 
all of this year's Conventions. On the whole we 
feel sure that the Father was glorified, that the Savior 
was honored, and that many of His followers were refreshed, 
as Bible Students, in grace, knowledge and Truth. 

R5290 : page 239 

The Editor remarked that at one Convention this 
year he shook hands with three men the same day, who at 
one time in their lives had been sadly blinded and were 
under the control of the Adversary. Now they were all 
clothed in their right minds— safe and sane, saints, jewels, 
children of the Highest. Two of them are Church Elders 
and leaders of Berean Bible Study classes; the third may 
be one also, but of this we are not positive. 

The brief history of these three men shows the transforming 
power of the Truth. One was a highway robber. 
The Truth reached him in prison. Another was an 
Atheist and his wife a Catholic. He kept a liquor saloon 
in connection with a railroad contractor's gang. The third 
was also at one time a saloon keeper and his wife was a 
Catholic. The wives of all three are with them fully in 
the Truth. 



"It may not come to us as we have thought, 
The blessed consciousness of sins forgiven; 

We may not hear a voice that shall proclaim 
Our title clear to the sweet rest of Heaven. 

"But like the winter merging into spring, 

Or gently as the trees put forth their leaves, 

May come to us the impulse of that life 

Which God bestows on those sin truly grieves. 



R5290 : page 239 



AN INTERESTING LETTER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

When passing through Dayton the other day, I was delayed 
in the station long enough to serve the people going out on 
two trains. With one or two exceptions all seemed very 
glad to get the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY. The thought 
occurred to me, Why could not every station in the large 
and small cities in the country be served at every train 
time? In some of the cities I have observed Methodist 
Deaconesses rendering assistance to incoming and outgoing 
passengers. Maybe railroad companies would grant such 
privileges to Deaconesses of the I.B.S.A.? 

When at last winter, Sister told me about 

the successful work done at a booth conducted by the I.B.S.A. 
at the big Fair held in that city. The booth was 
rented at a nominal sum and was under the immediate 
charge of that very zealous and clever Sister. The booth 
was made very attractive by great piles of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
in the various bindings, Mannas in many styles, Bibles galore 
and Tracts treating a variety of subjects. In this way everybody 
entering the Fair grounds could be served with some 
memento of the I.B.S.A. Would it not be a good thing 
if every Fair in the country could have an I.B.S.A. booth, 
conducted by either a local or a nearby class or by some 
representative of your selection? 

I am still serving the trains with good success. Conductors 
have occasionally objected, saying something like 
this: "A rule of the company prohibits the distribution of 
advertising matter on trains." A ready reply to this effect, 
has with one or two exceptions silenced the objection: 
"This is not advertising matter— it is a little religious paper." 
I have always gone on then, as if that settled the matter. 
The opposition of one of the two hardest conductors I have 
run up against was turned into friendly support when he 
observed my zeal in getting out at every station in a run of 
over 100 miles on a local train. I gained the impression, from 
a very fine conversation I had with him toward the end of 
the journey, that he had sneakingly read something he liked 
in one of the Tracts. My stop was the end of his run and he 
invited me to his hotel to have supper. 

Much love and many prayers for you and for all the 
Madison Conventioners. In His dear name, 
R. H. HIRSH. 



page 239 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Series VI., Study XV. 

THE FOES AND BESETMENTS OF THE NEW CREATION 
SEPTEMBER 7 



Read p. 642 to p. 646, par. 1. 

LOVE RIGHTEOUSNESS-HATE INIQUITY 

(62) How shall we understand the philosophy of God's 
dealings with the New Creation in subjecting them to such 
peculiar and fiery trials? P. 642; P. 643, par. 1. 

(63) What illustration in nature may help us to understand 
God's providential dealings with the New Creation, 

and what hope have we in the ultimate overthrow of evil 
when it has served the Divine purpose? P. 643, par. 2. 

(64) What special purpose have sin and sickness served 
in the case of the world, as well as in that of our Lord and 
His "little flock"? P. 644, par. 1. 

(65) Since the New Creation was typified by natural 
Israel in many respects, why should they not expect to be 
free from the trials and difficulties of the world, even as 
Israel escaped them? P. 645, par. 1. 

(66) What special consolation do the Scriptures offer 
New Creatures who suffer divers afflictions and fiery trials? 
P. 646, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 14 

Read p. 647 to p. 654, inclusive. 

(67) Should our confidence in the Lord's protecting care 
lead us into indifference with regard to temporal matters? 
And how should we examine ourselves when physical or 
financial calamities come upon us in spite of our best endeavors? 
Pp. 647, 648. 

(68) How may we prove that the Scripture, "Who 
healeth all thy diseases," (Psa. 103:3) does not apply to 
physical diseases of the New Creation? P. 648, par. 1. 

(69) How does the foregoing harmonize with Mark 16:9-20? 
P. 649, par. 1. 

(70) What were the experiences of our Lord and the 
Apostles with respect to physical infirmities? Pp. 650 to 
652, bottom of page. 

(71) Do we have any record of the Apostles' using 
Divine Power for their own relief or that of other consecrated 
followers of Christ? How should we accept and 

follow their example? Pp. 653, 654. 

SEPTEMBER 21 

Read p. 654 to p. 657, par. 1. 

THE NOMINAL CHURCH AS AN ADVERSARY OF THE NEW 
CREATION 

(72) How is the Nominal Church distinguished from the 
True Church of Christ? P. 654. 

(73) Is a wide difference between these two classes disadvantageous 
or beneficial to the True Church? P. 655, par. 1. 



(74) What has always been the position of the truly 
consecrated while in the nominal systems, and what service 
has "Babylon" rendered unto these? P. 655, par. 2. 

(75) In what manner is the New Creation continually 
subject to temptation from the Nominal Church? P. 656, par. 1. 

THE ARMOR OF GOD 

(76) What is the exhortation of the Apostle with respect 
to the Armor of God? What is this armor, and why is it 
necessary to put on "the whole armor" in the present day? 
P. 657, par. 1. 

SEPTEMBER 28 



Read p. 657, par. 2, to p. 658, par. 2. 



(77) What does the Girdle represent? P. 657, par. 2. 

(78) What does the Breastplate signify? P. 657, par. 3. 

(79) What do the Sandals represent? P. 657, par. 4. 

(80) What is the Shield, and why is it absolutely indispensable? 
P. 657, par. 5. 

(81) What is the Helmet of Salvation, and why is it so 
especially important in this day? P. 658, par. 1. 

(82) What is the only piece of offensive armor possessed 
by the New Creation? And how can it be obtained and 
used? P. 658, par. 2. 



page 241 
