From Our Readers
One-Parent Families  I just received my October 8, 1995, Awake! and read the series “One-Parent Families—How Successful Can They Be?” I can’t thank you enough for these articles. They are very timely. I have been a single parent for seven and a half years, and it has been very difficult. I have a 15-year-old daughter who is going through a difficult and rebellious period. Also, my work situation is very unstable. I am grateful, however, to be in a supportive and loving congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Whenever I’ve needed help with my car or simply needed a listening ear, my brothers have always been there for me.
D. R., United States
I have been a single parent since 1978. As a result of suffering from bipolar depression, I was not always the best parent. Anyway, I always listen to the magazines on tape. I’ve already listened to this issue twice, and it is playing on my stereo right now. As long as the magazines keep containing such wonderful information, I feel my family will make it!
T. O., United States
God Hard to Please?  I am a single parent, and when I saw the cover of the October 8, 1995, issue with the articles on single parents, I cried. But the first article I read was “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Are God’s Standards Too Difficult to Reach?” Yes, as a mom who seems to be failing, this article was a great relief. It showed me that I am not a loser. It is simply my turn to prove Satan a liar. Thanks to Jehovah for this wonderful article!
R. N., United States
It was an article that touched me deeply. It’s amazing to think that even though Jehovah is almighty, he is willing to forgive us of the mistakes that we have made. This article helped me to appreciate that we can be happy living by God’s standards, even though we will fail at times.
D. C., United States
River Blindness  Recently, a government agency distributed tablets for the prevention of river blindness in our village. Soon after that I received the October 8, 1995, issue with the article “River Blindness—Conquering a Terrible Scourge.” I made good use of it with my neighbors. When a government agent saw the article, he exclaimed: “Your organization is more than just a religion!” Furthermore, the local doctor obtained a subscription for both The Watchtower and Awake! Many in our territory request the magazines. They are happy to see that they cover what is going on in Nigeria.
A. A., Nigeria
Iditarod  I just finished reading the article “The Iditarod—Ten Centuries in the Making” (October 8, 1995), and I felt compelled to thank you for an extremely informative and mind-boggling article! It painted a vivid picture for the reader to enjoy. I actually felt that I was one of the mushers on that 1,100-mile [1,800 km] trek! I also came away with a deeper appreciation for Jehovah—whose qualities are manifest in his creation of both man and beast.
J. H., United States
Legal Victory  I read the article “A Victory for the Minority—In a Land of Uniformity.” (October 8, 1995) When I was in high school, I had to sit out the judo classes. I was encouraged when I read that the brothers in Kobe have been fighting this issue in the courts in order to protect their freedom of worship and their right to receive an education. Now that the school has appealed to the Supreme Court, I pray that the brothers will receive a favorable judgment.
Y. K., Japan

