Will You Be There?
During the past year, over 8,700,000 persons throughout the world attended the “Joyful Praisers” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Will you be at one of the “Messengers of Godly Peace” District Conventions? You are cordially invited to attend.
In most locations, the convention will begin at 9:30 Friday morning with a program of music. The opening session will feature the encouraging talk “What Does God Require of Us?” This will include information we can use to help millions of others to do what God requires.
The afternoon’s presentation “Helping Others to Learn God’s Requirements” will equip conventioners to share more effectively in the disciple-making work. Afterward, the two-part symposium “Watch Out for the Hidden Snares of Entertainment” will warn about demonic snares to avoid. Friday’s program will conclude with the important talk “Loyally Upholding the Integrity of God’s Word.”
Saturday morning’s session will stress the importance of the disciple-making work with the three-part symposium “Messengers Bringing Good News of Peace.” The final talk of the session will be on dedication and baptism, and the baptism of new disciples will follow.
Saturday afternoon’s presentation “Consider Jehovah’s Thoughts on Matters” will answer questions many have had on current topics. You will enjoy the heartwarming two-part symposium “The God of Peace Cares for You.” Then something special will be enjoyed during the session’s concluding talk “Pursue Godly Peace in Family Life.”
Sunday morning’s three-part symposium, “Identifying the Right Kind of Messengers,” will highlight the convention’s theme by drawing upon the examples of Bible prophets. The morning program will conclude with a full-costume drama that will draw valuable lessons from the Bible account of Judge Gideon.—Judges 6:11–8:28.
The convention’s final session on Sunday afternoon will feature the public discourse entitled “True Peace At Last!—From What Source?” Finally, the motivating talk “Moving Forward as Messengers of Godly Peace” will conclude the convention.
Since 198 conventions are scheduled in the United States alone, likely there will be one held close to where you live. Check with Jehovah’s Witnesses locally for the time and place of the convention nearest to you. The June 8 issue of Awake! will also list the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland.

