VOL. XXVII JULY 1 No. 13 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6034 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

The Wail of the Russian Peasant Woman 195 

Drifting to Socialism 195 

Anger, Hatred, Strife, and Murder 195 

Sacred Relics Recovered 196 

Berean Bible Study on Love 196 

One-Day Convention Reports 197 

The God-Likeness of Forgiveness 197 

What the Unmerciful May Expect 199 

Who Is My Neighbor? 200 

The Golden Rule 202 

"Lord, Teach Us to Pray" 203 

"Ask and It Shall Be Given You" 206 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ASBURY PARK, N.J., CONVENTION, JULY 22-29 



(For information respecting meetings, see last page, this issue.) 

RAILROAD RATES 

We have secured fare-and-one-third rates on all lines of railroad 
east of and including Chicago and St. Louis, on "Certificate 
Plan." Ask for ticket for "Watch Tower Convention, 
Asbury Park, N.J.," for which you pay one way full fare and 
receive a Certificate in addition to your ticket. The Certificate, 
after endorsement by proper officers at the Convention and 
payment of 25 cents, entitles you to one-third fare on return 
trip. From some points cheaper rates than these may be obtainable, 
via Atlantic City or other ocean points. Enquire of your 
railroad agent. 

ACCOMMODATIONS 

Board and lodging can be procured for $1, $1.25, $1.50, $2, 
and upward to $5 per day. 

Write at once if you wish us to procure accommodations, 
stating briefly and pointedly what kind, number of persons, 
sex and color, and if married couples wish to room together. Do 
not expect any alteration of your party's location after writing. 
If others join it later they will be accommodated in the order 
of notification. Address all letters to "Convention Dept," 
WATCH TOWER B. & T. SOCIETY, Allegheny, Pa. 



R3799 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WAIL OF RUSSIAN PEASANT WOMEN 



CZAR NICHOLAS received recently the following 
remarkable document. It is a petition from 
the peasant women of the village of Nikolskaje, 
in the government of Warquesch. It reads:— 

"For generations the women of the peasant class 
have lived without having any rights whatever. From 
birth to death they have been and are subject to the 
will of fathers, grandfathers, husbands and sons. We 
are not even considered human beings, but simply 
beasts of burden. 

"We demand to be taught to read and write; we 
demand that our daughters be given the same facilities 
for learning as our sons. 



"We will no longer be forced into marriage; we 
demand to be given land to cultivate that we may become 
independent and able to earn our own living. 

"We know that we are ignorant, but we are not to 
blame. We demand to be told what is happening in the 
world around us, and we demand the right to be represented 
in the Douma."— Cincinnati Enquirer. 



While the worldly spirit of Selfishness is goading 
on the whole world to battle for "rights," the Word of 
God directs the children of God to be not strife-breeders 
but peacemakers. It says: "Be patient, brethren; 
the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." His Kingdom 
will soon give to all absolute justice and right every 
wrong. Do all you can kindly, peaceably, lovingly to 
"follow peace with all," but expect to suffer and to bear 
considerable for righteousness' sake. "Think it not 
strange." "Rejoice in tribulation," trusting your affairs 
to him who has promised to make all your experiences 
work out for your everlasting advantage. He who takes 
to the sword will perish by the sword. He who trusts 
in the Lord will have peace now and hereafter. 

DRIFTING TO SOCIALISM 



"The revolutionary movement in Russia has been 
going on for nearly a year, and as conservative authority 
as the London Spectator predicts that it may last 
five years longer, and it further suggests that some 
young Russian lieutenant of artillery may today be 
studying the career of Napoleon Bonaparte and be qualified 
to act at the end of that time. The French revolutionists 
talked of constitutions and the rights of man. 
The Russian revolutionists are talking of these things, 
too, but they go further; they are talking of division of 
land, of equalizing the distribution of wealth, of other 
crude and half-formed ideas of economic change— in a 
word, Socialism. Tolstoi says that Russia is in better 
condition than any country in the world to attempt 
common ownership of land. 

"Should Russia in course of time and after a glut 
of horrors become a Socialist or semi-Socialist state, 
the revolutionary wave would spread, for good or ill, 
to other nations. 

"Already we read of Austrians and Hungarians 
insisting upon universal suffrage, and a delegation of 
no less than 200,000 workingmen filling the Vienna 
ringstrasse to impress parliament with their earnestness 
in making the demand. 

In Germany the Socialists, inspired by events in 
Russia, have begun an agitation for the reform of the 



R3800 : page 195 

election laws which will give them the representation 
in the reichstag, possibly a majority of that body, to 
which they are entitled.— Scranton Times. 

ANGER, HATRED, STRIFE, MURDER 



Lodz, Russian Poland.— Thirty-four girls working 
in Kindler's mills at Pabianice, near here, on refusing 
to join a strike, were poisoned by a powder that was 
strewn upon the floor of the mill. One of the girls died 
and the remainder are seriously ill, ten of them not 
being expected to recover. 



Russia is one of the newest countries to come under 
the influence of "strikes," but the above shows that 
no other nation could teach it much along the 
line of the "works of the flesh and the devil." 
What may we not expect, the world over, very shortly 
in the great "time of trouble such as was not since 
there was a nation." The veneer of civilization, miscalled 
Christianization, is quite thin, even in Churchianity. 
Then the works of the flesh and of the devil 
will show in marked contrast to the fruits of the Spirit 
of Christ— joy, peace, brotherly kindness, love. Let us 
not measure ourselves with the poor world, but with 
the perfect Lord, whose Spirit we have received and in 

R3800 : page 196 

whom we are seeking to be perfected in the Chief 
Resurrection. 

SACRED RELICS RECOVERED 



According to recent accounts the golden candlestick 
and other articles used in the Temple service, by 
the Israelites, have been recovered from the River 
Tiber, where they were thrown by the ancient Romans 
when the sacking of Rome by the Goths seemed 
imminent. 

"In the box were discovered many vessels and 
trumpets which exactly answer the descriptions in the 
Old Testament. Should the identification be accepted 
this candlestick would become one of the most valuable 
treasures in the world. 

"The value of the gold alone is more than $30,000, 
and, in addition, the rich working enhances its value, 
being of the finest. It stands nearly three feet high." 



It is claimed that the ancient Romans more or less 
worshiped the River Tiber and frequently cast valuables 
thereinto as sacrifices. A systematic effort is 
being made to recover those valuables, and the foregoing 
is the first important recovery we have learned of. 
It is hoped that the golden Ark of the Covenant from 
the Temple may yet be recovered also. 



R3800 : page 196 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY ON LOVE. 

WE are hearing good reports of blessings from the use 
of these Berean Studies in the Scriptures. We 
urge that each little group have one special session 
for these lessons and that one leader be selected for at 
least three months;— a leader who will enter into the spirit 
of the studies and who knows how to draw the answers 
from the class and then can briefly summarize at the close 
of each question. Following this course the Allegheny 
Church has adopted these studies for every Sunday evening, 
and the interest is shown by the fact that the attendance 
has about doubled during the past eight months. 

If good readers are numerous in the class, assign one 
reference to each; if few, several references to each. (The 
reading must be clear and distinct or the profit of the lesson 
will be sacrificed.) The Scripture references come first, 
then the DAWN references: the six volumes of DAWN being 
indicated by the first six letters of the alphabet, A, B, C, 
D, E, F. Similarly, T represents "Tabernacle Shadows," 
and S "Spiritism." The letter Z represents the WATCH 
TOWER, '02-152 signifying page 152 of the year 1902. The 
columns and paragraphs are indicated thus: col. 2, par. 3. 

JULY 1 

1 . What is love? Z/03-55 (2nd col. last par.); Z/03-58; 
(1st col. par. 2). 

2. How does the Apostle describe love? 
I Cor. 13:1, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 1). 

I Cor. 13:2, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 2). 

I Cor. 13:3, Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 3; 2nd col. par. 1). 

I Cor. 13:4, Z/03-56 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); Z. '03-57 

(1st col. par. 1, 2); Z/97-247 (1st col. par. 1-4). 

I Cor. 13:5, Z. '03-57 (1st col. par. 3 to 2nd col. par. 3); 

Z/97-247 (1st col. par. 5 and 2nd col.) 

I Cor. 13:6, Z/03-57 (2nd col. par. 4); Z/97-248 

(1st col. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:7, Z/03-58 (1st col. par. 1); Z/97-248 

(2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:8, Z/03-58 (1st col. par. 3); Z/97-248 (2nd 



col. par. 4). 

I Cor. 13:9-12, Z/03-58 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); Z/97-249 

(1st col. par. 1 to 3). 

I Cor. 13:13, Z/97-249 (2nd col. par. 1). 

JULY 8 

3. How does the illustration of the spectrum assist us 
to comprehend love? Z. '97-245 (2nd col. par. 2, 3); 
246 (1st col. par. 1). 

4. What is the distinction between natural, or human 
love, and spiritual, or divine love? Z. '00-182 (1st 

col. par. 5); Z. '03-333 (2nd col. par. 1 to 3). 

5. What is the difference between duty-love (phileo) 
and disinterested or divine love (agapee)? Z. '01-149, 
150. 

JULY 15 

6. What is the three-fold manifestation of the spirit of 
love? Z. '96-212 (1st col. par. 3); Manna, June 27. 

7. How may we distinguish between true and false 
love? Z/95-210 (1st col). 

8. What is the importance of this grace? Z. '97-244 
(1st col. par. 1 to 3; 2nd col. par. 2). 

JULY 22 

9. How is love attained? Z. '97-246 (2nd col. par. 1, 2); 
Z/00-183 (1st col. par. 1); Z.'98-8 (2nd col. par. 2). 

10. Why is an "aggressive warfare" necessary to attain 
unto love? Z/95-03 (2nd col.); Manna, Apr. 9. 

11. What is the relative importance of the early "gifts" 
of the Spirit, and the spirit of love? F.238, par. 2; 
Z/97-289 (2nd col. par. 2). 

JULY 29 

12. Why should love be the mainspring of all our actions? 
Z/03-91 (1st col. par. 2). 

13. What is the relation between love and purity of heart, 
and how may we purify our hearts? Titus 1:15,16; 
Z/99-214 (2nd col. par. 1); 215 (2nd col. par. 1) to 217; 
Z.'05-216(lstcol. par. 3, 4). 

14. How is love the seal or evidence of our begetting 
as New Creatures? E.286, par. 2; 267-270; Z/97-289 
(1st col. par. 1 to 2nd col. par. 1). 

Each one appointed for reader should have his BIBLE 
or DAWN or TOWER on hand, previously read, and should be 
prepared to respond at the leader's call without stopping to 
hunt his place. All of course have BIBLES and DAWNS, and 
some one in each company is likely to have old TOWERS and 
will be glad to loan them for the benefit of the class. 

Opportunity for discussing each question should be 
given after the references have been read and before the 



leader makes a brief closing summary of the answer and 
proceeds to read the next question. It is urged that the 
questions as printed be strictly adhered to until they have all 
been discussed. It will generally be found that all questions 
are included on the subject. The reason for care on this point 
is that if the questions are intruded that come later the 
subsequent lessons are considerably spoiled thereby. The 
leader should be expected to kindly, gently, but firmly hold 
the class to the question under discussion, and in this he 
should have the cooperation of all who recognize the value 
of order in the study of the Divine Plan of the Ages. 



R3800 : page 197 

ONE-DAY CONVENTION REPORTS 

THE failure to give reports of the One-Day Conventions 
recently held should not be understood to signify 
that they were unworthy of reporting: other matters 
claimed our attention and the WATCH TOWER space. We 
here very briefly record that in the various places, namely, 
Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, Pa., Indianapolis, Ind., 
Huntingdon, Pa., New York City, N.Y., Cleveland, O., Springfield, 
111., the dear friends of the cause put forth strenuous 
efforts, and under the Lord's blessing numbers of new 
hearers were reached with the Gospel message, and a few of 
these, we trust, were brought from darkness to greater light 
and started in the good way toward the Kingdom. Others, 
we may hope, were relieved of some measure of previous 
blindness and hindered from stumbling into infidelity and 
led to a more reasonable and appreciative view of the divine 
character and that blessed book, the Bible. 

R3801 :page 197 

As usual there was one public service at each place 
aside from the meeting specially for the interested. The latter 
were attended not only by the friends of the local 
churches, but also by representatives and delegations from 
surrounding territory within a radius of sometimes 200 miles 
or more. The impression is a growing one with these that 
these One-Day Conventions are blessed of the Lord and being 
used to the pulling down of the strongholds of error 
and misunderstanding of the Truth and to the upbuilding 
of those who are already of the Lord's consecrated flock and 
in the enjoyment of light upon his Word. 

You will all be interested in knowing that by dint of 
wisely directed and diversified forms of advertising and at 
considerable expense, large attendance was secured in all of 
the public meetings at these Conventions. The estimated 
numbers in attendance at these public services were as 
follows:— 

Washington, 2,500; Philadelphia, 1,600; Indianapolis, 
about 2,500; Huntingdon, about 450— a very large attendance 



for a wet day and a small place; New York City, 
2,000; Cleveland, O. 2,500. 



R3801 :page 197 

THE GOD-LIKENESS OF FORGIVING. 
-MATT. 18:21-35.~JULY8.~ 

"Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."— Matt. 6:12. 

OUR last lesson forewarned us that offences, snares and 
stumblings would come to the Lord's people, and 
cautioned us against being in any sense or degree the 
causes of these offences— against any conduct which would 
prove a stumbling-block or in any way be injurious to 
others. Today's lesson takes up the matter from the opposite 
standpoint, instructing the Lord's followers how they 
should deal with the injurious persons when they are of the 
household of faith, "brethren." Feeling the great importance 
of this subject, we have heretofore repeatedly made it 
prominent in these columns and associated publications, and 
especially in DAWN, Vol. VI. This seemed the more necessary 
because the matter has been apparently so generally 
neglected by others. Now, having seen some good remarks 
on the subject by Dr. Peloubet, we take pleasure in quoting 
the same in preference to repeating our own arguments, 
which to some might become wearisome. Dr. Peloubet says:— 

"Every one receives criticisms and wrongs which try his 
temper to the utmost. Especially is this true of the ambitious 
spirits who seek to be first, as described in our last 
lesson. As Professor Bruce says, An ambitious man is sure 
to be the receiver of many offences, real or imaginary. He 
is quick to take offence and slow to forgive or forget wrong.' 
But the danger assails all classes. 

"Go to him privately and alone. If our object is to 
gain our brother and help him to do right, we will not make 
known the wrong to others, make it a matter of notoriety, 
for that makes the settlement far more difficult. The offender's 
pride, or even self-respect, will tend to keep him 
from acknowledging his fault. This is a most important 
principle. The wise head of a great asylum told me that 
in dealing with the insane it was of the utmost importance 
to keep away the audience, and that almost every one was 
influenced by the presence of others. The wisest teacher of 
my acquaintance deals in the same way with his boys. Deal 
with them alone whenever it is possible. Thus thy brother 
will be more likely to hear thee, and thou hast gained thy 
brother, gained him for righteousness, for salvation, for a 
Christian life, and probably as a friend. 

"If this fails then the next step is to get help from one 
or two others; and if this fails, from the larger community. 
If this fails, he is to be to you as a heathen and a publican, 
outside of your religious and social company, but not outside 



of your love and care and desire to help. (See Rom. 12: 19,20.) 
In all cases the object is not revenge, but to 
save and help the offender. Henry Ward Beecher used to 
say that he looked upon those who maligned him and said 
bitter things against him as sick people whom he must try 
to cure of their moral disease." 

"SEVENTY TIMES SEVEN" 

After explaining to his followers how best to avoid taking 
offence from the brethren and how best to help brethren 
out of the wrong position of being offenders and being injurious, 
the matter is brought up afresh by Peter's question regarding 
the number of times that we should be willing to 
receive injuries from another and take them patiently, and, 
exercising a forgiving spirit, should try to have the injuries 
discontinued. It will be noticed that the Lord is not laying 
down any rule by which we may deal with the world, but 
merely the rules which should govern amongst his followers. 
As respects the world we are to expect opposition, misrepresentation, 
slander, opposition of every kind. "Marvel 
not if the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before 
it hated you"— "Whosoever will live godly in this present 
life shall suffer persecution."— John 15:18; 2 Tim. 3:12. 

Such oppositions from the world we are to take as a 
matter of course, and not be surprised at the fiery trials that 
will try us, but to consider that the Lord is wise in permitting 
such experiences and able to make them all work 
out for our good. It is within the household of faith that 
the special trials sometimes come, from the very quarter 
whence we least expect them, but these also must be taken 
patiently; we must not render evil for evil nor railing for 

R3801 :page 198 

railing toward the Lord's members nor toward the world; 
we must, as the Apostle says, be patient toward all. 

Notice that Peter's query is, If my brother trespass 
against me how often shall I forgive him? Seven times? 
Peter no doubt had in mind the thought that seven was the 
symbol of perfection, and that this might mark the reasonable 
limit of mercy and forgiveness. He did not, of course, 
consider that if that were a divine law it would mean that 
he himself might be forgiven of the Lord not more than 
seven times for imperfections, shortcomings, etc. Our Lord's 
answer is broad and sweeping— "I say not unto thee until 
seven times, but until seventy times seven." Some are disposed 
to translate this until seventy and seven times, but 
evidently the Lord's intention was to imply that forgiveness 
should be granted as often as it is sought with any manifestation 
whatever of sincerity. 

This is not merely advice from the Master to his followers 
—it is a command. It is not optional with us how we 
shall do toward our brother, for the great Teacher has assured 
us that if we have not the forgiving spirit we cannot 
be his disciples. His words are, "If ye do not from the 



heart forgive men their trespasses neither will your heavenly 
Father forgive your trespasses." All, then, who realize their 
need of divine mercy and forgiveness and who receive the 
great Teacher's instruction on this point will be careful to 
cultivate in their hearts in every sense a forgiving spirit, a 
loving, generous disposition. And by this all men may know 
the disciples of the Lord of mercy. We quote Dr. Peloubet 
again:— 

"Our hearts are like reservoirs, and outward occasions 
draw out whatever is within and only that. If they are full 
of love and forgiveness, kindness and desire to help, then no 
matter how often— seventy times or seventy times seven- 
some act of others call forth the feelings of the heart, it will 
be met by love and forgiveness and help. As all need to be 
forgiven, so all need to forgive. There are enemies who injure 
us by word and deed. There are others who say evil 
things about us carelessly and attribute wrong motives, pervert 
what we do and say. 'They speak daggers.' Insults are 
offered, even friends sometimes do the most annoying and 
trying things, that are apt to remain in the memory and 
fester like a thorn in the flesh." 

"The kindest and the happiest pair 
Will find occasion to forbear; 
And something every day they live 
To pity— and perhaps forgive." 

Dr. Hale refers to people who "have given a new turn 
to an old text. In their own private 'R. V.' of the New 
Testament they read: 'Whosoever speaketh a word or committeth 
a wrong against God, it shall be forgiven him; but 
whosoever speaketh a word or committeth a wrong against 
me, it shall not be forgiven him.'" 

"The forgiving spirit seeks to do all the good possible 
to the one who has wronged us. It yearns to help him and 
to save him from his sin. It proves this feeling of forgiveness 
and love by doing good, as God sends the rain and 
sunshine on the evil and on the good." 

"Always and under all circumstances we must have a 
forgiving heart, whatever the offence against us or the attitude 
of the offender. We must never have the spirit of hatred 
or revenge or retaliation. We must never brood over wrongs, 
but must make all possible allowances and excuses. If thou 

R3802 : page 198 

canst not make thyself such an one as thou wouldst, how 
canst thou expect to have another in all things to thy 
liking?'" 

"Heir of the same inheritance, 
Child of the selfsame God, 
He has but stumbled in the path 
We have in weakness trod." 
"An old Spanish writer says, 'To return evil for good 
is devilish; to return good for good is human; but to return 
good for evil is Godlike.'"— Archbishop Whately. 

"I have known a man to nurse the tiny cocatrice egg of 
unforgiveness till it has burst into the fiery serpent of 



crime."— Farrar. 

THE DEBT OF A KING'S OFFICER 

By way of impressing this lesson our Lord gave a parable 
to his disciples. This parable represented a great 
king who, making an accounting with his officers charged 
with the collection of taxes, found one of them short in his 
accounts in a very large sum, ten thousand talents, estimated 
to represent nine million dollars. Justice laid hold upon the 
debtor and was about to execute its penalty when he appealed 
for mercy and extension of time in which to make 
good the deficiency. The king was compassionate, forbore 
the collection of the debt and let the servant go free. 

This is our Lord's illustration of the proper exercise of 
mercy. The one thus dealt with does not represent the world 
of sinners, Adam and his race, for whose deliverance 
from the penalty a ransom price is demanded from justice. 
This parable is often thus used improperly against the 
Bible argument of the teaching of the ransom, that the death 
penalty against Adam and his race could not be lifted or set 
aside except by the payment of the ransom price, the corresponding 
price, our Lord's death. That this is not the teaching 
is clearly shown by the statement, "The Kingdom of 
Heaven is likened unto a certain king which would make a 
reckoning with his servants," etc. This declaration respecting 
the Kingdom of Heaven lifts the parable entirely out of 
connection with the world in general, which is not either in 
embryo or otherwise the Kingdom of Heaven: it definitely 
locates the parable in the Church, and these servants of the 
king as amongst those who have already been justified 
through faith in Christ and who have already made consecration 
of themselves to the Lord and become thus his 
servants entrusted with his goods. The signification of this 
feature of the parable, then, is that if any of the Lord's people, 
his disciples, come short they have a throne of grace 
and mercy to which they may approach that they may 
"obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:16. 

THE DEBT OF A FELLOW-SERVANT 

As representing the wrong course, the reprehensible 
course of some, the Lord in the parable before us pictures 
the forgiven officer as going forth from his king's presence 
with the latter's kind words still ringing in his ears and in 
the exercise of his unmerited freedom, and, finding a fellow-servant 
who owed him an hundred pence— a small bet 

probably representing not more than a hundred dollars proportionately 
in our money and time. Instead of a proper and 
generous feeling toward his fellow-servant, instead of sympathy 
and love for him corresponding to that which had 

R3802 : page 199 

been bestowed by the king upon himself, this servant caught 



the lesser debtor by the throat saying, "Pay me that thou 

owest." The fellow-servant used toward him the very same 

words that he had used to the king, saying, "Have mercy 

upon me and I will pay thee all." But he did not, but cast 

him into a prison. He was hardhearted, not at all after the 

likeness of his generous master, the king. Even his fellow-servants 

recognized this; they felt a pity for the unfortunate 

one and told it unto their lord. They knew well enough the 

king's generous disposition to be sure that he would not 

favor such an intemperate exercise of justice. 

The king sent for his officer and upbraided him for the 
matter, saying, I remitted thy debt because thou besoughtest 
me; I showed mercy to you. Should you not also have 
shown mercy to your fellow-servant? The question was left 
without an answer— the answer was clearly enough implied. 
He who had received so great mercy should have been 
moved with compassion toward a fellow-servant in a small 
affair. The king was wroth, was angry, with that servant, 
justly so. He had proven himself unworthy of the mercy 
bestowed upon him. Nor was it too late yet to punish him 
for the matter, for his debt had merely been remitted or set 
aside and not blotted out. Thus it is with all of the Lord's 
people; we are dealt with on the basis of faith; God is in earnest 
if we are in earnest. Our blemishes and shortcomings will 
not be permitted to stand between us and the glorious things to 
which we have been called if we are faithful to the extent 
of our ability, and if as a part of that faithfulness we have 
the Spirit of Christ, for if we have not the Spirit of Christ, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of forgiveness, gentleness, etc., 
we are none of his. 

It is in line with this that the Apostle writes that sins 
shall be blotted out at the second coming of Christ. (Acts 3:19.) 
They will be blotted out when in the resurrection 
we come forth as New Creatures, sown in weakness, raised 
in power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown natural or 
human bodies, raised spiritual bodies, glorious. Then that 
which is perfect having come, all the imperfections and 
blemishes will be fully blotted out, never to be revived either 
by the Lord or others. But meantime, while we have our 
standing of faith, our blemishes are merely covered while 
we are permitted to give a demonstration of the loyalty and 
sincerity of our consecration and earnestness of desire to 
walk in the footsteps of the Lord. 

WHAT THE UNMERCIFUL MAY EXPECT 

Our Lord, after concluding the parable, makes a direct 
application of it to his disciples, not to the world, although 
in a certain sense or degree there is a general principle 
expressed which is applicable to the world in proportion as 
each comes under enlightenment and instruction. Our Lord 
says, "So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you if 
you from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their 
trespasses." How solemn these words, how clear cut, how 
unmistakable their import. In no uncertain terms they assure 
us that whatever our faith, whatever our works, they 



all amount to nothing if we do not attain to that spirit of 

love which is merciful, generous, long suffering, patient toward 

those who do injury to us, whether they be brethren 

of whom we might expect the more, or whether they be 

enemies of the world from whom we must expect less, consideration. 

Mercy is an element of love, and Love is the 

fulfilling of the whole law of God. 

The propriety of the Lord in thus dealing with us is 
evident. He is seeking a special class for the Kingdom— 
to be associates with our Lord Jesus in the great work of 
ruling and blessing the world. Only those who possess the 
divine character of patience, forbearance, sympathy, compassion, 
mercy, love, could possibly be suited to the divine 
purpose in respect to the great work of blessing all the families 
of the earth. We are accepted in Christ because of 
our profession that we love these qualities in him and desire 
to be copies of God's dear Son. If we fail to improve 
the various lessons and opportunities afforded by the Lord, 
to cultivate this character, then in the same proportion we 
fail to make our calling and election sure. 

The king delivered the unmerciful servant to the tormentors. 
Such was the custom of oriental countries at that 
time and to some extent still. We are not to understand 
that our Lord had sympathy with those barbarous customs, 
but that he was speaking to the people from the standpoint 
of custom which they would understand. Elsewhere the 
Scriptures assure us that any who are the true servants of 
the Lord and who fail to come into accord with his Spirit 
willingly, will be turned over to Satan, to tribulation, to hard 
experience, that by these they may be profited and learn to appreciate 
things from the Lord's standpoint. (1 Cor. 5:4,6.) For 
instance, Revelation 7 first speaks of the little flock, the 
Bride class, as composed of 144,000— the nucleus of which 
were Natural Israelites, in whom was no guile, and who became 
the nucleus of spiritual Israel, and to whose numbers 
since throughout the Gospel age the Lord is gathering those 
from amongst the Gentiles who enter into covenant relationship 
with himself and manifest his Spirit. Aside from 
these so selected, the same symbolical picture shows us a 
great company whose number is known to no man— whose 
number was not predestinated— these are out of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue. These, unlike the 144,000, do 
not sit with Christ in the throne, but are pictured as being 
before the throne. These have not, like the others, kept 
their garments unspotted from the world, have not had the 
Spirit of Christ dwelling in them richly, so that his merit constituted 
the robe of forgiveness for them without blemish, that 
by a wrong spirit and a wrong course they have bedraggled 
their robes, and therefore, we are told, they must wash them 
and make them white in the blood of the Lamb, and this 
washing is represented as being done in "great tribulation." 
These tribulations correspond to the torments of the parable 
upon the servant who did not exercise toward his fellows 
the spirit of mercy. As again it is stated, "Blessed are the 
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy."— Matt. 5:7. 



"FORGIVE US AS WE FORGIVE OTHERS" 

It will be remembered that in our Lord's prayer he 
sets forth this principle for our instruction and guidance, 
that we must not expect of the heavenly Father mercy for 
our shortcomings and blemishes and continuance in his favor 
and ultimately join t-heirship in his Kingdom, unless we 
cultivate in ourselves the same spirit. How beautifully and 
how simply the Lord states this matter in the prayer, "Forgive 

R3803 : page 200 

us our debts as we forgive our debtors." (Matt. 6:12.) 

How emphatically the Lord states it again, saying, 

"If ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father 

will also forgive you, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses 

neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." 

(Matt. 6:14,15.) These trespasses, be it noted again, do 

not refer to the one original sin on account of which condemnation 

of death passed upon the whole human family 

and on account of which Christ died and on account of 

which the curse is ultimately to be rolled from every member 

of the race so that there shall be no more curse. (Rev. 22:3.) 

These trespasses are our own individual shortcomings 

and blemishes which we have inherited and which the 

Lord is very willing to overlook and excuse for those who 

will comply with the conditions of their Covenant and be 

followers of the Lord Jesus, filled with his Spirit and striving 

to walk in his steps. 

Archbishop Hare has represented the attitude of the 
unforgiving many as implying their prayer to the Lord 
thus,— 

"O, Lord, I have sinned against thee many times; I have 
been often forgetful of thy goodness; I have broken thy law; 
I have committed many secret sins. Deal with me, I beseech 
thee, O Lord, even as I deal with my neighbor. He hath not 
offended me one hundredth part as much as I have offended 
thee, but I cannot forgive him. He has been very ungrateful 
to me, but not one hundredth part as ungrateful as 
I have been to thee, yet I cannot overlook such base ingratitude. 
Deal with me, O Lord, I beseech thee, as I deal with 
him. I remember and treasure up every little trifle which 
shows how ill he has behaved to me. Deal with me, I 
beseech thee, O Lord, as I deal with him." 



R3803 : page 200 

WHO IS MY NEIGHBOR? 

-LUKE 10:25-37.~JULY 15.- 

"Golden Text:— "Blessed are the merciful, 
for they shall obtain mercy."— Matt. 5:7. 



JESUS was a teacher and expounder of the Law to the 
common people, but he did not class himself with the 
Scribes and Doctors of the Law amongst the Jews. 
He had a different view of the Law from theirs and taught 
in a different manner. The common people heard him 
gladly, whereas the Jewish Doctors of the Law did not appeal 
to the common people at all or attempt to teach them, 
but merely discussed the great problems of divine law 
amongst themselves and with the more ascetic of the people 
—the Pharisees. 

The common people, although they heard the Lord 
gladly, did not clearly comprehend his teachings, for he 
spoke to them in parables and dark sayings to the intent 
that the mass might not understand, but that the specially 
zealous Israelites indeed might be attracted to closer study 
and inquiry. To these he explained the parables, saying, 
"To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, 
but to all those without [outsiders, not specially interested 
followers] these things are spoken in parables." (Mark 4:11.) 
Nevertheless, there was something very attractive in 
the Master's style, so that even those who did not fully comprehend 
his teachings said, "Never man spake like this 
man"; and again we read, "They wondered at the gracious 
words that proceeded out of his mouth," "For he taught 
them as one having authority [as one who understood his 
subject thoroughly] and not as the Scribes [not doubtfully]." 
-John 7:46; Luke 4:22; Matt. 7:29. 

For this reason jealousy of Jesus sprang up amongst 
the Doctors of the Law. To them he was a rival teacher, 
and accordingly they sought to entrap him, with a view to 
exposing him to ridicule before his followers, whom they 
recognized as "unlearned men." But in no case did they succeed; 
in every instance recorded the Lord's wisdom was too 
great for them— he entrapped them in their own arguments. 
The present lesson is an illustration of this. One of the 
Doctors of the Law, evidently thinking that our Lord's 
teachings along the lines of love and mercy were contrary 
to the rigid lines of justice as laid down in the Law, thought 
to entrap our Lord by a question. He would ask him upon 
what terms he could have eternal life. He expected Jesus 
to answer, "Eternal life will be given to all who manifest a 
God-like, loving, generous character," or that he would say, 
"You can have eternal life by becoming my disciple and 
practising my teachings." Thereupon this Doctor of the 
Law would at once call attention to the fact that the teachings 
of Jesus abrogated the Law, made it null and void- 
that he ignored the Law. 

"WISE AS A SERPENT, HARMLESS AS A DOVE" 

Our Lord answered this Scribe thoroughly out of his 
own mouth: he said to him, "You are a teacher of the Law; 
give us your statement of what the Law says respecting how 
eternal life may be obtained?" This was a pointed reply, 
and the lawyer was fully prepared to answer it, for, What 
saith the Law? was a common question amongst the Jews 



who quoted from the Law. (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18.) This 

was the very definition which our Lord a short time before 

quoted to the rich young ruler who came to him on one occasion. 

The lawyer evidently repeated a well-known formula 

of the Law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 

all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and 

thy neighbor as thyself." Jesus replied, "Thou has answered 

right: this do and thou shalt live"— have eternal 

life. 

THE LAW VERSUS THE GOSPEL 

Why did Jesus thus refer to the Law? Why did he 
not avail himself of this opportunity for preaching the Gospel? 
Why did he not say to the lawyer— "The only way to 
obtain eternal life is through faith in me, followed by a 
full consecration to walk in my footsteps as my disciple"? 
Why did he not tell the lawyer, "There is no other name 
given under heaven whereby men must be saved but the 
name of Jesus"? Why did he not tell him, "He that hath 
the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son shall not see 
life" ?-Acts 4:12; 1 John 5:12. 

We answer that this would have been too strong meat 
for the lawyer in his condition of mind. It was necessary 
that first he should realize his own inability to keep the 
full letter of the divine Law, so that he might be prepared 

R3803 : page 201 

to look for divine mercy through Jesus. The difficulty with 

the Pharisees and Scribes was that they were pretending 

to keep the Law, pretending that they were justified by it, 

pretending to gain eternal life by it, although they very 

well knew that they all died like other men, and knew also, 

when they would reflect upon the subject, that the divine 

Law was so high, so grand, so complete, that in their weak 

and fallen condition they were unable to meet all of its requirements 

perfectly. 

There are some people of the same kind today, who 
are ready to acknowledge that God has a perfect standard 
and that none can expect eternal life except as they harmonize 
with that standard; and many today, as well as 
formerly amongst the Jews, believe that they are sufficiently 
near the divine standard to have eternal life, and are therefore 
not looking for any Savior— not looking for a Redeemer 
to pay a ransom price for them and to grant them immunity 
and forgiveness of sin and reconciliation through him to 
the Father— the covering of their blemishes. It is necessary 
for all such to learn first the lesson that divine justice has 
but one standard and that is a very high one. When they 
find how high God's standard is and how imperfect are 
their best endeavors to measure up to their requirements, 
then and not until then do they begin to look for help from 
the Lord in the attainment of life eternal. The Lord wished 
the lawyer to learn this lesson, and therefore exacted from 
him a statement of what the Law required. 



The lawyer did not stop to haggle over what would be 
included in loving God with his entire heart, soul, strength and 
mind. Some one might claim to be loving and serving God and 
others might doubt the truthfulness of the claim, though unable 
to prove anything, since only the Lord and the man's own 
heart could judge perfectly in this matter. The lawyer 
passed over that great question as though it were nothing, 
as though it were settled, but had he sought to critically examine 
what such a complete consecration to the Lord would 
signify he would doubtless have found himself far short of 
its standard. 

Let us not pass the question too quickly or too lightly 
—let us know that to love the Lord with all our heart 
would mean that the sum of all our affections would center 
upon the Lord, so that our love for him would far excel all 
of our love for the dear ones of the home and the family and 
of the whole world. To love the Lord with all our soul 
would signify with all our being— to manifest our love not 
only by our words and looks, by our praises, but by our services 
and all of our conduct in life, everything testifying 
that God is first in our affections and in all of life's interests. 
Thirdly, to love him with all our strength would signify 
that time and talent and influence would all be at the service 

R3804: page 201 

of our God, that in everything we would be ready to be 
used, spent, in glorifying his name, in serving his cause as we 
might understand it to be his will. Fourth, to love our 
Lord with all our mind would seem to imply that we are to 
intellectually attempt to appreciate the Lord, to understand 
his divine laws and to enter into heart sympathy with them, 
so that our service and worship would be the more intelligent, 
after the kind described by our Lord when he said, 
"They that worship him must worship him in spirit and in 
truth"— intelligently. 

"LOVE THY NEIGHBOR AS THYSELF" 

The Scribe, passing over the obligations to the Lord, 
seemed to realize that his daily conduct would condemn him 
as a violator of the latter part of his own definition of the 
Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." He apparently 
recognized this as his most vulnerable point, and 
that the Lord had entrapped him in his own answer. He 
knew how in his daily life he was not loving his neighbor as 
himself— that he was making a wide discrimination between 
those of his own class and the common people, the publicans 
and the sinners; and that even in his present endeavor to entrap 
Jesus he was not loving him as himself, as his neighbor, but 
treating him as an opponent. He felt that, like others of his 
class, he had a haughty, disdainful attitude toward the lower 
classes of his own race. He was skilled in the Law, however, 
and this was not a new point for him to evade. He had the 
same explanation of the matter that was common to others 
of the Scribes and Pharisees, namely, that their neighbors 



whom they were, according to the Law, to love as themselves, 
were those who belonged to their class, to their set, to their 
station in life. Apparently, therefore, with considerable 
confidence he replied to Jesus, "But who is my neighbor?" 
as though he would say, "That is a point, I presume, upon 
which we might possibly differ. I think that I keep the 
Law when I love and respect and fellowship those of my 
own class, and treat others with more or less of disdain. 
How could you apply the Law of Moses differently? I feel 
sure that you will agree that the Law meant that each person 
was to consider those of his own class as his neighbors, 
and to love them and cooperate with them and not with others 
of the outside world." 

With marvellous wisdom the Lord framed a parable, 
such as the Scribe of the Law well knew might take place 
any day. He pictured the road between Jerusalem and Jericho, 
a bridle-path, in some places quite steep, passing 
through a gorge in the mountain— a vicinity infested with 
robbers, who lived in the numerous caves, and who not infrequently 
attacked passengers. Even today it is the custom 
for travelers to have an armed escort of Arabs on this journey 
to Jericho. Our Lord pictured a traveler on this road 
beset by the robbers, beaten into helplessness, stripped of 
his clothing. He pictured a priest passing by, seeing the 
man and hastening on, lest he also might be beset by the 
robbers; similarly a Levite passes by, unwilling to spend 
the time necessary to render assistance. Then a man of 
Samaria comes along, and, moved with sympathy, assists the 
injured one, binding up his wounds; and finally, taking 
him on his own beast to the nearest inn, he cared for him 
over night and made some provision for his further care. 

The force of our Lord's illustration is only seen when 
it is remembered that the Levites were specially set apart 
for holy service to the Lord as instructors of the people, to 
guide them by word and by example in the ways of the 
Lord, and when it is further remembered that the priests, 
also belonging to this tribe, were a special family chosen of 
the Lord for the very highest service toward himself and 
toward the people of Israel. The picture is still further 
heightened when we recall that the Samaritans were a mixed 
people, whom the Jews despised and with whom they would 
have no dealings.— John 4:9. 

R3804 : page 202 

With these things in mind mark the Master's question, 
"Which of these three was neighbor of the man who fell 
amongst thieves?" There was only one answer for the lawyer 
to make. He himself belonged to the Levite class condemned 
by the parable. The reply was, "He that showed 
mercy on him." Our Lord approved of that answer and 
responded, "Go thou and do likewise"— go and show mercy, 
go and understand that any man in the world, friend or 
foe, is your neighbor and is to be loved and served by you 
as you may have opportunity. As you would have him do 
for you do even so for him; love him and serve him as 



yourself, as you would have him love and serve you under 
reversed conditions. 

THE GOLDEN RULE 

We have found some of the Lord's people disposed to 
evade the force of this requirement of the Law and its illustration 
by the Lord's parable by saying, "Yes, the Samaritan 
who showed mercy to the wounded man was indeed his 
neighbor, while the priest and the Levite who did not show 
mercy to him he should not consider to be his neighbors; 
hence the wounded upon recovery, should he ever have any 
dealings with that Samaritan who assisted him, should love 
him as himself, should be willing to lay down his life in his 
service. Whereas the other two who did not do neighborly 
acts ought not to be considered as his neighbors, and he 
should not try to love them as himself. 

We answer that this is a distortion of our Lord's language. 
Indeed, he was seeking to counteract this very 
thought, which was common to the Jews, for it was a proverb 
amongst them that they should be loyal to neighbors but 
bitter to enemies. The word neighbors signifies those who are 
near, and the Scribes and Pharisees were in the habit of applying 
this to those who were near in sympathy, in sentiment, 
in faith, in sectarian relationship. Thus a Pharisee 
would gladly serve another Pharisee, and a Scribe would 
gladly serve another Scribe, from a clannish, selfish spirit, 
regarding each other as neighbors in the sense of the Law, 
and that others of a different class were more or less 
opponents, either to go unloved or, if they oppose themselves, 
to be hated. 

As Christians we must take a much higher view of the 
matter than this. We remember our Lord's words in opposition 
to this very thought. He said, "Ye have heard that it 
hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine 
enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for 
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that 
ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." 
(Matt. 5:43-45.) Any who will not come to this standard 
of love, not only for friends but also for enemies, cannot 
long be recognized by God as his children. 

Our Lord originated the Golden Rule as a full statement 
of the divine will, which must govern all who would 
be his disciples. That Golden Rule does not say that we 
shall love as brethren those who have done kindness for us. 
Our Lord condemned that selfish kind of love when he said, 
"If ye love them that love you what thank have you? Do 
not even the publicans and sinners the same?" Such an interpretation, 
therefore, as would make this parable to teach 
that we should love as our neighbors those who have hazarded 
their lives for us would be far beneath the teachings 
of our Master, and, he says, would be on a parity with the 
usual sentiments of sinners. 

As followers of the Redeemer we are to have the much 
higher standard; we are to recognize every one who is in 



adversity and needing our help as our neighbor, whom we 
should love sympathetically to the extent of being ready to 
do for him or her whatever service we might be able to 
render, to the extent that we should wish that person to do 
for us if we were in his difficulty. To whatever extent we 
can get this high standard of love, sympathy, cooperation, 
generosity, kindly feeling in control of our hearts and to be 
the rule of our conduct, in that proportion surely we will be 
the more Godlike, the more Christlike, for, as our dear Redeemer 
remarked, God is kind even to the unthankful. 

LOVE YOUR ENEMIES 

Our Lord's requirements of us as his disciples go beyond 
merely the loving of a neighbor. We must have at 
least a sympathetic love for our enemies, so that we would 
not only not endeavor to injure them by word or deed, but 
that we would be ready and glad to assist them as might be 
in our power. No one, however, is to suppose that the Lord 
means that we are to love our enemies as we love the Lord 
himself, nor even as we love our brethren. Our love for the 
Lord and for the brethren is love of the very highest type- 
love which appreciates the principles represented in our 
heavenly Father's character, which all who are truly his are 
seeking to copy. 

Our love for our enemies and for many of our neighbors 
must necessarily be along lines of their characters: their 
hopes and their plans are very different from those which 
we have adopted. As is our Lord's, so our love for them 
must be of the sympathetic kind, even as is the love of God— 
"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, 
that whosoever believeth on him might not perish." God 
does not love the world with a love of fellowship, nor are 
we to do so. Like him we are to have the love of sympathy 
for the world. Realizing its fallen and depraved condition 
we are to be glad to do all in our power for its rescue, for 
its comfort along lines of justice and mercy. 

There seems to be a limitation to the love commanded 
by the Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself"— not 
better than thyself. Hence if it came to the place where a 
neighbor's life was in jeopardy, and we could assist him only 
by the sacrifice of our own life, it would not be a requirement 
of the divine law of love that we should sacrifice our 
life for his— that would be loving him better than ourselves, 
and therefore more than the divine requirement. Neither 
should we expect a neighbor to love us better than himself, 
so that he would sacrifice his life for us. Should he attempt 
to do so it would be our proper attitude of mind to 
hinder it, not to allow him to work a permanent disadvantage 
to himself, more than we would have been willing 
and glad to have done for him. It is in this particular that 
our Lord's course in the sacrifice of his life on our behalf 
transcends anything that was required of the Law— in giving 
his life a ransom for many, he did more than was required 
by the Law. It is for this reason that it is denominated a 



R3805 : page 203 

sacrifice. To do the whole Law was his duty, but when he 
went beyond this, and gave his life a ransom price for mankind, 
that was a sacrifice, and as a sacrifice it was appreciated 
by the Father and specially rewarded with more than 
everlasting life. And the same rule applies to us, for as he 
was so are we in this world— we are to walk in his footsteps. 
-1 John 4:17. 

The demands of the Law are still to do to our neighbor 
as we would have him do to us. We are to do nothing less 
than this to anybody; but as followers of the Lord, imbued 
with his spirit of sacrifice, we are joyfully to lay down our 
lives for the brethren— in harmony with the divine program 
which is now selecting the little flock, the household of 
faith, as sacrificers with Jesus, to be by and by joint-heirs 
with him in his Kingdom and in its great work of blessing 
and rejuvenating the world. It is very necessary that we 
have clear views respecting this subject of the demands of 
the Law, the demands of justice upon us toward any creature, 
and also as respects what would properly come in as a 
part of our sacrifice. 

"THE LAW IS FULFILLED IN US" 

We noticed in the beginning of this lesson that our 
Lord gave the Scribe instruction in the Law instead of 
preaching to him the gospel of grace. Now let us note 
that the Lord applies to his followers both the Law and the 
Gospel. God has but one standard, but one Law, and never 
will abolish it. The Law Covenant indeed, after serving its 
purpose, ceased; but the Law of God, upon which that Covenant 
was based, will never fail. We as well as the Jews 
are commanded to love the Lord with all our heart, soul, 
mind and strength, and our neighbor as ourselves. This is 
the standard before us as well as before the Jew. The Jew 
could not keep it— he found himself deficient not only in 
respect to his treatment of his neighbor, but deficient also in 
the fulness of his love for his Creator, which must overbalance 
all other loves and manifest itself in all the conduct of 
life. 

Only our Lord Jesus could or did keep that love in the 
absolute perfection of its very letter and spirit. However 
much a Jew living before our Lord's time might have had 
the right disposition of heart as respects the Law, because 
unable to come up to its requirements he could not have 
eternal life. Our position is different. Our Lord Jesus, 
having kept the Law, gave his life a sacrifice for Adam and 
for all of his race; and we who now come to a knowledge 
of this fact, and by faith accept it, have a standing with 
God in Christ, so that our best endeavors to keep the Law 
are supplemented by the merits of Christ and thus made acceptable 
to God. In other words, if we do our best in the 
matter of loving God supremely with our hearts, with our 
whole being, with our strength, with our minds, and our 
neighbors to the extent of our ability as ourselves, God will 



accept that good endeavor as though it were perfection, 
making up for its defects through the merit of Christ's sacrifice. 
Thus the Apostle tells us, "The righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us who are walking not after the flesh 
[not seeking to please ourselves and our fallen dispositions 
and attributes] but after the Spirit [to the best of our ability 
seeking to be in accord with the very spirit of the divine 
Law]." 

THE GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text reminds us of the Apostle's statement, 
"He who loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen?" (1 John 4:20.) In 
other words, the measure of the love which fills our hearts 
will find expression toward our fellow-creatures who have 
need of our sympathy and attention, and if we show ourselves 
deficient here it will imply a deficiency of our love 
for our Creator. If, on the contrary, we are merciful to others, 
generous, kind, taking pleasure in doing what we can for the 
relief of our fellow-creatures, especially to the household of 
faith, this will be an indication of the spirit which our Lord 
will appreciate and own if it be accompanied by a trust in 
the precious blood of Christ. Such merciful ones of the 
Lord's followers shall obtain mercy at the Lord's hands. He 
will deal gently with them, forgiving their blemishes and 
weaknesses in proportion as they have this spirit of generosity, 
forgiveness, toward those who trespass against them. 



R3805 : page 203 

"LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY." 

-LUKE 11:1-13.-JULY 22.- 

MANY are the unscriptural views respecting 

prayer. It is well that we notice that our 

Lord never taught the multitudes to pray, 

nor intimated that they should pray— even though the 

multitudes with whom he was in contact were nominally 

people of God. Even with his consecrated disciples 

the Lord waited until they asked him for instruction 

on the subject. Our Lord's declaration to the 

woman of Samaria was, "God is a spirit, and they who 

worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." 

Any other worship, any other prayer, is a mockery 

which God not only does not invite but especially reprimands, 

saying to those who are not desirous of doing 

his will, "What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, 

or that thou shouldst take my covenant in thy mouth? 

Seeing thou hatest instruction and castest my 

words behind thee." (Psa. 50:16,17.) And again, "Forasmuch 

as this people draw nigh me with their mouth, 

and with their lips do honor me, but have removed 



their heart far from me. ..Therefore, behold, I will 
proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, 
even a marvellous work and a wonder."— Isa. 29:13,14. 

From this standpoint the privilege of prayer is a 
very wonderful one: it implies that the suppliant is on 
terms of intimate acquaintance with the great Creator 
of the universe, so that he is welcomed into the divine 
presence and heart. In accord with this the symbolical 
representation is that the prayers of the saints of God 
ascend before him as a sweet incense— the heavenly 
Father is pleased to receive the humblest worship and 
reverent petitions of his child adopted into his family 
through Jesus Christ. 

R3805 : page 204 

OUR FATHER IN HEAVEN 

Only those who have become God's children by forsaking 
sin and laying hold upon Christ as their Savior 
are accorded the privilege of approaching the throne 
of grace that "they may obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need." (Heb. 4:16.) In the world, therefore, 
only those who are accepted in the Beloved are 
privileged to call Jehovah God by the endearing name, 
"Our Father who art in heaven." The attempt to thus 
approach God implies (1) a faith in the divine being; 
(2) a realization of dependence upon him; (3) a faith 
that a way of reconciliation with the Father has been 
effected through the Redeemer; (4) a realization that 
the great Creator no longer condemns the suppliant, 
but accepts him as his son. More than this, it implies 
that the suppliant recognizes the fact that there are 
other sons of God who, like himself, have fled from 
sin and been adopted into God's family— the petition is 
not "My Father," but "Our Father in heaven." Therefore, 
whoever thus prays intelligently must have interest 
in and concern for all the interests of the family of 
God. Whatever of selfishness he might have had formerly 
he must divest himself of when he comes to the 
Father, and must realize himself as merely one of the 
favored class of sons thus privileged. It is in harmony 
with this thought that all of the Lord's truly consecrated 
people have special pleasure when permitted to 
approach the throne of grace together, whether but 
two or three or in larger numbers. 

In proportion as the Lord's people grow in grace, 
in knowledge and in love, they will grow in appreciation 
of the great privilege of prayer. Not that prayer 
will take the place of the study of the divine Word, but 
that realizing more and more from the Word something 
of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
divine mercy and provision, the true children of God 
have comfort of heart and joy in going to the throne of 
grace to give thanks unto the Lord for all his mercies, 
to commune with him respecting their trials and difficulties, 



and to assure him of their loving confidence in 

the gracious promises of his Word, in the exceeding 

riches of his grace, and in his wisdom, love and power 

to fulfil toward them and in them all his gracious 

promises. 

The more the Lord's people advance in knowledge 
of him the more they will appreciate the fact that the 
divine arrangement is broader and deeper and higher 
than anything they could suggest, so that such are 
granted liberty to ask what they will with the assurance 
that it will be done. The Lord well knows that this 
class will ask that his will be done; hence the promise 
is made only to those who abide in Christ and who have 
his Word of promise abiding richly in them. All such 
learn, before attaining this station and liberty, that as 
the heavens are higher than the earth so are the 

R3806 : page 204 

Lord's ways and provisions higher than our conceptions 
and every way to be preferred. Hence, while 
praying to the best of their ability in harmony with the 
promises of the Word, these would always include the 
sentiment expressed by our Redeemer, "Nevertheless, 
not my will but thine be done." 

"PRAY WITHOUT CEASING" 

"Pray without ceasing. In everything give thanks." 
(I Thess. 5:17,18.) The advanced Christian is to be 
so fully in accord with the Father and the Son and the 
divine program, The Plan of the Ages, that his entire 
life will be a prayer and a song in respect to every affair 
of life. He will have in his mind primarily, What 
is the will of God in this matter? "whether we eat or 
drink or whatsoever we do let us do all to the glory of 
God." The heart that is thus continually in all of life's 
affairs looking for divine direction is thus continuously 
in a prayer attitude, and no other condition is proper 
to the Christian— "In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths;" "Delight thyself also in 
the Lord and he shall give thee the desires of thine 
heart."— Prov. 3:6; Psa. 37:4. 

But while thus in the prayer attitude continuously 
we must not neglect the privilege of a more formal approach 
to the throne of grace— on bended knee, privately 
and alone. Whoever does not embrace this 
privilege misses a portion of the great blessing which 
the Lord has arranged for his benefit and assistance in 
walking in the narrow way. Our Master spent seasons 
in prayer alone, and surely all of his disciples may 
well follow his example in this as well as in other matters 
to advantage. As our Lord sometimes prayed in 
the presence of his disciples, as is evidenced by their 
recording his words, so all of his followers are to realize 
that they have a special privilege of fellowship in 



prayer, praying to one another, speaking to one another 
in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and in petitions 
to the throne of grace.— Eph. 5:19; 
I Cor. 14:14-17. 

While family prayer is not specifically taught in 
the Scriptures we cannot doubt its appropriateness under 
some conditions. True, the natural family is separate 
and distinct from the family of the Lord, but 
where the natural family has been reared in the "nurture 
and admonition of the Lord" it is scarcely supposable 
that the minor children would be so lacking of 
reverence as not to have pleasure in bowing with their 
parents for the worship of the Creator. Where the 
children are grown so that they have discretion for 
themselves, if they be not pleased to join in the worship, 
in our opinion the Lord will be all the better 
pleased that they be not coerced, for he seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth. 
Where the husband or wife is not a child of God, unbegotten 
of the Spirit, it would be inappropriate that 
he or she should lead in the worship, addressing the 
throne of grace. The more we recognize the divine 
limitations on this subject the more will we and those 
with whom we are in contact appreciate prayer as a 
great privilege, which is accorded only to those who 
can with sincere hearts address Jehovah as our Father, 
and these can be only such as have accepted the Lord 
Jesus as their Savior, for "No man cometh unto the 
Father but by me."— John 14:6. 

As in the type none but the priests offered incense 
before the Lord, the teaching would seem to be that 
only the Royal Priesthood, the members of the body of 

R3806 : page 205 

Christ, have this privilege in the present time. Nevertheless, 
we might reasonably suppose that the children 
of believers, who have not yet reached the deciding 
point of loyalty or disloyalty to the Lord, would properly 
enough be privileged to approach the throne of 
grace through the relationship of their consecrated 
parents. We might even suppose that justified believers, 
who have not reached the point of making a consecration 
of themselves to the Lord, would have the 
right, the privilege, of addressing the Redeemer in 
prayer: and yet we know of no Scripture that positively 
says or indirectly implies that an unconsecrated believer 
has any acceptance at the throne of grace, or any 
standing whatever before the Father as amongst those 
who may address him in the petition, "Our Father 
which art in heaven." 

"HALLOWED BE THY NAME" 

The more it is recognized that the privilege of 
prayer is an exclusive one the more those enjoying the 



privilege will be inclined to use it in a most reverent 
manner. The kings of earth make resolutions respecting 
times, seasons, dress, etc., regulating those ushered 
into their presence; and all who have a proper appreciation 
of the majesty of the King Eternal, invisible, 
the only true God, will approach in a worshipful, 
reverent spirit, implied in the expression, "Hallowed 
be thy name." Holy and to be reverenced is our God; 
his name stands for everything that is just and wise 
and loving. 

"THY KINGDOM COME" 

"Thy will be done, as in heaven so in earth." These 
words, not found in the older MS. in Luke, are found 
in the Matthew MS., and are, therefore, properly to be 
considered a part of the petition. Be it noted, however, 
that while this petition as it stands is appropriate 
enough as a prayer, it was evidently not the Lord's 
intention that it should be continually used as the only 
petition at the throne of grace, but rather he gave it as 
a sample. The various items of the Lord's prayer 
should therefore be to the Lord's people a suggestion 
of the general character of their petitions, and not be 
understood as binding their terms, their expressions, 
their words. 

The thoughts of the true disciples are directed to 
the fact that the present condition of sin and death is 
not to be everlasting, that God has provided for and 
promised a glorious kingdom through his Son, and the 
Church his Bride, under which evil will be conquered 
and brought under complete subjection to righteousness. 
Those who are in proper relationship of heart to the 
Lord must recognize this fact, and be so separated from 
the spirit of this world that they will long for the installation 
of the reign of righteousness, even though 
they will know that this will imply the overthrow of 
present institutions. Their hearts are so in accord 
with the Lord that they are out of accord with every 
form and institution and vine not of the Father's right-hand 
planting. (Isa. 60:21.) Longing for the Kingdom 
that will bless the world, they also long for the promised 
privilege of being joint-heirs with their Redeemer 
as members of that Kingdom class which shall bless 
the world and uplift it out of sin-and-death conditions. 

GIVE US OUR DAILY BREAD 

"Give us day by day our daily bread," or "our 
needful bread" [Am. Rev.]. There is no attempt here 
to supplicate delicacies, but merely an expression of 
trust in the Lord and confidence that he will provide, 
in harmony with his promises that our bread and water 
shall be sure. Indeed when we remember our Master's 
words, that the heathen have in mind what they shall 
eat, what they shall drink and wherewithal they shall 



be clothed, but the heavenly Father knoweth what 

things we have need of, we perceive that to the Spirit-begotten 

and advanced Christian these words respecting 

daily bread imply more particularly the spiritual 

than the earthly food. Provision for all our necessities, 

both temporal and spiritual, according to divine 

wisdom, is briefly summed up in this expression. 

To suppose that the Lord here is merely referring 
to the natural food would imply that the petitioners 
were merely natural men, whereas we have seen that 
the prayer was taught only to those who were reckonedly 
New Creatures in Christ by a covenant to walk in his 
steps in the narrow way. It must be understood, therefore, 
that it is the New Creature that is offering the petition, 
and this will imply that it is the nourishment of 
the New Creature that is chiefly under consideration— 
with whatever provision for temporal necessities the 
heavenly Father may see best. This is distinctly 
brought to our attention in the last verse of this lesson, 
wherein the heavenly Father is represented as dispensing 
the holy Spirit— the spiritual blessings and experiences 
which develop in his children his own holy Spirit, 
the Spirit of the Truth, the Spirit of the Lord. 

GOD'S MERCY PROPORTIONATE TO OURS 

"Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive everyone 
that is indebted to us." The sins here referred to, 
or as in Matthew, "debts," are in no way related to 
original sin, which we are not to pray to have forgiven, 
but which the Father has already made provision to 
forgive unconditionally to those who accept Christ. 
Original sin is not forgivable, but God in his mercy 
provided a Redeemer, and we read, "Christ died for our 
sins according to the Scriptures." He is a propitiation 
for our sins, the Just for the unjust, to bring us to God. 
This prayer relates not, therefore, to that sin whose 
forgiveness permits us to approach God, and by 
covenant through Jesus to call him our Father. The 
sins mentioned in this prayer, or the "debts," are those 
which are ours after we have become New Creatures in 
Christ, children of the Highest. Because of our imperfections 
we cannot do the things which we would, 
the things which we know to be the perfect will of our 
Father in heaven. 

In a certain sense these are our debts or obligations 
to the Father from the time we start to walk in 
newness of life— not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 
Walking after the flesh we find that we cannot come up 
to the Spirit, hence the "debts." It is for the forgiveness 
of these that we are privileged to petition— matters 

R3807 : page 206 

of omission and commission not wilfully done, not 
intentionally omitted. In the divine arrangement the 



merit of Christ not only covered the sins that are past, 
but made provision for our weaknesses and blemishes 
en route for the Kingdom. God could indeed apply the 
merit of Christ to these debts and excuse us from them, 
and not require us to mention them at all, but for our 
advantage he has arranged it otherwise, that we must 
make application for the covering of these debts, for 
exoneration in the name of Jesus, and so doing we 
learn three lessons: (1) We learn to keep track of our 
blemishes, and are the better assisted, therefore, in 
the future in warring a good fight against them; (2) 
We are thus continually reminded of our dependence 
upon the merit of our Savior, the merit of the precious 
blood. (3) We are thereby assisted in being merciful, 
compassionate and generous toward others who may 
be our debtors in matters great or small. 

How just and how wise is the divine arrangement 
which requires of us, in applying for mercy, to pledge 
ourselves to the Lord that we also are merciful, forgiving 
to others, not attempting to exact justice from 
those with whom we have contact and who are under 
some obligation to us. This is a wise provision, in that 
it will assist us in the right direction, assist us in the 
development of character which the Lord can approve, 
and which would be meet for those who would be inheritors 
of the Kingdom. It will assist us in our 
endeavors to be copies of God's dear Son, and like 
unto our Father in heaven in the sentiments of our 
hearts at least. It is just, because it is not God's arrangement 
to simply show us favors above the remainder 
of mankind, except as we shall receive his mercies 
with proper appreciation, and with a desire to attain 
the condition which would be pleasing to him and 
which he would be pleased to reward with the everlasting 
life and the Kingdom glories. 

"DELIVER US FROM EVIL" 

These words are not in the original in Luke's account 
of the prayer, but they are found in Matthew's 
account, and hence are properly a part of the prayer. 
"Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the 
evil one." (R.V., Matt. 6:13.) This statement is a little 
confusing, for we have the assurance that "God 
tempteth no man." (Jas. 1:13.) The thought then 
seems to be that there is an evil one ever ready to attack 
the Lord's people to the extent that the Lord will 
grant the privilege, the opportunity, as in the case of 
Job. 

We remember, too, that trials, testings and temptations 
are necessary for our development as New Creatures, 
and since these are necessary and of divine 
arrangement or permission, it would not be appropriate 
for us to pray that the Lord would spare us from 
all trials and temptations, for, says the Apostle, "If 
ye be without chastisements then are ye not sons." 



(Heb. 12:8.) We must, therefore, paraphrase this 
statement in our thoughts and suppose it to mean, 
"Bring us not into temptation that would be too severe 
for us, or abandon us not in temptation; but deliver 
us from the evil one." This thought is in full accord 
with the entire testimony of the Word of God. The 
promise is, "He will not suffer us to be tempted above 
that we are able, but will with the temptation provide 
a way of escape." (I Cor. 10:13.) The evil one would 
indeed utterly destroy the Lord's consecrated ones, 
but he will not be permitted so to do. Thus far he 
may go but no farther. If God be thus for us who or 
what power can prevail against us— nothing shall by 
any means separate us from the love of God in Christ. 

"ASK AND IT SHALL BE GIVEN YOU" 

Although our Lord did not teach his disciples to 
pray until they requested instruction, this was evidently 
not because he was unwilling to assist them, but because 
he wished them to realize and desire further 
teaching. It may be argued by some that no one needs 
instruction in how to pray, but that thought is not 
borne out by this lesson. Evidently there are proper 
and improper prayers. We might as well say that no 
one needs instruction in singing or in playing music. 
We do sometimes say that singers and players are 
born with the talent, nevertheless the most talented 
musicians by instruction reach their proficiency. 

And so with prayer. We have already seen that 
great mistakes have been made as to who may pray 
and as to what may be properly prayed for, and we 
have already considered the Lord's outline respecting 
a proper form of prayer, beginning with ascriptions of 
praise and thanks and proceeding to expressions of 
confidence in God and the promises of his Kingdom, 
continuing with acknowledgments of our dependence 
upon his provisions day by day, and ending with expressions 
of confidence in his power and goodness to 
protect us and ultimately to deliver us. This is the 
general form which our Lord commends to us as proper 
in approaching the throne of grace. On the other 
hand, however, it is interesting for us to note that the 
Lord does not wait until we have become proficient in 
the use of language and in the form of expressing our 
petitions to him, but that so gracious and broad are his 
arrangements that we may come in imperfection and 
with stammering tongues to tell him of our devotion, 
our appreciation, our confidence, etc., in any manner 
that we please. The suggestion is, however, that in 
proportion as we appreciate the privilege of prayer, we 
will desire to use the privilege in the manner most acceptable 
to the great One whom we thus approach. 

Why should the Lord wish us to ask before he 
would give his blessing? For a wise purpose, we may 
be sure! He would have us feel our need, he would 



have us appreciate the privilege, he would have 
us look for the response, and in all these experiences 
he would develop us as his sons of the New Creation. 
Therefore we are to ask and seek and knock if 
we would find the riches of God's grace, and have 
opened to us more and more the wonderful privileges 
and mercies and blessings which he is so willing to 
give to us as we develop in character and in preparation 
for his mercies. 

R3807 : page 207 

It was to illustrate this that the Lord gave the parable 
of this lesson respecting the householder who was 
short of food for the entertainment of his visitors. He 
was represented as importunately urging upon his neighbor 
the necessities of the case, and ultimately thus succeeding. 
Our Lord instructs us that we should be so 
earnest in our desires for the Kingdom, for the honor 
of the Father's name, for the daily portion of the bread 
of life, for deliverance from the evil one, and for God's 
keeping power in every trouble, and in all of life's affairs 
his supervision, that we continually go to him 
day by day, hourly and momentarily, watching and 
praying without ceasing, and in everything giving 
thanks, accepting by faith the promises of his Word that 
all things shall work together for our good. To such 
the blessings are on the way, sometimes coming in one 
form and sometimes in another, but generally in ways 
not anticipated and generally larger by far than anything 
we had asked. 

"YE BEING EVIL KNOW HOW" 

Choosing an illustration from life our Lord reminded 
the disciples that few if any earthly parents, if their 
children cried to them for blessings, would give them 
injurious things instead. What kind of a father if 
asked for bread would give his child a stone, if asked 
for fish would give him a serpent, if asked for an egg 
would give him a scorpion? Certainly such parents 
would be few, if any. The force of our Lord's language 
is seen if we remember that the bread of oriental countries 
very much resembles a stone, being about the 
size of a large hand and baked in an oven provided 
with stones and whitened with the ashes. Some kinds 
of serpents resemble certain kinds of fish, too. And 
there is a small white scorpion which rolls itself up in 
the shape of an egg. Basing his argument upon these 
illustrations, which would commend themselves to his 
hearers, our Lord proceeds to institute a comparison as 
between the dealings of earthly parents with their children 
and the dealings of God with his children. His 
words are, If ye being evil, being imperfect through the 
fall, more or less selfish in all of your thoughts and words 
and dealings, still would be disposed to give good gifts 



to your children, how much more would your heavenly 
Father give the good gift of all gifts, the holy Spirit, to 
them that ask him for it. 

The clear intimation is that this should be the essence 
of our petitions to our heavenly Father, for more 
of his holy Spirit, and that we should look to the experiences 
of life, its trials, disappointments, discouragements, 
oppositions, not as being really injurious 
to us, not as being stones, scorpions and serpents, 
but as being blessings in disguise, if we 
receive them in the proper spirit. The Lord is able to 
make all things abound in the interest of his children, 
the New Creatures in Christ Jesus. These know from 
experience that some of their severest trials and disappointments 
of an earthly kind have worked out for 
them development of character, elements of the holy 
Spirit, which they probably could not have so well received 
in any other manner. Hence, when we pray to 
the Lord for his blessings, we are with patience to wait 
for them, and to seek them and to find them in the various 
circumstances of life which his providences will 
permit. Remembering that the holy Spirit is the spirit 

R3808 : page 207 

of meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love, we may well ask ourselves 
how else could the Lord work out for us these elements 
of character which we desire did he not permit to come 
upon us the trials and difficulties of life necessary to 
their development. 

We know not the author of the following, but consider 
it worthy of reproduction as an illustration of 
earthly kindness and a reminder of the gracious message 
from Jehovah:— 

"LIKE AS A FATHER PITIETH HIS CHILDREN, SO THE LORD 
PITIETH THEM THAT REVERENCE HIM."-PSA. 103:13 

The life of a beautiful girl was nearing its close. 
The busy father, active in legal and political life, made 
short visits to his office to perform the most necessary 
duties, and hurried home again day by day to be near 
her in her last days. He spent every possible moment 
in granting her every wish, and it was a comfort to him 
that his daughter was finding in her religion a 
source of strength that robbed approaching death of 
its terror. He was an upright man, but one from whose 
busy life religion had been crowded out. 

One day as he sat by the bedside, his daughter 
asked him to read to her. He found a magazine, and 
read some bright bits of poetry and fiction. It pleased 
her, but she wanted something else. 

"Father," she asked, "will you get my Bible and 
read from that?" 

"Certainly, my dear," he answered, and was rather 



glad than otherwise. 

He was a strong man with a clear voice and a good 
degree of self-control. He had mastered his own feelings 
in these days of patient and affectionate ministration, 
that he might bring to the sick-room every element 
of cheer that was possible. And now he began, calmly 
and quietly, to read the Sermon on the Mount. He 
knew where to find it, and he knew that it was good, 
and he read it with a growing appreciation of its beauty 
and sublimity. 

But the daughter grew more and more restless. 

"Don't you like it?" he asked. 

"O, father," she exclaimed, "it isn't that I want, 
about our righteousness exceeding that of the Scribes 
and Pharisees! Can't you find the place where it says, 
'Like as a father pitieth his children so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him?'" 

His voice trembled a little, but he said, "I will find 
it," and he turned to the concordance in the back of the 
Bible. But when he found the place and began to read, 
Like as a father,' he could bear no more. 

"O, my child," he cried, "if God cares for you as I 
do-" 

He bent over the bed and wept. 

"It is the verse we both need," she said softly, 
after a few minutes. 

And he knelt beside the bed, and said: 

"Yes, my dear— that is the verse we both need." 



page 209 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 