“Ready for Every Good Work”
“CONTINUE reminding them to be in subjection and be obedient to governments and authorities as rulers, to be ready for every good work.” (Titus 3:1) What good work did the apostle Paul have in mind when he wrote those words to his fellow believers? Bible scholar E. F. Scott pointed to one kind of good work, saying: “Not only were Christians to obey authority, but they must be ready for any good work. . . . When occasion demanded, Christians should be among the foremost in showing public spirit. There would constantly be outbreaks of fire, plague, calamity of various kinds, when all good citizens would desire to help their neighbours.”
Christians participate in certain works that are of public concern as long as the works do not conflict with God’s laws. (Acts 5:29) For instance, following the direction of the local fire department, the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Japan, located in Ebina, annually holds a fire drill. On such occasions, all members of the Bethel family come together to listen to instructions given by a representative of the local fire department.
In addition, for over a decade, the branch office has cooperated with the local authorities in an exhibition sponsored to promote fire prevention awareness. At the exhibition, companies and firms from the city demonstrate their fire-fighting and fire-control readiness. The branch has often been given recognition for the skills and cooperation of its staff. In 2001, they were awarded first prize in the exhibition. They are ready to do good work that can be lifesaving in case of fire.
A Valuable Service
Jehovah’s Witnesses, however, are interested in a more important kind of good work, which is also lifesaving. They regularly call on their neighbors to share the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14) The Witnesses encourage people to learn and apply Bible principles in their lives so as to improve their quality of life now and have the hope of everlasting life in a world where true peace and security will prevail.
Some may not appreciate the value of the service provided by Jehovah’s Witnesses, considering them to be a nuisance. However, Justice Jean Crepeau of Quebec Superior Court in Canada had a different opinion. Jehovah’s Witnesses there had challenged a city bylaw of Blainville, Quebec, that required a permit for their door-to-door visits. In the court’s decision, Justice Crepeau stated: “Visits by the Jehovah’s Witnesses are a Christian community service and . . . the publications offered by Witnesses to interested citizens are serious literature, dealing with subject matters such as religion, the Bible, drugs, alcoholism, youth education, marital problems and divorce.” The ruling went on to say: “The court can only conclude that to compare Jehovah’s Witnesses to peddlers is insulting, degrading, hurtful, and defamatory.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses contribute to the welfare of the community in which they live by helping people to overcome problems in their daily life and bringing them hope for the future. The Bible equips them to accomplish that work. “All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness, that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.”—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
Would you like to know how Jehovah’s Witnesses become “ready for every good work”? We invite you to accept their help to learn more about the Bible and thus avail yourself of this vital community service that they perform in your area and the world over.
[Pictures on page 30, 31]
Jehovah’s Witnesses seek to cooperate with the secular authorities
[Picture on page 31]
The Witnesses are noted for helping their neighbors

