From Our Readers
The Gift of Hearing  I want to express my appreciation for the article “Your Hearing—A Gift to Be Treasured.” (September 22, 1997) Before reading the article, I thought I had a pretty good understanding of what went on in the ear and how we hear. However, I didn’t realize how ignorant I was. The illustration on page 23 was marvelous! I am amazed at the amount of thought and effort that went into creating that illustration of the ear. I am even more amazed at what it took to create the real thing!
A. S., United States
My friend and I are both medical specialists, and we sincerely believe that in our many years of secular study, we have never read an article that so simply and accurately described the ear. This article makes us agree with the words of Psalm 139:14: “In a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made.”
M. B. and Z. B., Venezuela
I was the victim of a drunk driver. After one month in a coma, I awoke to a silent world. After 18 years I am still legally deaf, but with the help of hearing aids, I am able to hear to some degree. This timely article really helps those who can hear to empathize with those who have a hearing impairment.
K. C., United States
Kilimanjaro  I truly enjoyed the article “Kilimanjaro—The Roof of Africa.” (September 8, 1997) I saw Mount Kilimanjaro in January 1994 while attending an international convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Kenya. I was truly moved at the sight and thanked Jehovah for his marvelous handiwork as our loving Creator.
E. J., United States
No Part of the World  I just loved the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: ‘No Part of the World’—What Does It Mean?” (September 8, 1997) After studying it, I decided to stop using the expression “worldling” to describe non-Christians. After all, 30 years ago, I myself was not yet a Christian. If the person who first introduced me to the Bible had taken a supercilious attitude, then I might never have wanted to speak with a Witness again!
B. G., United States
Swindlers  I did not take the time to read the series “Beware of Swindlers!” when I first received the September 22, 1997, issue. The next day, four of us were victimized by a seemingly friendly taxicab driver who preyed on our ignorance of the city. We were made to pay a very large amount of money and were dropped off far from our destination. If only we had applied the words of Proverbs 14:15, quoted at the end of the articles: “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps”!
J. P., Philippines
Crusades  I was doing some research on the subject of the Crusades when along came the October 8, 1997, issue, with the article “The Crusades—A ‘Tragic Illusion.’” We really receive information at the proper time! I was reminded of the importance of reading the magazine immediately when I receive it.
T. K., Finland
Trouble-Free Paradise  I am nine years old, and I want to thank you for the article “A Trouble-Free Paradise—Soon a Reality.” (October 8, 1997) The article really touched me because my dad has been out of town, and at night my mom and I have been afraid even to open a window because someone might break into our house. So when I read about how Jehovah promises to remove all crime and violence, I felt comforted.
D. M., United States

