How Dangerous Is Television?
On December 18, 1997, newspaper headlines reported that a television cartoon had sickened many in Tokyo, Japan. Hundreds were taken to hospitals. “Some children vomited blood and others had seizures or lost consciousness,” reported The New York Times. “Doctors and psychologists warn that this episode is a stunning reminder of how vulnerable children can be to certain contemporary television shows.”
The New York Daily News said: “Panic gripped Japan yesterday after an animated TV monster flashed his red eyes and hundreds of children collapsed in convulsions across the nation.
“Nearly 600 children and a few adults were rushed to emergency rooms Tuesday night after watching . . . a TV cartoon.” Some were admitted to intensive care units, with breathing difficulties.
Yukiko Iwasaki, the mother of an eight-year-old, explained: “I was shocked to see my daughter lose consciousness. She started to breathe only when I hit her on the back.”
Producers of television programs for children were at a loss to explain how an animation technique that they say has been used “hundreds of times” could be responsible for such a dangerous, violent reaction.
Aware of the dangerous effects of watching television, some parents have carefully monitored TV viewing or have even eliminated the TV from their home. One parent in Allen, Texas, U.S.A., noted that before TV was removed from their home, his children displayed “short attention spans, irritability, lack of cooperation, and chronic boredom.” He went on to explain: “Today, nearly every one of our five children—who range in ages from 6 to 17—are straight-A students. Off TV, they quickly developed a variety of interests including sports, reading, art, computing, etc.
“One particularly memorable event happened about two years ago. My son, then 9, called from a friend’s sleep-over party, wanting to come home . . . When I picked him up and asked what the problem was, he said, ‘It’s so boring. All they want to do is sit and watch TV!’”

