Announcements
“LIVING UP TO THE NAME” TESTIMONY PERIOD
Do you profess or would you like to be one of Jehovah’s witnesses? Then you sincerely want to walk worthy of the name. You will appreciate, too, the intent of the June Testimony Period, entitled “Living Up to the Name”. We are sure you will be with us in carrying out the program of activity for that month. Toward delivering the witness in harmony with our God-given name, we shall be offering the three bound books “Let God Be True”, “The Kingdom Is at Hand” and “The Truth Shall Make You Free”, on the nominal contribution of one dollar for all three books. It is mutually strengthening to have your cooperation in this testimony, and our joined efforts work together to give a more impressive witness and to prove that the Most High God has a people on earth who uphold the honor of his name. He knows all the efforts you put forth, not for praise from man but from him. Nevertheless, we should appreciate your making out a report of the month’s work and results, on our form therefor, that we may compile a combined report.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 2: “A Mind Freed for Godly Combat,” ¶1-21 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1950.
Week of July 9: “A Mind Freed for Godly Combat,” ¶22-45 inclusive, The Watchtower June 1, 1950.
SAVE
your personal or home copy of each issue of The Watchtower. Do not throw them away, but preserve them in a binder or drawer or on library shelves. At the end of each year, in its December 15 issue, The Watchtower contains an index of subjects and an index of all the scriptures cited, quoted and commented upon in all the leading articles throughout the year. By saving your copies and keeping them in date order you will have an invaluable reference library for consultation in your study of the Bible. Organized companies should preserve copies in the library of their local Theocratic ministry course school.
USE RENEWAL SUBSCRIPTION BLANK
The renewal blank sent you prior to the expiration of your Watchtower subscription should be filled out and returned to the Brooklyn office or to the Branch office in the country where you reside. Servants in the companies, and individuals, when sending in renewals for The Watchtower, should always use these blanks. By filling in these renewal blanks you are assured of the continuation of your Watchtower from the time of expiration, and without delay. It will also be a great help if you sign your name uniformly, and note any recent change of address, on the renewal slip.

