From Our Readers
Coping With Unemployment
Your article “How to Cope With Unemployment” (July 22, 1984) has been more than effective in helping me to create employment for myself. I had lost my job. But from the suggestions listed there, I bought a bicycle that I use to make deliveries of goods between stores.
G. N. C., Nigeria
Help at School
I am 13 years old. Some months ago, I had to present at school an essay about insects. I was rather worried because I had only two days left. Then I saw your article “Insects​—Friends or Foes?” (June 22, 1984) I decided to use this information. The teacher appreciated the information from your magazine a lot and gave me a good grade. Thank you for having printed that article.
D. P., Italy
Working Wives
After reading your issue on “A Wife’s Income​—Worth the Cost?” (February 22, 1985), the impression I received was that you are against wives working. It is wrong to distribute an article like this. You do not seem to be aware of everyday facts. The wage a man receives barely covers the cost of keeping the home. Without the small amount the wife brings home, the marriage would break down.
F. R., England
We did acknowledge that at times it could be necessary for a wife to work for extra income. But it can put added stress on the marriage and hinder proper rearing of the children. These problems should be acknowledged and faced, even as shown in our article “Working Couples​—The Key to Success.” (February 8, 1985) A couple will have to determine their needs, count the costs, and then make their own decision.​—ED.
Your articles on ‘Working Couples’ (February 8, 1985) and “A Wife’s Income​—Is It Worth the Cost?” (February 22, 1985) were very balanced in their approach and suggestions regarding both husband and wife’s feeling the need to work to make ends meet. My husband is self-employed as a sewing machine repairman, and he recently taught me how to clean and oil the machines so he can concentrate on repairs. That way he can take in more work without having to spend more time working, and we can work together at home. Maybe other husbands who are self-employed could teach their wives or older children some helpful aspect of the business so they would be able to make more money while working together.
E. P., Texas
I just read the article “A Wife’s Income​—Is It Worth the Cost?” and the two interviews. Like the mother who quit her job because she needed to spend time with her child, I too worked for three months and then quit because I noticed a change (not for the good) in both my small sons. I now have part-time work and can leave our children with their father while I’m working.
D. C., Ohio

