Succeeding by Faithfulness in the Ministry
By what standard do worldly people judge success?
Worldly people lay great stress on “higher education.” The higher the learning that one has received, the more successful many persons hold him to be. Yet ‘the world through its wisdom has not come to know God.’ (1 Cor. 1:21) Worldly people also lay great stress on material riches as an evidence of success. But what counts with God is being “rich in fine works.”​—1 Tim. 6:18.
By what standards was Jesus’ ministry a success?
He put the emphasis on glorifying his heavenly Father. (John 12:28; 17:4) By successfully meeting all the tests brought upon him by the Devil, Jesus proved his unbreakable devotion to his heavenly Father and branded the Devil a liar. Yes, he faithfully carried out ‘Jehovah’s regulations and judicial decisions’ in his ministry and so was successful.​—1 Chron. 22:13.a
For what basic reasons is the preaching done by Jehovah’s witnesses a success in our day?
First of all, by means of their faithful ministry they make known Jehovah’s name and purposes. Others must have the opportunity to learn about him, that he is a loving God. Calling on others in their homes provides many opportunities to speak in behalf of Jehovah. This is the most important of all reasons why the ministry of Jehovah’s witnesses is succeeding.
A second and very important reason why their ministry is succeeding is that by means of it they demonstrate their love for Jehovah and for their neighbor. In fact, there is nothing like the ministry to sharpen one’s appreciation, to perfect one’s obedience and to show what is in one’s heart.​—Mark 12:29-31.
Also, their ministry is succeeding because it warns the wicked regarding Armageddon. The seriousness of this obligation is seen by Ezekiel’s commission. Jehovah made him a watchman. If he failed to warn someone wicked, the wicked one would die in his error, but Ezekiel would also die for having failed to warn him. To deliver his own soul he had to warn the wicked one.​—Ezek. 3:17-19.
And fourth, there is the making of disciples in obedience to the commission that Jesus gave his followers. Right-hearted persons hear the Kingdom message preached by Jehovah’s servants and so learn of and enter upon the narrow way of life, rather than undertake the broad road that leads to destruction. More than 120,000 did so during the 1969 service year.​—Matt. 7:13, 14; 28:19, 20.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, April 1, 1969.

