VOL. XXXII MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1911-A.M. 6039 



CONTENTS 

Good Tidings Abroad (No. 2) 131 

Spiritual Growth 134 

Keeping the Body Under 136 



"I Keep My Body Under and Bring It 

Into Subjection" 136 

The Apostle Had No Thought of His 

Coming Short 136 

"A Man is Tempted When He is Led 

Away of His Own Desires 137 

A God Ready to Pardon 138 

Christendom's Idolatrous Debauch 138 

Hezekiah's Great Reform 139 

Those Who Will Do the Lord's Will 

in the Next Age Shall Not Die 139 

The World's Hatred 141 

"Good Tidings" in India 142 

Annual Request for Visits of the Traveling 

Brethren 143 

The Western Convention Tour 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, Lancaster 
Gate W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, Barmen. Australasian 
Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. Please address 
the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. FROM 

FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA 



INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 



AT WHICH BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL WILL BE PRINCIPAL SPEAKER 
FRIENDS FROM NEARBY PLACES ARE CORDIALLY INVITED. 



LYNCHBURG, VA., MAY 14 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested at 
11; Lecture for the Public at 3 p.m. All services to be in 
the Auditorium, Main St., between 1 1th and 12th Sts. 

BALTIMORE, MD., MAY 21 

Morning Rally at 10:30. Discourse for the interested at 
11 in Lehman's Hall, 856 North Howard St. Afternoon 
service for the Public at 3 in the Lyric Theatre, Mount Royal 
and Maryland Aves. 

BOSTON, MASS., MAY 28, 29, 30 

Sunday, May 28, Morning Rally at 10 o'clock in Steinert 
Hall, 162 Boylston St. Public Lecture at 3 p.m., and evening 
service at 7:30, both in Boston Theatre, 539 Washington St. 
Monday sessions 9:30 a.m., 2:30 and 7:30 p.m. in Ford Hall, 
15 Ashburton Place. Brother Russell will be present on 
28th and 29th. 

BROOKLYN, N.Y., JUNE 4 

Morning Rally for Praise and Testimony at 10:30 in the 
Brooklyn Tabernacle. Discourse for the Public at 3 p.m. 
in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Lafayette Ave. and St. 
Felix St. Evening service in Brooklyn Tabernacle, 7 p.m. 

Those desiring water baptism or to present their children 
in consecration should notify in advance. 



BROOKLYN BETHEL HYMNS FOR JUNE 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the MANNA text is 
considered. Hymns for June follow: (1) 151; (2) 273; 
(3) 165; (4) 41; (5) 260; (6) Vow; (7) 145; (8) 12; 
(9) 47; (10) 4; (11) 307; (12) 114; (13) 313; (14) 
182; (15) 93; (16) 97; (17) 119; (18) 293; (19) 7; 
(20) 60; (21) 27; (22) 291; (23) 49; (24) 279; (25) 
333; (26) 1; (27) 19; (28) 222; (29) 29; (30) 9. 



R4806 :page 131 

THE GOOD TIDINGS ABROAD 

No. 2. 

FROM BERLIN we journeyed northward to 

Copenhagen. Brother Luttichau and a 

deputation of Bible Students met us at the 

station. Soon we were in the Society's 

Danish headquarters, and in a little while 

were addressing an assembly of earnest 

people of God, whose beaming faces indicated 

that they understood and appreciated 

our message. Our morning address 

was to the interested. Amongst other 

things we endeavored to make clear the subject of the 

Covenants. The Abrahamic Covenant is the comprehensive 

one, which guaranteed a seed through Isaac and 

Rebecca, and that a blessing would come as a result to 

all mankind— and also an antitypical Seed which would 

have the first place in the blessing of the world, the two 

Seeds being referred to in the promise, "Thy Seed shall 

be as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the seashore." 

This Covenant guarantees the blessing of the 

world, and it guarantees that that blessing shall come 

through the natural seed of Abraham. At the same 

time it guarantees the spiritual Seed— The Christ (Messiah), 

Head and Body, fully qualified and empowered to 

give the needed blessing through the earthly seed. 

We pointed out that Christ and the Church constitute 
the spiritual Seed— "If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) 
We pointed out that this spiritual Seed is not 
developed under the Law Covenant, because it was not 
made with us, but with the natural seed— with Israel, 
Moses being its mediator. We pointed out that the New 
Covenant is not the one under which we are developed, 
because it also is to be made with natural Israel, and is 
to be merely an enlargement of the Mosaic Law Covenant. 
We cited in proof of this that the New Covenant 
is to be made with Israel as per the Divine promise. (Jer. 31:31.) 
We pointed out that that New Covenant will 
bring blessings of Restitution to Israel (and to all mankind 
through Israel), taking away the stony heart of 
selfishness and sin and restoring a heart of flesh, of tenderness, 
sympathy, righteousness and Divine likeness, as 
was Adam's when he was created in the image and likeness 
of God. 

We exhorted the dear friends to faithfulness to their 
covenant of sacrifice. We pointed out the privilege of 
service now granted to the Church, and urged the laying 
aside of every earthly weight and hindrance and pressing 
toward the Mark for the Prize of our High, Heavenly 



Calling. 

The afternoon service was for the public; the topic 
was "The Judgment of the Great White Throne." We 
were surprised at so large an audience for an afternoon 
service on a week day. Approximately eight hundred 
crowded the hall, some of them standing during the 
entire service— over two hours. Here Brother Luttichau 
served us as interpreter, as Brother Koetitz had done in 
Germany. We had most excellent attention. It was a 
pleasure to watch the earnest countenances and to note 
how the Truth seemed to be absorbed with eagerness. 
Our Copenhagen visit was certainly much enjoyed. Some 
of the friends accompanied us to the station as we proceeded 
to Stockholm. The Danish friends more than 
ever impressed us with their warmth of heart and loving 
devotion to the Truth. 

ONE DAY AT STOCKHOLM 

Our night journey brought us in the morning to 
Stockholm. Brother Lundborg, the Society's representative 
in Sweden, boarded the train before we reached 
Stockholm. As we passed through the station we were 
greeted most cordially by about a hundred of the dear 
Swedish friends, with whom we shook hands. Unable 
to speak their language, or they to speak ours, except 
through the interpreter, we nevertheless exchanged very 
cordial greetings, and the expression of the eye told us, 
as truly as could the mouth, that the "fellowship of kindred 
minds, is like to that above." 

Here our address to the friends was along the same 
lines as at Copenhagen. We emphasized the fact that 
the Church (The Christ) comes into relationship with 
God's Plan, not under the Law Covenant of Moses, 
which still continues with the Jewish people, nor under 
Israel's New Law Covenant, which has not yet supplanted 
the Old Law Covenant, and whose Mediator will 
be the greater Prophet, Priest and King, the spiritual 
Messiah, Head and Body. We pointed out that this Gospel 
Age is for the special purpose of developing the 
great Mediator— the great Messiah through whom the 
New Covenant of Restitution will be inaugurated with 
fleshly Israel for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. We emphasized the fact that all those who 
suffer with Christ are to reign with him, and only those 
who now become dead with him to earthly hopes and 
interests will live with him as members of the Bride on 
the spirit plane of glory. We exhorted the dear friends 

R4806 : page 132 

to an earnest appreciation of this wonderful privilege, 
this special salvation granted to the Church in advance 
of the earthly salvation which God has promised to the 
world during the "Times of Restitution of all things, 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 



world began."— Acts 3:19-23. 

At the evening service the hall was jammed; about a 
thousand were present, and probably as many more 
were unable to gain admittance. We greatly regretted 
that a sufficiently large hall or auditorium could not be 
obtained on a week night except for a larger sum than 
the friends and the Society felt justified in spending. 
About a hundred stood in the aisles for two hours while 
an overflow meeting was held in another hall in the same 
building. To these we sent the promise that we would 
address them a few words later. Fulfilling our agreement, 
we addressed the second audience of about three 
hundred for over half an hour, after 10 p.m. Surely such 
deep interest and close attention indicates that earnest 
Christians amongst the Swedes are awakening to the 
fact that they have enjoyed only a part of the "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people." 

ONE DAY AT OREBRO 

We took an early morning train for Orebro and 
arrived in the Society's Swedish headquarters at about 
11 o'clock. The afternoon meeting was held in a little 
hall generally used by the friends on Sundays. This 
time it was taxed to its capacity, many standing during 
the service or exchanging seats with each other. Here 
we addressed the friends along the same lines, believing 
that a clear understanding of the Covenants signifies a 
clear understanding of the Divine Plan, and the very 
best preparation for a life of consecration in harmony 
with that Plan. 

We emphasized the fact that The Christ is the Vine— 
that Jesus is the Root, and his faithful members branches 
in him. We reminded the friends that at the present 
time our membership in the Vine is tentative; that only 
those who bring forth the fruitage of the Vine will be 
allowed to remain in it. We quoted the Master's words, 
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit, my Father, 
the Husbandman, taketh away, and every branch which 
beareth fruit, he pruneth, that it may bring forth more 
fruit. Thus the trials and difficulties of the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice are seen to be the methods by which 
the Heavenly Father fits and prepares his holy ones, his 
consecrated Church, for the completion of the divine 
nature in the First Resurrection. Thus he fits and prepares 
them as members of the great Prophet, Priest, 
King, Mediator for the glorious work to which he has 
called them in the Anointed One. From this standpoint 
alone can the trials and difficulties and sacrifices and 
the drinking of the Lord's cup of suffering be appreciated. 
As he was, so are we in this world. 

Here, as at other places, our discourse to the interested 
was followed by a question meeting. The questions 
indicated a very intelligent grasp of the Divine 
Plan and the interested faces showed that even the 
deepest features of consecration were appreciated, and 



that nearly all of those present were fully submitted to 
the Lord and anxious to know and to do his will— even 
unto death. 

The public meeting was held in a large hall, which 
was crowded to the very limit. Notwithstanding the 
fact that a minister of the city had made an attack upon 
us through the public press, slandering us, and saying 
various evil things against us falsely, because of our 
faithfulness to the cause of Christ, and probably because 
of envy, hundreds of people were unable to gain 
admittance, and many in attendance stood for the entire 
two hours, and more, of our discourse. We have the 
satisfaction of believing that many of those who were 
present understood and appreciated our message respecting 
the Two Salvations, one for the Church, on the 
heavenly plane, and another yet to come for the world, 
on the earthly plane, by a Judgment and Restitution. 

We pointed out the judgment or trial of the Church 
and the things necessary for her testing and proving 
as to her worthiness of the divine nature in association 
with her Redeemer. We also pointed out the very 
different judgment of the world under the Messianic 
Kingdom, when all mankind will be separated as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats, as described in 
Matthew 25:32. We pointed out that the sheep at the 
end of the Millennial Age will get the earthly Kingdom, 
Paradise restored, and that the goats will go into destruction 

R4807 : page 132 

in the Second Death, symbolized by fire, and that this 
will be everlasting punishment, from which they will 
not be recovered by any redemption or resurrection. We 
feel sure that a good impression was left at Orebro, and 
that some will make still further investigations. In all 
cases these meetings are to be followed by other meetings, 
in which other features of Present Truth will be 
set before those who have an ear to hear and an appetite 
for spiritual things. 

ONE DAY AT CHRISTIANIA 

Another night's ride brought us to Christiania, the 
capital of Norway, where the Society is represented by 
Brother Lindkvist. This dear Brother, who served as 
our interpreter in Norwegian, came to Stockholm to 
meet us, as did also two brethren from Finland, who 
accompanied us. Their activities in the service of the 
Truth were mentioned in THE WATCH TOWER not long 
since. The Christiania class of Bible Students, although 
small, seems very earnest. With them were representatives 
from various parts of Norway, some having come 
as many as six hundred miles. 

Our meeting with the interested ones was a privilege 
and a pleasure. With them also we discussed God's 
Covenants. We laid special emphasis upon the fact that 



God's call is not to the different churches of Christendom, 
but to the one Church of Christ. We quoted the text, 
"Gather my saints together unto me [saith the Lord]; 
those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 
We called special attention to the fact that the covenant 
of Christ is a covenant of sacrifice. We saw that Jesus, 
the great Captain and Forerunner of our salvation, entered 
into such a covenant with the Father— that he 
sacrificed his earthly life, all earthly hopes and interests, 
that he might become the great Prophet, Priest, King, 
Mediator, between God and man, and that as a reward 
he was highly exalted to the divine nature, necessary 
for him before he could accomplish the great work of 
blessing the world, as the spiritual Seed of Abraham. 

We called special attention also to the fact that the 
Church's covenant, like that of her Lord, is a covenant 
of sacrifice. We are to walk in the Redeemer's footsteps. 
We are to take up the cross and follow him. We 
are to suffer with him if we would reign with him. We 
are to join with him in his covenant of sacrifice. This 
is the Apostle's exhortation, "I beseech you, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy, acceptable unto God and your reasonable 
service."— Rom. 12:1. 

We pointed out that thus Isaac died "in a figure"; we 
read the Apostle's words, "Ye, brethren, as Isaac was, 

R4807 : page 133 

are the children of promise," "heirs of the promise"— 
"in thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
We sought to specially impress the great truth that only 
those who thus suffer with Christ, sacrificing earthly interests, 
will gain the great prize of the high calling. The 
dear friends gave closest attention, our little meeting 
room being crowded to the doors and beyond, with the 
aisles full and some sitting upon the platform at our feet. 
We were assured of the earnest desire of many to gain 
the great spiritual prize— obtainable through the First 
Resurrection— to be kings and priests unto God and unto 
Christ and reign with him a thousand years.— Rev. 20:4. 

The leading Christiania newspaper, on the afternoon 
of our coming, contained a vile attack, surely instigated 
by the Adversary, but coming, alas! from the pen of one 
whom, we understand, had made profession of being a 
minister of Christ. Slander and false words have been 
the weapons of the enemies of the Truth from the beginning, 
and the Master has warned us that such experiences 
were his and must be ours if faithful. We remember, 
alas, that the Master and the Apostles were persecuted by 
the professed ministers of God— so were all the reformers. 
And do we not read, Whosoever will live 
godly in this present time shall suffer persecution, and 
again, "So persecuted they the prophets (teachers) which 
were before you." We were not, therefore, surprised, 
nor did we feel angry. Rather we felt sorry for those 



so captivated by error and used by the Adversary. 

But if Satan's motive was to hinder the people from 
coming to hear the Good Tidings he again failed. The 
house was crowded, about a thousand being present, 
about two hundred of them standing while hundreds were 
turned away. Our topic was, "The sinner a hundred years 
old, cut off, and yet but a child." We pointed out the 
difference between the salvation of the Church and that 
of the world. We read what the Scriptures say respecting 
Messiah's glorious Kingdom and the blessed opportunities 
it will afford to all mankind, to be lifted from sin 
and death conditions and be brought to a knowledge of 
the Truth and to a full, fair opportunity for deciding 
either for righteousness and eternal life, its reward, 
or for unrighteousness and eternal death, its punishment, 
and that this blessed opportunity of rescue from the death 
penalty, the result of Adam's sin, has been secured for 
every member of Adam's race through our Redeemer's 
merit, through him who loved us and bought us with his 
precious blood. 

The next morning we bade farewell to the friends of 
Christiania and vicinity as they sang to us on the station 
platform— "God be with you till we meet again." This 
was indeed a feature in connection with many of the 
partings. 

GOTHENBURG-HALMSTAD-HELSINGBORG-HAMBURG 

Our London appointment for Sunday, April 2d, required 
that we make the closest possible connections on 
the return journey. We traveled via the West Shore 
Line from Christiania to Copenhagen. The friends en 
route had been notified in advance of the train we took 
and the places it would make stops, so they were on the 
lookout for us. At one station a party of nine met us 
and journeyed with us for about an hour. We had 
pleasure in breaking to them the bread of life, and in 
reading their joy of heart in their shining faces. 

Brother Lundborg accompanied us and served as 
interpreter. He advised that they had not much of this 
world's goods, else they would have attended one of the 
conventions which we addressed, and which continued 
after our departure. We had a happy time together in 
considering the gracious things of our Heavenly Father's 
Plan. At the next station we were met by still others 
who had come a distance. One of the dear friends, 
through the interpreter, said, "I wonder if I will ever 
have another day as happy as this." Truly there is a 
power of the Gospel of the Love of God that is unknown 
to those who are exercised solely by the fear of eternal 
torment. With the true Gospel comes the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding, the joy of the Lord, 
which the world can neither give nor take away. 

"BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH AND I WILL GIVE 
THEE A CROWN OF LIFE" 



At Halmstad we found about twenty of the friends 
waiting for us on the platform. Our stay was short, but 
in those five minutes we congratulated the dear friends 
upon the blessing of the Truth which had reached their 
ears and hearts, and extended assurances of our Christian 
love for them and for all the dear household of 
faith. We gave to these, as to others, our parting message, 
the Master's words, "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee a crown of life." From these dear 
friends also we received the assurance of their joy in 
the Lord and their appreciation of the Truth, of their 
desire to be amongst the overcomers who will inherit the 
Kingdom, according to the Master's promises. 

Helsingborg was reached about 9 p.m. Shifting of 
the cars there permitted an exchange of Christian greetings, 
and a little address of about fifteen minutes, in 
which we endeavored to impress some of the prominent 
features of the Divine Plan, and especially the privilege 
of the Church in connection with the covenant of sacrifice 
made by our Head, thus opening the way, upon the same 
terms of sacrifice, for his faithful followers. 

About 10:30 we reached Copenhagen, where about 
twenty of the class met and greeted us at the station and 
accompanied us to the south-bound station. As we had 
already addressed these dear friends in connection with 
the Copenhagen meeting we entered into no doctrinal 
particulars. We exchanged with them Christian love 
and good wishes for the remainder of the journey of 
life and for a share in the Kingdom. 

The night ride of 1 1 hours brought us to Hamburg, 
Germany. Here about twenty-five met us in the station 
with heartiest greetings. They had provided a dinner in 
honor of our coming. We partook of it with great 
pleasure, fellowshiping with the entire company through 
Brother Koetitz as interpreter, and also through others 
who spoke English. After dinner we repaired to the 
usual meeting room of the class, where we received a 
more formal expression of welcome, following with an 
address of about an hour, which specially referred to 
the Covenants. We tried to make as clear as possible 
the distinction between the Old Law Covenant, established 
by Moses, the Mediator, by means of the sacrifice 
of bulls and goats, and its antitype, the New Law Covenant, 
to be established upon better sacrifices and by the 

R4808 : page 133 

better Mediator, the antitypical Moses— Christ and the 
Church, his Body.-Heb. 9:23. 

We were pleased that the train connections gave us 
in all nearly three hours of fellowship with the friends 
at Hamburg. They gave evidence of earnestness, zeal, 
and informed us that their numbers had doubled within 
the past year. We specially rejoiced that their love and 
zeal had also kept pace. 



We are writing this on the train speeding toward London, 
which, God willing, we will reach tomorrow morning, 
April 2d, in season for meeting with the London 
friends, and for the public service at Albert Hall at 
night. 



R4808 : page 134 

SPIRITUAL GROWTH 

"If ye do these things, ye shall never fall."— 2 Peter 1:10. 

THERE is a philosophy in the growth and development 

of Christian character, just as 

truly as in the growth and development of 

vegetation; and the more thoroughly we 

acquaint ourselves with the natural processes 

and conditions of development and 

growth in either case, the better we shall 

understand how to cultivate and to secure 

the desirable end— maturity and luxuriant 

fruitfulness. The farmer who puts into 

practice only what he has learned by accident, in a haphazard 

way, and who is goaded to effort only by sheer 

necessity, must not expect the fruitful fields, the abundant 

harvests and the well-earned approbation of the enterprising, 

thrifty farmer who has made a study of the business 

and has brought knowledge, carefully gleaned, together 

with enterprise and energy, to his assistance in 

the work. 

Take, for example, a fruit tree. If one, knowing 
nothing about the necessity for cultivation, simply plants 
the tree and lets it alone, its strength, instead of producing 
fruit, will generally go toward making wood and 
leaves; worms and decay may attack its roots, insects 
may sting and blight its scanty fruitage; and if it continues 
to stand, it will be only a useless, fruitless cumberer 
of the ground, an advertisement of the farmer's negligence 
and worthy only of having the axe laid to its 
root. Had it been pruned and trimmed and kept free 
from insects, etc., under the blessing of God's air and 
rain and sunshine, it would have been a fruitful, creditable 
tree; for the laws of nature are true and faithful 
in all their operations. 

And none the less rigid are the operations of moral 
law in the growth and development of moral character. 
Under proper conditions and with proper, diligent cultivation, 
the character will grow and develop according to 
fixed laws, and will become beautiful and fruitful in 
blessings to self and others; or, lacking the necessary 
cultivation, even under favorable natural conditions, it 
will be deformed, worthless and fruitless. 

When we presented our bodies as living sacrifices to 
God, holy and acceptable through the merit of our Redeemer, 



we there received the spirit of adoption to the 

spirit plane, as spiritual sons of God; and from that time 

the faculties and dispositions of our mortal bodies were 

reckoned as our new being, now under the direction and 

control of the Spirit of God. The faithfulness with 

which we cultivate this reckoned new nature, by persistently 

weeding out old habits of thought and action, 

supplanting them with new virtues, and training them 

to activity in the Divine service, is to prove our worthiness 

or unworthiness of the actual new nature to be received 

at the resurrection, to which perfect spirit condition 

our present reckoned condition stands related as 

embryotic; for the character and disposition of the embryo 

New Creature will be the disposition of the perfected 

New Creature, when born in the resurrection. 

The Apostle affirms (Rom. 8:11) that if we really 
have the Spirit of God in us— unless we quench it or put 
it away from us— it will quicken our mortal bodies, make 
them alive toward God, active in growing into his likeness 
and fruitful in Christian graces and activities. Again 
he adds, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is 
none of his," and "As many as are led by the Spirit of 
God, they are the sons of God."— Rom. 8:9,14. 

It is our business, therefore, to grow; to cultivate in 
ourselves those dispositions which are worthy of us as 
spiritual sons of God, called to be "heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ." 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER IS A 
GRADUAL, DAILY LIFE-WORK 

The Apostle Peter tells us how to proceed in the matter 
of cultivating Christian character, intimating that we 
cannot do it all in a day, nor in a few days, but that it 
must be a gradual, daily life-work, a process of addition 
—adding virtue to virtue and grace to grace, day by 
day and hour by hour. He says, "Giving all diligence, 
add to your faith virtue [fortitude]; and to virtue, knowledge; 
and to knowledge, temperance [self-control]; and 
to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and 
to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, 
charity [love]." Then he adds, "If ye do these 
things ye shall never fall."— 2 Pet. 1:5-7,10. 

This is a very strong assurance— that if we do these 
things we are sure to stand approved of God. We do 
well, therefore, to consider them with special care. Here 
are eight elements which must go toward making up the 
Christian character, the one to be added to the other and 
assimilated by the spiritual germ of the new nature, until 
the embryo New Creature is formed; and then it must 
continue to grow and develop. Look at them again. 
They are: 

1. Faith. 5. Patience. 

2. Virtue [fortitude]. 6. Godliness. 

3. Knowledge. 7. Brotherly kindness. 

4. Temperance [self-control]. 8. Charity [love]. 



"A THUS, SAITH THE LORD," SHOULD BE THE END OF 
ALL CONTROVERSY 

Now for a little self-examination. Let each ask himself: 
(1) Have I the faith to which the Apostle here refers; 
not faith in every thing or every person, but faith 
in God— in his Plan of redemption through the vicarious, 
or substitutionary sacrifice of Christ, and in all his rich 
promises built upon that sure foundation? Do I trust 
him implicitly? Is a "Thus saith the Lord" the end of 
all controversy, the solution of all doubts and the restful 
assurance in every perplexity? 

(2) Am I endeavoring to lead a virtuous life? This, 
to the child of God, consecrated to be a living sacrifice, 
implies much more than merely abstaining from evil. It 
implies living truthfully, that is, true to his covenant, 
which to wilfully violate would be equivalent to swearing 
falsely. It is fortitude, strength of character in 
righteousness. It implies the cultivation of the strictest 
integrity in our dealings, both with God and with our 
fellowmen, scrupulous honesty, justice and truth being 
the only standards. 

The Psalmist clearly defines it thus, saying, "He that 
walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh 
the truth in his heart. He that backbiteth not with 
his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbor; in whose eyes 
a vile person is condemned; but he honoreth them that 
fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt and 
changeth not [who will not violate a contract found to 
be unfavorable to himself]. He that putteth not out his 
money to usury [taking unjust advantage of the necessities 
of others], nor taketh reward against the innocent. 
He that doeth these things shall never be moved." 
(Psa. 15:2-5.) Such a one is a virtuous man, a man of 
fortified or strong character. How we need to invoke 
Divine assistance here! and how critically to judge 
ourselves! 

(3) Am I endeavoring day by day to gain a more 
thorough and complete knowledge of God, of the Plan 
revealed in his Word, and of the special features now in 
operation, that I may co-operate with him in its execution; 
and of his will concerning me in the particular relationships 

R4808 : page 135 

and conditions in which I now stand— irrespective 

of my own will and disposition in any matter? 

Am I striving to gain this knowledge of God and of his 

righteous will concerning us, as revealed through his 

Word, by the holy Spirit? Neglect of this Divinely appointed 

means of knowledge is equivalent to setting up 

our own imperfect standard of righteousness and ignoring 

the Divine standard. It is, therefore, important 

that we give all diligence to the study of the Divine 

Oracle, that we may be fortified in faith and works 



accordingly. 

(4) Am I temperate, moderate, exercising self-control 

in all things— in eating, in drinking, in home arrangements, 
in conduct, in thoughts, in words, in deeds? Do 
I realize that self-control is one of the most important 
elements of good character? "He that ruleth his spirit 
is better than he that taketh a city," is the counsel of 
the Wise Man; and many a victorious general has yet to 
learn to conquer and control himself. Self-control has 

R4809 : page 135 

to do with all our sentiments, thoughts, tastes, appetites, 
labors, pleasures, sorrows and hopes. Its cultivation, 
therefore, means a high order of character-development. 
Self-control, accompanied by faith, fortitude, knowledge 
from on High, implies increased zeal and activity 
in Divine things, and increased moderation in earthly 
things. In judgment, in conduct, in the regulation of 
temporal affairs, etc., "Let your moderation [temperance, 
self-control] be known unto all men." (Phil. 4:5.) 
Let them see by our thoughtful (not rash and hasty), 
careful and considerate demeanor, in every affair of life, 
that we honor our profession. 

(5) Am I patient under trial and discipline, keeping 

my feelings always under the control of enlightened reason, 
letting patience have its perfect work in cultivating 
the character, however severely the plow and the 
harrow may break up the sub-soil of the heart, meekly 
submitting to the discipline in every case? and am I 
submitting cheerfully under the mighty hand of God, 
in his work of preparing me for a place in his 
Kingdom soon to be established? The Greek word from 
which patience is here translated means cheerful 
endurance. 

(6) Am I carefully observing and endeavoring to 
pattern my character and course of action after the Divine 
model? If a parent, or in any position of authority, 

am I using that authority as God uses his— not for selfish 
purposes, to make a boast of it, or in any way to oppress 
or trample upon the God-given individual rights of those 
under such authority, but for the blessing and advantage 
of those under it, even to the extent of self-denial, 
with patience, dignity and grace, and not with boastful 
imperiousness, which is the attitude of tyrants? 

If a son, or one under authority to any extent, do I 
consider the example of loving obedience furnished us 
in the example of our dear Lord? His delight was 
to do the Father's will at any cost to himself. As 
a man, under the kingdoms, authorities, of this world, 
and as a youth, under the authority of earthly parents, 
he was loyal and faithful (Matt. 22:21; Luke 2:51); yet 
all of this earthly authority was exercised by his personal 
inferiors, even though they were his legal superiors. 
How beautifully we shall be able to grace and fill whatever 
station we occupy in life, if we carefully study and 



copy godliness (God-likeness), whether we be princes 
or peasants, masters or servants! 

(7) Does brotherly-kindness characterize all my actions? 
Does it cause me to make due allowance for 

the inherited weaknesses and circumstantial misfortunes 
of others? Does brotherly-kindness deal patiently and 
helpfully so far as wisdom, with a view to the correction 
of those faults, may dictate; and even at the expense 
of self-interest, if necessary and prudent? 

If, as I look myself squarely in the face, I recognize 
deformity of character, do I thankfully accept a brother's 
proffered aid and meekly bear reproof, determining that 
by the grace of God I will overcome such dispositions, 
and prove myself a help rather than a hindrance to 
others, if it should even cost my life to do it; and that 
I will no longer foster my old dispositions, but will 
plunge into activity in the service of God with those 
who should have my co-operation in service, instead of 
being a burden to them? 

(8) Have I charity (love unfeigned) for the unrighteous 
and unlovely, as well as for the good and 
beautiful— a love which is ever ready to manifest itself 
in wise and helpful activity for saint and sinner; a love 
which pities, helps, comforts, cheers and blesses all within 
its reach; which longs for the grand opportunities and 

power and glory of the incoming Age, chiefly for its privileges 

of scattering universal blessing; and which, in harmony 

with that sentiment, utilizes every present opportunity 

wisely and in harmony with the Divine Plan for the accomplishment 

of the same end— thus manifesting and 

cultivating the disposition which must be found in every 

member of that glorious company which will constitute 

the King's Cabinet in the incoming Age? If this disposition 

is not begun, cultivated and developed here, we 

shall not be considered worthy of that office there. 

Just as in a well-kept orchard pruning, trimming and 
cultivation are necessary to accomplish the desired end 
of fruitfulness, so must we be watchful and take necessary 
precautions to prevent blight and decay of character, 
and to guard against the intrusion of evil powers 
and influences calculated to sap the life of the New 
Creature. By resisting the Devil he will flee from us; 
and by patient continuance in well-doing an increasing 
measure of development will result. "If these things be 
in you and abound," says the Apostle Peter (that is, if 
you have them in some measure and keep on cultivating 
them, so that they abound more and more and rule in 
you), "they make you that ye shall be neither barren 
[idle] nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ." The Truth is for such: "Light is sown for 
the righteous," and they are sure to get it. They 
shall not walk in darkness. If any man will do the will 
of God, he shall know of the doctrine. (John 7:17.) 
"But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot 
see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from 
his old sins." 



LET US GIVE ALL DILIGENCE IN THESE MATTERS 

"Wherefore, brethren, give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure; for if ye do these things [if you 
diligently cultivate this disposition] ye shall never fall." 
Being justified fully, by faith in the sacrifice of Christ 
for your redemption and sanctification (setting apart 
from the world and devotion to the service of God) by 
the Truth, your final selection to that position of glory, 
honor and immortality, to which you are called, shall be 
sure. For "so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore," again says our beloved Brother Peter, 
"I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance 
of these things. Yea, I think it meet so long as 
I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in 
remembrance. ...Moreover, I will endeavor that you 
may be able after my decease to have these things always 

R4809 : page 136 

in remembrance." This Peter did; and the Church 
to this day may profit by his brotherly counsel. 

While the Apostle Peter, addressing the consecrated, 
thus clearly and explicitly points out the way in which 
we may make our calling and election sure to the chief 
favor of God, the Apostle Paul, addressing the same 
class, shows that wilful and continual neglect to develop 
and cultivate the Christian character, involves the loss, 
not only of the chief favor of the High Calling, but, 
eventually, of all favor. He wrote, "If ye [ye who have 
solemnly covenanted to sacrifice your very life in the 
service of God, for the eradication of evil] live after the 
flesh [with selfish effort, merely to gratify self] ye shall 
die." (Rom. 8:13.) God has no use or place for wilful 
covenant-breakers and covenant-despisers, after they have 
been brought to a knowledge of the Truth and of his 
will, and have covenanted to do it faithfully. 

With all our striving and watchfulness, however, we 
shall not be able, in our present condition, to reach our 
ideal. Perfection is something which can only be approximated 
in the present life. But the measure of our effort to 
attain it will prove the measure of our faithfulness and 
earnest desire to do so. And that effort will not be unfruitful. 
If no fruit appears, we may be sure that little or 
no effort is made at cultivation, pruning, etc. The fruit 
will appear, not only in the development of the Christian 
graces of character, but also in increasing activities. 
We must not wait for our immortal bodies, promised us 
in our resurrection, before our activity in God's service 
begins. If we possess the spirit [the will, the disposition] 
of that new nature, our mortal bodies will be active in 
the service of God's Truth now. Our feet will be swift 
to run his errands, our hands prompt to do his bidding, our 



tongues ready to bear testimony to the Truth, our minds 
active in devising ways and means to do so more and 
more abundantly and effectively. Thus we shall be living 
epistles, known and read of all about us— an honor to 
him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 



R4809 : page 136 

KEEPING THE BODY UNDER 

"I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight 
I, not as one that beateth the air."— I Cor. 9:26. 

THE Apostle Paul had definite knowledge as 

to what constitutes the prize. He was not 

uncertain about it; it was not a question 

with him as to its being one thing or another. 

St. Paul knew that the "high calling 

in Christ Jesus" is that we may be 

heirs with him, if we suffer with him— that 

we shall be with him in glory. Neither 

was the Apostle uncertain as to the terms 

and conditions of the race. He knew that 

they were even unto death; and that if he should seek 

to save his life he would lose it. Neither was he uncertain 

as to his own determination. He knew positively 

that he had entered the course. He was not of those 

who merely say, "I hope to do so some time." He had 

made with the Lord his covenant of sacrifice unto death. 

Nor was the Apostle uncertain as to his opportunity 
to gain the prize. He knew that it remained with him 
to will and to do in harmony with God's good pleasure. 
He knew that nothing impossible was required of him in 
this race; that the terms and conditions of the race include 
"grace to help in every time of need"; and that 

R4810 :page 136 

this grace and help would come from the Lord. Hence, 

the Apostle's expression that, for the runners in this race-course, 

there was no uncertainty, from first to last. 

Thus it may be with all under the guiding eye of the 
Great Redeemer. We may each make our calling and 
election sure: "If ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 
for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly 
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ."-2 Pet. 1:10,11. 

"I KEEP MY BODY UNDER AND BRING IT INTO 
SUBJECTION" 

The Apostle tells us that he kept his body under, lest, 
having preached the good tidings to others, he himself, 
should be a castaway. "I keep my body under, and bring 



it into subjection, ...lest I myself should be a castaway," 
he declares. (I Cor. 9:27.) One translation has this, "I 
brow-beat my body"; that is to say, I use coercive measures 
upon my body. 

The body originally belonged to the natural man, the 
natural will. When the old will gave place to the new 
will, the latter became the owner of the body. The new 
will cannot properly be served by the old body, because 
the new mind is perfect and the body imperfect. When 
the new mind, the mind of God, the mind of Christ, therefore, 
takes into possession the mortal body, it has more 
or less difficulty. The mind is not suited to the body, 
nor the body to the mind. It is the work, therefore, of 
the new will to show its obedience to the Lord, its full 
loyalty to the Divine will, even though the body should 
be, in some respects, treated shamefully, its claim, its 
supposed necessities, etc., being ignored. 

Not only are we all thus to mortify and brow-beat 
the body, but, additionally, we are to bring it into subjection. 
We are to make it serve the New Creature. The 
Apostle says, "But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus 
from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ shall 
also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit." (Rom. 8:11.) 
The holy Spirit, which comes to us more and 
more as we feed upon the Lord, assists us to conform our 
lives to his will, and also quickens or makes alive our 
mortal bodies to the service of the Truth. 

There are not two creatures, but one; we cannot be 
two creatures at once. It is not until the old creature 
submits and we are transformed, so far as the will is concerned, 
that we become New Creatures, so that, henceforth, 
we really are New Creatures. But the New Creature 
has not its new body as yet. In our text the Apostle 
evidently refers to the New Creature, the New Man. 
There is an outward man, which the world may think is 
the individual, but in proportion as the outward man is 
brought into subjection and service, the New Creature is 
growing stronger, until eventually, with the death of the 
human body, God will give the New Creature a new body, 
in the resurrection. Then the new Creature will be satisfied, 
when it shall be found in his likeness. 

There is a tendency for the body, the flesh, to arise 
from its condition of reckoned deadness. Hence the 
New Creature needs to be continually on guard in the 
good fight of faith. These battlings of the new mind 
against the flesh are a "good fight," in the sense that they 
are fightings against sins and weaknesses that belong to 
the fallen nature. The entire course of the New Creature 
is the course of faith. It would be impossible for one to 
keep up this battle against the flesh and its propensities 
and desires, unless he exercise faith in the promises and 
in the Lord as his Helper. 

THE APOSTLE HAD NO THOUGHT OF HIS COMING SHORT 

There is another passage in which St. Paul says that 



we should "fear lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of 

R4810 :page 137 

it." (Heb. 4:1.) He had no thought of coming short of 
it himself, but he urged those to whom he was writing 
to make their "calling and election sure." 

It will be a great help to the overcoming of the weaknesses 
of the fallen nature to have rightly made a full consecration 
of the will, a full enlistment of every power and 
talent of mind and body to the service of the Lord. He 
who takes this proper view of his consecration to the 
Lord and of his enlistment in the Lord's army, realizes 
that he has nothing more to give to the Lord. Hence, 
whatever struggle of the will he may have had, is all 
ended when he has finally decided to give himself to the 
Lord. How important it is, therefore, to realize that the 
service is until death, and that there is no room even to 
consider any suggestion to withdraw and cease to fight 
the good fight of faith! 

We are to remember that it is not the flesh, the old 
creature, which has entered the School of Christ, and is 
under instruction and preparation for the Kingdom, for 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 
(I Cor. 15:50.) Our acceptance of the Divine call to the 
spirit nature means, not only the renunciation of the 
earthly nature in every sense of the word, but also our 
begetting as New Creatures, "sons of God." The New 
Creature, the new mind, the new will, is in the School 
of Christ, to be perfected, to be brought into full accord 
with the Divine will, to become a copy or likeness of 
the Lord. We shall never succeed in bringing our flesh 
into absolute harmony with the Divine Law, because of 
its imperfections, inherited and otherwise. Hence, the 
necessity that it be covered with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. He who looks for perfection of his flesh, 
and who rests his faith therein, must of necessity have 
a poor hope of ever attaining to the likeness of Christ— 
of ever becoming one of the predestinated class— of becoming 
"the image of his Son."— Rom. 8:29. 

"WE DO THOSE THINGS WHICH WE OUGHT NOT AND 
LEAVE UNDONE WHAT WE OUGHT TO DO" 

In joining the Lord in faith and consecration we are 
proclaiming ourselves, not as graduates and heirs, but as 
students, disciples, who desire to be prepared to inherit 
"the things which God has prepared for them that love 
him." (I Cor. 2:9.) If this thought be kept in mind 
as the Divine teaching on the subject, it will tend to 
prevent our discouragement with ourselves when we find 
that, unavoidably, we do those things which we ought 
not to do, and leave undone those things which we ought 
to do; for in our flesh dwells no perfection.— 
Rom. 7:15,18,19,25. 



It is unnecessary for us to point out that the new 
mind, in proportion as it develops in likeness to the mind 
of Christ, will relax no efforts to keep the body under, 
with the motions of sin— to keep the will of the flesh 
dead. Surely no spirit-begotten son of God could allow 
sin to reign in his mortal body. Should sin to any degree 
control him, it will not be willingly, and hence could 
be but momentarily— until the new mind, the New Creature, 
seeing the uprising of the flesh, would conquer it, 
obtaining the promised grace and help in every time of 
need, from the heavenly storehouse of grace— Christ. 

This thought, rightly entertained, will help true disciples 
to appreciate their own position, and not to be utterly 
cast down if overtaken in a fault of the flesh, so 
long as they realize that their hearts are not in sympathy 
with the sin and unrighteousness, but, on the contrary, 
in full sympathy with the principles and instructions 
of our Teacher, and longing to be cleansed and acceptable 
in his sight. Moreover, this thought will also 
help all such to exercise fervency of love amongst themselves, 
toward the brethren who similarly are disciples, 
pupils in this School— New Creatures, not according to 
the flesh, but according to the spirit of their mind. If, 
therefore, each should see blemishes in the flesh of the 
brethren, disapproved and striven against, he should remember 
that the evil which he sees is his brother's enemy, 
and not the brother himself, the New Creature— if so be 
that he gives us the assurance that his heart, his will, is 
in harmony with the Lord and his law of Love; and that 
he is daily seeking to fight a successful warfare against 
the weaknesses of the flesh. 

"A MAN IS TEMPTED WHEN HE IS LED AWAY OF HIS OWN 
DESIRES" 

When studying this subject we must keep two facts 
in mind: (1), The Scriptures ascribe no sin to the New 
Creature, and (2), no perfection in righteousness to our 
fallen flesh. The New Creature (whose flesh is reckoned 
dead), which is represented by the new mind, and which 
is begotten of God, CANNOT SIN; for in its very essence, as 
the seed or germ implanted by the Truth— "the spirit of 
the Truth"— it is opposed to sin. This New Creature is so 
fully in accord with righteousness, so fully imbued with 
the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, that it delights 
in holiness and not in sin; and this must be the 
case so long as this begotten or Holy-Spirit-condition 
continues. "He that is begotten of God sinneth not 
[willingly— neither approves of sin nor takes pleasure 
in it]; because his seed remaineth in him" [the holy 
seed of the Truth, the spirit of Truth with which he was 
begotten]; "and that Wicked One toucheth him not."— 
I John 3:9; 5:18. 

We are not to suppose that every trial or difficulty 
which besets us is of the Devil; but rather to remember 
the Apostle's words, "A man is tempted when he is led 



away of his own desires and enticed." (James 1:13,14.) 
Such temptations, then, are of the flesh, and the result 
of our being members of the fallen race, whose weaknesses 
and imperfections have been aggravated and intensified 
for now six thousand years. So, then, we are to 
recognize as among our chief foes our own inherent 
weaknesses and predisposition to things selfish, depraved, 
sinful. 

The whole world, thus depraved and under the control 
of the spirit of selfishness, are largely, though unconsciously, 
the tools of Satan, "who worketh in the hearts 
of the children of disobedience." (Eph. 2:2.) To the 
children of God the world has become an enemy and a 

R4811 :page 137 

tempter by reason of the fact that we [the Church] have 
been "begotten again" to new hopes, new ambitions, new 
aspirations, new desires, which are along radically different 
lines from anything the world knows or has sympathy 
with. 

"THE FLESH DESIRES CONTRARY TO THE SPIRIT, AND 
THE SPIRIT CONTRARY TO THE FLESH" 

Our begetting is of the Holy Spirit, and its tendencies 
are heavenly and spiritual, in harmony with righteousness 
and love. Yet it is only our hearts that are thus 
changed— our flesh is much more in harmony with the 
world than with the new order of things established in 
our hearts and wills by grace and truth, through Christ. 
Consequently, when the world, through the words or 
writings or general spirit of any of its children, comes 
into contact with the Lord's people, immediately they— 
the Lord's people— find that, although their hearts are 
loyal to the Lord and loyal to all the gracious things 
which he has promised them, and to the spirit of righteousness, 
love and truth, yet nevertheless, their flesh 
has an affinity for and an attraction toward the world, 
its views, its arrangements, its pleasures, etc. 

R4811 :page 138 

For this reason the Christian is called upon to reckon 
himself dead, not only to sin, but to his own natural desires, 
appetites, inclinations, and also to the world, which 
is in harmony with sin and has perverted tastes and appetites. 
As the Apostle intimates, there is a constant battle 
between the New Creature, the new will, and the old 
creature, the fleshly and depraved disposition. He says, 
"The flesh desires contrary to the spirit, and the spirit 
contrary to the flesh." (Gal. 5:17.) And even though 
the advanced Christian has reached the place where he is 
enabled to reckon his flesh and will completely dead and 
buried, nevertheless, he has need continually to re-examine 
himself lest the flesh should become alive again. 



This was the Apostle's method. He says, "I keep my 
body under [dead, buried] and bring it into subjection 
[to the new mind]; lest having preached to others I myself 
should be a castaway." (I Cor. 9:27.) This keeping 
of the body under, this watching it lest it should become 
alive again, is a constant necessity to those who 
would be overcomers; for it is the victory of the new 
mind, the new will, over the old will, the will of the 
flesh, that constitutes us victors, by developing in us 
strong, holy character— character like unto that of our 
glorious Lord and Redeemer. 



R4811 :page 138 

A GOD READY TO PARDON 

-JUNE 4.-HOSEA 14.- 

"For thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious 
and merciful, slow to anger."— Neh. 9:17. 

TODAY'S study is an exhortation by the 

Prophet Hosea to Israel, at that time distinct 

from Judah; but it is applicable to 

our own nation as well as to every nation. 

Israel had become debauched through 

idolatry. Intermarriage with the royalty 

of heathen nations had introduced the 

idolatries of heathen religions and the sensualities 

which constituted their attractive 

features to the people. With the sensuality 

came a lack of moral sense— a general numbness of 

conscience respecting impurities. The record indicates 

that Hosea's own wife was an adulteress, a debauchee, 

who finally left her husband and her false offspring. 

Later the Prophet took her back under his own roof, but 

not as his wife. He was compassionate toward her and 

her offspring. 

No doubt the Prophet's own experiences had much to 
do with awakening him to a realization of the deplorable 
state of his own people. When the spirit of the Lord 
came upon him in prophecy, he could the better from his 
own experiences enter into sympathy with them. He 
had been pitiful and of tender compassion, and his message 
told of the still greater Divine pity and sympathy. 

"RETURN UNTO THE LORD" 

The Prophet, in our lesson, urges his nation to realize 
their fallen condition, their helplessness, and to 
avail themselves of God's clemency. They must not look 
to Asshur (Assyria) for help, nor must they trust in 
horses imported from Egypt; nor must they any longer 
rely upon idols, the work of their own hands. On the 



contrary, they must turn to the Lord, who is merciful 
even unto the fatherless. The Israelites were fatherless in 
the sense that they had denied the Heavenly Father; the 
Creator, and had become children of the Adversary; even 
as Jesus said to some, "Ye are of your father the Devil, 
for his works ye do." 

In their repentance, in their return to God, they were 
not only to abandon false hopes and false worship and 
iniquity, but they were to take with them words, and say 
unto the Lord, "Take away our iniquity and receive us 
graciously, that we may render unto thee the fruit of 
our lips— our praise." 

Then follows a prophecy which has not yet been fulfilled, 
but will, we believe, soon be realized. It tells of 
the turning away of God's anger, of his blessing upon 
Israel. It will have fulfilment in the beginning of Messiah's 
reign. 

"RECEIVE US GRACIOUSLY" 

Be it noted that the people of Israel to this day have 
not accepted the Lord's terms as stated by the Prophet. 
They have not asked to be received by grace— graciously. 
They are still hoping for Divine favor through the keeping 
of the Law Covenant, which neither they nor others 
of fallen humanity can keep in its letter and spirit. 
This is the great lesson to be learned by all people, kindreds, 
nations— that we are all fallen, imperfect, unable 
to meet the Divine requirements— that we all need Divine 
grace, mercy, forgiveness of iniquity and help out of our 
imperfections. 

How God can be just and yet clear us was not made 
known in Hosea's day, but is now clearly set forth as the 
very essence of the "good tidings" of God's love. God 
himself has provided in Jesus this, the Ransom sacrifice, 
necessary to the satisfaction of Divine Justice, so that 
God can be both just and merciful, although these terms 
are antagonistic. 

"THE WISE SHALL UNDERSTAND" 

The last verse of the chapter declares, "Who is wise 
and he shall understand these things, prudent and he 
shall know them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and 
the just shall walk in them, but transgressors shall fall 
therein." 

In order to have a clear understanding of God's merciful 
provision it is necessary, first, that the transgressor 
shall come to a realization of his own needs— that he 
shall crave a recognition by the Creator and a share in 
his mercy and loving provisions. Such abandoning of 
sin to the extent of ability will be assisted of the Lord in 
connection with the exercise of faith in him, which will 
bring rest and peace of soul and a realization that Divine 
mercy will make good all unintentional blemishes and 
cause all things to work together for good to him. But 



there is no place on the Highway of Holiness— the Highway 
of Divine mercy and love and forgiveness and peace 
—for transgressors, for those who knowingly and willingly 
go contrary to the Divine will. 

CHRISTENDOM'S IDOLATROUS DEBAUCH 

We are not to lose the force of this lesson by applying 
it wholly to the nation of Israel. There is also a nominal 
spiritual Israel, styled "Christendom," professing to be espoused 
to the Lord. Christendom is, in the Scriptures, 
charged with adultery, in that she lives with the 
world. She is charged also with idolatry— with worshiping 
houses and lands, banks, stocks and bonds, name and 
fame. Indeed the serious charge against "Christendom" 
is that she has lost her God. Only the comparatively few, 
a mere handful, know God as their Father and are known 
of him as his children. Their confidence is in the work 
of their own hands, and in lodges, unions, trusts, insurance, 
church membership, etc. "God is not in all their 
thoughts." 

R4811 :page 139 

The condition of "Christendom" today is one of trust 
in armies and navies, soldiers and guns, aeroplanes and 
dynamite, great wealth and prosperity. Under the picture 
of Laodicea the nominal church of today is described as 
saying, "I am rich and increased in goods and have need 
of nothing." The Lord answers, "Thou knowest not that 
thou art poor and wretched and miserable and blind and 
naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, 
and raiment, that thou mayest be clothed and that the 
shame of thy nakedness do not appear."— Rev. 3:17,18. 

THE FATHERLESS FIND MERCY 

Such as are children of the Adversary— such as love 
iniquity and hate righteousness— have nothing to expect 
from the Almighty in the way of favor— "All the wicked 
will he destroy." But all such as renounce sin and desire 
to return to the Lord are fatherless in that they 
have neither Satan nor God as their father, but to such 
God proffers mercy, forgiveness, through the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice. Thus turning from sin they will be in 
proper condition to be the recipients of Divine favor and 
adoption as children of God. "Thou art a God ready to 
pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger." 

While God's anger against sin has been manifested 
for six thousand years in the reign of sin and calamity 
and death, nevertheless the Scriptures clearly foretell of 
the especial time of trouble or Divine wrath that will 
come upon Christendom in the close of this Gospel Age 
—at the ushering in of Messiah's Kingdom. The present 
is the time of special opportunity for those who would 
escape the severity of that trouble as well as for those 



who, becoming saints, would make their "calling and their 
election sure" to a share in the "Kingdom of God's dear 
Son." 



R4812:page 139 

HEZEKIAH'S GREAT REFORM 

--JUNE 11. -II CHRON. 30.- 

"Man looketh on the outward appearance, but 
the Lord looketh on the heart."— 1 Samuel 16:7. 

KING HEZEKIAH of Judah has a wonderful 

record as a man of God, a reformer, a 

patriot, yet he was the son of a bad father, 

who in turn was the son of a good father, 

who in turn was the son of a bad father. 

The alternation between good and bad for 

four generations illustrates the fact that, 

although heredity has much to do with 

every member of our race, nevertheless, 

there are counter-balances in nature. We 

are all members of Adam's family, and as such we are 

all sharers in the general weakness, mental, moral and 

physical, which for six thousand years has descended 

upon us. St. Paul refers to this, saying, "By one man's 

disobedience sin entered into the world, and death as 

the result of sin; and thus death passed upon all men, because 

all are sinners."— Romans 5:12. 

The downward or sinful tendency inbred in our very 
constitution is so strong that none is able fully to overcome 
it. The best that any of us can do is to set our 
wills in opposition to our inherited weaknesses and to 
fight courageously against them. The Apostle assures 
us that if it were possible for humanity to fully gain 
such a victory over its fallen self as to bring itself back 
to perfection, then doubtless God would have provided 
that way of salvation. But that way being impossible, 
God provided another method, another way, for our return 
to him— through the merit of Christ's death, "the 
Just for the unjust," and through Messiah's assistance. 
This assistance, in the present time, is confined to those 
who voluntarily seek it. They receive the blessing of 
peace and joy in the present life and later glory, honor 
and immortality with Messiah in his Kingdom. 

THOSE WHO WILL DO THE LORD'S WILL IN THE NEXT 
AGE SHALL NOT DIE 

However, many are so weakened, so "lost" through 
the fall, that they are, figuratively, blind and deaf to their 
own needs, to God's love and mercy in Christ, and to the 
Savior's offered assistance. These get little or none of 



the Redeemer's aid in the present time, yet they are not 
left out of the Divine provision. With the completion 
of the election of the saints will come the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom "under the whole heavens." By its 
power sin will be conquered and the blind and deaf prisoners 
of sin will be released, including the prisoners that 
have gone down into the prison-house of death— sheol, 
hades. 

Then gracious opportunities for earthly blessings and 
everlasting life will be afforded to all. Then it shall no 
longer be a proverb, "The fathers have eaten a sour 
grape and the children's teeth are set on edge." (Jer. 31:29,30.) 
Then only those who eat the sour grape of 
sin will die the Second Death; and all the willing and 
obedient shall be lifted up to perfection and eternal life. 

A lesson that all should learn is in respect to the 
power of the will and the necessity for having a positive 
or strong will rightly directed— a will to do right. King 
Hezekiah had a strong will, or heart. The secret of his 
success lay in the fact that he was not double-minded, but 
with his whole heart sought to do right— to do the Lord's 
will. 

True, it is better that one should be partly right-willed 
rather than wholly wrong-willed; but let us settle at once 
that such a person will, at most, be only a partial success 
in life. Our little all is surely none too much to give 
to our God, to our Redeemer, to the cause of righteousness. 
A mistake made by many well-meaning people 
is the keeping back of a part of their heart for themselves. 
If we give the Lord nine-tenths of our heart and 
our will and reserve one-tenth, in the furthest recesses, 
it will but weaken and blemish our character, our lives 
our success in Divine service. We will find ourselves 
making paths for selfishness and sin, from the unconsecrated, 
farthest corners, all over the consecrated nine-tenths. 
Properly, the Lord could not accept such a consecration 
under his call, "My son, give me thine heart." 

HEZEKIAH THE REFORMER 

Shortly after his ascension to the throne, King Hezekiah 
took steps for the reorganization of the worship of 
Jehovah God. His father had introduced idolatrous worship 
—erecting altars and groves to the worship of Baal. 
God's temple was strewn with rubbish. Under the direction 
of the King, the Levites began a cleansing work. It 
required eight days to carry out the rubbish from the 
court, etc. Then the priests, who alone were authorized 
to enter into the Holy, or temple proper, were directed to 
cleanse the temple itself. 

But as a preliminary work, before the cleansing of the 
court or the temple began, the King directed that the 
priests and the Levites sanctify themselves afresh to the 
Lord and his service. How appropriate! How in harmony 
with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, who lived at 
that time and who was the King's counselor— "Be ye 



clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord's house!"— 
Isa. 52:11. 

R4812:page 140 

It is an important thought that no one is properly 
ready to render service to God in any form or work until 
he himself has come to a sanctified condition of heart 
in relationship to the Lord. 

Applying this feature to reforms of our day, we concede 
the propriety of ministers of Christ taking a prominent 
part in respect to all religious reforms. In proportion 
as such have influence with the people, good may 
be accomplished. But let us not forget the instruction 
of St. Peter upon this subject. Comparing the priesthood 
of Israel with the institutions of the Christian 
church, St. Peter gives us the thought that the priests of 
olden times do not find their antitypes in the clergy of 
today, but in God's saintly or sanctified people, whether 
in or out of the public ministry. And the antitypical 
Levites of today are in general the household of faith. 
Thus St. Peter says to all of the consecrated Church of 
Christ, "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a 
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of 
him who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous 
light." 

The great King commands his consecrated people to 
purify the temple of God, which is the Church, "from 
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness 
in the reverence of the Lord." (2 Cor. 7:1.) In proportion 
as this is done, a blessed influence will go forth from 
the temple of God, the true Church, far reaching upon 
all those who love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

HEZEKIAH'S GREAT PASSOVER 

The King, although only twenty-five years old at this 
time, had a broad mind— the result of his whole-hearted 
consecration of himself to the Lord and the Lord's guidance 
—possibly through the Prophet Isaiah. Having gotten 
the temple into readiness, the King issued a general 
appeal to the people to return to the worship of God, 
to come up to Jerusalem to keep the Passover. Not only 
did this message go throughout the jurisdiction of his 
own kingdom of Judah, but it was extended to the ten 
tribes of the kingdom north, the split-off portion of the 
same people. Messengers were sent informing all that 
King Hezekiah had cleansed the temple and had appointed 
magnificent arrangements for the celebration of 
the Passover, and invited all who loved God and desired 
to worship him to come and celebrate the feast. 

Throughout the kingdom of Judah the message was 
well received, but in the northern kingdom, where idolatry 
had a stronger hold, the invitation was derided by 
many, pride and politics uniting in slighting the invitation 
and sneering at it and in denouncing the king as an 



up-to-date hypocrite, etc. 

The Passover feast, nevertheless, was a pronounced 
success, and so greatly enjoyed by the people that it was 
prolonged for a second week— the King giving bountifully 
from his flocks and herds, the people appreciating 
and availing themselves of his bounty. 

The rejoicing amongst the people was general, many 
of their brethren from the northern kingdom participating. 
We read, "So there was great joy in Jerusalem, 
for since the time of Solomon, the son of David, King 
of Israel, there was not the like in Jerusalem." 

The whole world today is bent on pleasure. It is 
sought in various directions, in hunting, fishing, theater-going 
money-making, in home, family, etc.— legitimately 
and illegitimately; but of the many who seek pleasure and 
joy, but very few find it; even the little found usually 
leaves a bitter taste in the mouth. The real finding of 
pleasure is in finding the Lord and coming into proper 
heart harmony with him. There is no other peace or joy 
or love so delicious, so soul-satisfying as that which comes 
from fellowship with the Creator through the Lord Jesus 
Christ; and this joy, as the Master said, he alone can 
give, and none can take it away from us. To maintain 
this joy we must continue to abide in his love— eating the 
Passover in an antitypical sense— rejoicing that we have 
been passed over by God's mercy and favor— that we 
have passed from death unto life— from sin to righteousness 
—from the world into "the Church which is the 
Body of Christ." 

THE SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND 

Our study records that amongst those who came to 
the Passover from the northern tribes, some ate the 
Passover without having performed the purifyings stipulated 
by the Law. King Hezekiah might without impropriety 
have made a great ado over this fact. He might 
have berated the visiting brethren on their ignorance, 
their stupidity, their saturation with idolatry to the neglect 
of their God's commandments. He might have 
ordered them to be driven from the Holy City. But he 

R4813 :page 140 

did more wisely. He prayed for them, asking Divine 
mercy for their error. Similarly, in the Church of Christ, 
we at times find some who but imperfectly comprehend 
the sanctification of life necessary to a proper participation 
in the Lord's "feast of fat things." Let us 
be wise in our dealing with such; let us not denounce 
them as hypocrites nor hold up their shortcomings. Let 
us pray for them and assist them in the more excellent 
way. Let us remember the words of our text, "Man 
looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh 
on the heart." Let us be less punctilious respecting 
forms and ceremonies, and more lovingly sympathetic 



with the expressions of heart of all those who seek to 
draw nigh unto the Lord. 

THE DIVINE BLESSING 

The conclusion of the feast was a Divine blessing 
upon all the people, through the Priests and Levites. So 
there goes out a Divine blessing from the Lord's sanctified 
people— from all the consecrated of the household of 
faith— to the people in general— to their neighbors, their 
friends and visitors from afar. Let such be our influence 
amongst men. In this connection let us remember the 
power of the tongue, of which the Apostle said, "Therewith 
praise we God, and therewith curse (or injure) we 
men." Let our tongues and all our powers be used in 
blessing the people as well as in praising our God. 

The King wisely began his reformation at the temple 
and gave the priests and Levites the first share therein. 
It was later that the idols of the city of Jerusalem were 
gathered and hurled into the valley of Kedron, and it 
was after the fervor of the Passover occasion that the 
zeal of the people in general rose high, and they went 
forth all over the land, destroying the idols, the groves 
of Baal, and every symbol of disloyalty to God. 

And so today: Everywhere the light of our day is 
showing more and more of the meanness, selfishness, 
corruption— some of it centuries old, and some of it bred 
of special privilege and opportunity in our day. The 
call for reform is heard on every hand, although sometimes 
but feeble. The proper place for reform is, as in 
Hezekiah's day, with the sanctification of the priests and 
the Levites themselves. 

Let us not forget this; and after having seen to our 
own heart purification in harmony with God, let us proceed 
to the cleansing of the Sanctuary. Idols and traditions 
of men in the form of venerable creeds of the past 
are defiling the Temple of God. These must be gotten rid 

R4813 :page 141 

of. The vessels of the Lord's house must be cleansed of 
all defilements— their human traditions, heathen philosophies 
and superstitions. We must no longer worship a 
book and a cross, but must reverence the teachings of 
the Book and the significance of the cross. 

If the Church of Christ could but faithfully perform 
her responsibility, under the direction of the King, it 
would mean a great revival of religion. It would mean 
the sanctifying of the people. It would mean the casting 
out of the idols of mammon— selfishness, filthy lucre 
and worldly fame, and a general bowing down of men to 
the Giver of every good and perfect gift. 



R4813 :page 141 



THE WORLD'S HATRED 

"Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you"; 
"Ye know that it hated me before it hated you." 
-1 John 3:13; John 15:18. 

HERE the great Teacher seems to show that 

the kind of hatred that would come to us 

would be the same that came to himself. 

Looking at his experiences we see that he 

was hated chiefly by the most prominent, 

the most influential amongst the people. 

The Scribes specially hated him; but the 

Pharisees, the Chief Priests and the Sadducees 

also hated him. In time their hatred 

extended to the common people. The lower 

classes are always led by the superior classes; the lesser 

Pharisees by the greater Pharisees; the lesser Sadducees 

by the greater Sadducees, etc. Probably the common 

people could not give an intelligent reason why they hated 

the Lord. Accepting the presentations of their leaders, 

they assumed that he was a fraud and an impostor, and 

hated him as such. In proportion as they esteemed their 

leaders, they were inclined to disesteem whomsoever these 

disesteemed. 

So it is today. We can see that there are motives 
behind the hatred manifested toward the Lord's people. 
No prominent person poses as being wicked. Hence, 
there is a general disposition on the part of all to justify 
themselves (politically and religiously), as moved by 
noble sentiments, as either the supporters or originators 
of high standards. But we see the hypocrisy which is 
made manifest by the lies and the procedure of those who 
hate the Lord's people without a cause. When, therefore, 
the Truth comes to any of those who have error and 
pride mingled with worldly religion, it becomes a rebuke 
to them. As the Apostles went from one place to another 
it was said of them, "These that have turned the world 
upside down have come hither also."— Acts 17:6. 

The thoughts of Jesus are so deep and touch so upon 
the heart that everything not fully in accord with them 
appears worthless in comparison. Hence, many of those 
who have been teachers of religion find themselves impelled, 
through hate and envy, to try to crush, to blacken, 
to defame that which is true. But these teachers are 
being tested; they are being proved. To the Lord, at 
least, their hypocrisy is manifested, whether others be 
deceived by it or not. It is, therefore, today as it was in 
our Lord's day— "The darkness hateth the light." 

"WHOEVER WILL LIVE GODLY IN CHRIST JESUS SHALL 
SUFFER PERSECUTION" 

As our Lord explained, the darkness of sin and error 
is in direct antagonism to the light of Truth, and consequently 



when his people lift up the light— "Let their light 

so shine as to glorify their Father which is in heaven," 

who has called them "out of darkness into his marvelous 

light"— the effect upon the darkened world is to awaken 

opposition, antagonism, and thus to disturb and make uncomfortable 

those in sympathy with darkness. Consequently, 

those who love darkness, those who love evil, 

those who love sin in its varied forms, hate the light, 

neither come to the light; but either publicly or secretly 

oppose the children of the light, the enlightened ones, the 

light-bearers. And even those who have gotten out of 

the extreme darkness of moral pollution into a kind of 

twilight of civilized reformation and moral reform, cannot 

endure the clear, searching light of the true Gospel. 

They much prefer a measure of darkness.— John 3:20. 

In consequence of this conflict between light and darkness, 
our Lord suffered at the hands of those who professed 
to be children of the light, children of God; and 
who had, at least, a little light. Our Lord was not maltreated 
by either the Roman Governor or the Roman 
soldiers, of their own volition; for they were so totally 
blind as not to appreciate the light which he displayed. 
His persecutors were those who had some light, but who 
hated the brilliancy of the great Light shining upon them. 

Similarly, all down through this Gospel Age, those 
who have been burning and shining lights in the world 
have been hated and persecuted chiefly (almost exclusively) 
by those who had some light, but whose light 
was darkness in comparison with the great light of the 
holy Spirit shining in and through the Lord's fully consecrated 
ones. Thus was fulfilled our Lord's testimony, 
"If they hated me they will also hate you"; "Whosoever 
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
(John 15:18; I John 3:13; 2 Tim. 3:12.) The Lord's 
followers in the present time are called upon to suffer 
persecution for righteousness' sake, not because it is 
either reasonable or proper, but because the Lord, wishing 
to test, prove, and polish his people, is willing to 
permit the evil, opposing influences to prosper and to 
persecute and oppose his "members," and thus to serve 
his cause in the preparation of his Elect for a future 
work of service. Thus the persecutors of the Body, as 
did the persecutors of the Head, are co-operating to fulfil 
the Divine Plan in a manner they little suspect. 

"MARVEL NOT IF THE WORLD HATE YOU" 

When the Lord's followers take a firm stand for 
Truth and righteousness, as did their Leader, the results 
are the same. Satan is their implacable opponent; he 
will see to it that they suffer, that there will be opposition, 
not only by himself, but by the world, which is 
largely under the influence of his spirit in various ways. 
Having taken this stand, the Lord's people must not 
marvel if the world hate them and say all manner of evil 
against them falsely, for Christ's sake. The more 



prominent they may be, as in our Lord's case, the more 
virulent will be the attacks against them; the more interested 
will be the great Adversary in overcoming them. 

This thought that Satan opposes us, and that we are 
contending not merely with flesh and blood, but with 
principalities and powers and wicked spirits in high positions 
of power (Eph. 6:12), would be appalling to us did 
we not, on the other hand, realize that by this same positiveness 
of decision for Truth and righteousness we acquire 
great help and assistance by other unseen powers. 
From the moment of our positive resistance of temptation 
and positive standing up for the Lord and his cause, we 
become stronger in the Lord and in the power of his 

R4814:page 142 

might. Let us remember that "greater is he that is for 

us than all that can be against us."— Matt. 5:11; Eph. 6:12; 

I John 4:4. 

The chief opposition to our Lord came from the 
religious leaders and professors. The union of the 
worldly and the semi-religious is sometimes complete, as 
in the union of Church and State in foreign lands; in 
other instances, it is incomplete, as in this country, where 
the Church and State are not fully united. Nevertheless, 
the politician desires the support of the professors and 
supporters of religion. These, in turn, plume themselves 
on their political influence and seek to use this influence 
for their own advantage, or, as they would say, for the 
"good of the cause." So, where there is no direct union 
between Church and State, there is an affiliation, an indirect 
union. The politician wishes to have the support 
of the moral and religious leaders of the community and 
others. Thus drawn together, the princes of this world, 
both religious and secular, uphold one another. Their 
interests are one. Hence, the Lord and all those who are 
his "members" and followers would be unsympathetically 
viewed, hated, persecuted; for the presentations of the 
Truth make manifest various errors and hypocrisies in 
contrast with Divine standards. 



R4814:page 142 

"GOOD TIDINGS" IN INDIA 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Yours dated February 1 1 reached me too late last 
week, so I was not able to send a reply then. I am very 
glad to hear from you; the contents of your letter give 
me much strength. 

In Travancore the Truth is spreading rapidly; the 
Lord is opening the way. Everywhere people are flocking 
to hear the Gospel Truth! The majority of the poor 
people are unable to grasp the details, but a large number 



among them, who are the leaders of the community and 
can read and write their vernacular language (Malayalam) 
are able to understand the Plan of the Lord; and 
I am glad to tell you, dear Brother, that they are appreciating 
the Truth, and gladly preach it to others. 

In my last letter I wrote the details of the work in 
Travancore. Before I left India, or rather Travancore, 
fourteen years ago, I spoke Malayalam and Tamil 
fluently. (These two are the languages spoken in Travancore.) 
But when I came back I was not able to talk 
either Malayalam or Tamil. But now I can talk both 
fluently; they have come back without much trouble. So 
the language difficulty in connection with the work in 
Travancore is no more. 

Until a few weeks back the work was not systematized. 
From experience, the Lord has shown me that the work 
among that people must be carried on in a thoroughly organized 
form, and that no hope of material help should 
be given to them in any way. This is quite new to them, 
as all the missionary societies start their "Christian" 
work on the basis of "rice" Christianity. It took some 
time and much hardship to convince the leading men of 
the wisdom of the method we have adopted. The Lord 
has opened their eyes to see the beauty of Christianity 
and the principles upon which the Lord and the Apostles 
carried on the work. I am glad to say that they understand 
a great deal now of the Secret of the Lord. Their 
lives, their enthusiasm and zeal explain it. 

Just think, these poor people going about and visiting 
the people at their houses and teaching them the Truth, 
and also making arrangements to hold meetings in several 
places! We have in all now sixteen congregations 
holding meetings regularly in fifty different places 
hereabout. Thirteen of the brethren are working 
regularly among these people. The fact that they have 
been doing this work for the last two months (some of 
them for five or six months) without receiving any financial 
help, shows the interest and the devotion they have 
for the Lord's work. We have fourteen temporary shelters 
for the purpose of holding meetings. In each of these 
places from 100 to 350 people attend the meetings regularly 
—not simply attend the meetings, but they have 
learned much during these days; and even those who 
were once baptized in the London Mission Church 
want to be immersed again since they understand 
the real import of baptism as set forth in the Scriptures. 

As large numbers of the people are illiterate, we have 
to teach the Truth orally. But as there are quite a good 
many who are able to read and write, it is best to have 
some tracts printed, setting forth the main points of 
Present Truth. 

As we have thoroughly consecrated men with us now, 
as far as I can judge, we would have no difficulty in entrusting 
the work of teaching to such. Many people 
have come to me to start work among them, but I have 
not yet seen my way clear to begin the work and carry 



it on effectively. 

You will be greatly surprised, dear Brother, when I 
say that among all the "Christian" people in these parts, 
the Present Truth is the subject of discussion. Some are 
for, and others against it, even in the sectarian pulpits. 
Last week there was a conference of the London Mission 
people, where the main discussion was about the 
Lord's work of our Society in these parts. So there is 
much interest either directly or indirectly. 

The elders and deacons hold two class meetings each 
week; about thirty are attending and studying the Lord's 
Word to preach to others. Some walk from twelve to 
fifteen miles to attend these meetings. We hold these 
from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. I find that this class study work 
is very helpful. They all have their note-books with them 
and take notes when I discuss each subject from the volumes 
and the booklets. It is wonderful how these poor 
ones go to the Reverends and tell them about the Truth, 
giving Bible references for every statement they make. 

It is best to have some booklets printed for the use 
of these Pilgrims, Elders, etc., as well as for those who 
are able to understand the Truth somewhat. It will cost 
too much to have the volumes translated either into Malayalam 
or Tamil. We shall have to circulate the literature 
free, as the people are unable to pay. I would suggest 
that extracts of certain chapters of all the six volumes 
be printed. We must have also some tracts in 
Malayalam and Tamil. We can distribute these tracts 
among the denominational church people whom we cannot 
reach otherwise. These are the reasons why I put 
$500 for printing purposes for this year. The tracts could 
be used in all South India, among fifteen or twenty millions 
of people. 

I am sorry to say that some of the teachers have to 
work in the fields at least a few days each week to 
earn their bread; the rest of the time they spend in 
preaching the Gospel and holding meetings. Last Sunday 
morning 450 people attended the service in one place, 
and in the evening 850. 

Your brother and servant of the Lord. S. P. D. 

IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Your welcome letter of March 21 is before me. I am 

R4814:page 143 

glad to have it. If you can get into right line with our 
ideas of the work we will be glad, and believe that a great 
blessing may result. We are praying for you and the 
work in India, and believe from the tenor of your last 
letter that you now understand our program better than 
at first, and will follow it. 

Our plan is not to trust to oral instruction of teachers, 
but to co-operate specially with those who are able 



to read English, and who will take the printed matter 
with them in their preaching and translate to those who 
are unable to read. We do not mean by this that none may 
be accepted as teachers who cannot read English, but 
that those able to read English should be given preference. 

You are quite right, dear Brother, in understanding 
us not to wish to purchase either teachers or hearers with 
rice. The Gospel must be hungered and thirsted for 
with a spirited appetite. As for the teachers being 
obliged to labor a part of their time, we think it the very 
best way, except for a very few whose entire time as 
overseers might be necessary, like your own and that of 
the pilgrims. We favor this very same course in every 
land. For the teachers to be so separated from the people 
that it would be thought a shame for them to make 
tents or do other work for an honest living, is neither 
good for themselves nor does it have the proper influence 
upon the people with whom they should be in close touch 
as "brethren." 

We feel that the money sent you thus far has not 
been unwisely expended, and you may count on upwards 
of two thousand rupees for printing during the ensuing 
year, also an allowance not to exceed five rupees per 

R4815 :page 143 

week for the teachers who are giving all their time, and 
something less for those giving part of their time. 

Please make monthly reports, which need not be 
lengthy, but which should contain distinct statements of 
amounts expended for literature and the quantity it purchased, 
also number of teachers and pilgrims, and briefly 
the work being done. 

We are sending herewith L.20. 

Very truly your brother and servant in the Lord. 



page 143 

ANNUAL REQUEST FOR VISITS OF TRAVELING BRETHREN 

THE Lord's blessing continues richly with this 

branch of the service. During the period 

from May, 1910, to May, 1911, there has 

been a large increase in the number of 

public meetings held, and a corresponding 

increase also in the attendance. Larger 

auditoriums, better means of announcement, 

and a thorough house-to-house distribution 

of Everybody's have been the 

means through which the Lord has been 

pleased to specially bless this branch of the harvest work. 

This wide-open door seems, by the Lord's grace, to 
open still more widely for the year— May, 1911, to May, 
1912. If you desire to arrange for large public meetings, 



but feel that the expense would burden you, mention that 
fact; the Society may wish to assist financially. 

Do not get the thought, however, that these visits are 
merely for the public; they are also intended to encourage 
Bible Students everywhere; it matters not whether the 
class be large or small. No charge is made for these 
services. The Society pays all the necessary traveling 
expenses, etc., and takes up no collections. The cost is 
borne by the general fund to which many of you are, or 
have been, contributors. Requests for these visits must 
be renewed every year in May. It is our desire to serve 
all who make request. We will use our best endeavor to 
this end. 

All desirous of visits by the traveling brethren during 
the year from May, 191 1, to May, 1912, are invited to 
send in postal-card replies to the following questions: 

(a) Are regular meetings being held? 

(b) How many are usually in attendance? 

(c) Where do you meet? What time? 

(d) Have the members of your class chosen leaders 

in accord with STUDIES, Vol. VI, chapters V and VI? If 
so, give name and full address of each. 

(e) Give full names and full addresses of the two 

[2] to whom notice re traveling brethren should be sent, 
and notify us as to any change or removal. 

(f) If your town is not on a railroad give the name 
of railroad station at which to stop. 

(g) How many miles from station is meeting place, 
and which direction from station? 

(h) Would the Brother be met at station? 
(i) Give writer's full name and address, 
(k) Give Secretary's full name and address. 



R4815 :page 143 

THE WESTWARD CONVENTION TOUR 

THE WATCH TOWER of May 1 is ready for 
the press as we arrive home from our 
European campaign. We are quite well and 
send greetings to all of our dear readers, 
promising further details later respecting 
our European experiences. 

We take this opportunity to express our 
regret that so considerable an announcement 
of our Western Tour during June and 
July was inserted in these columns during 
our absence. We are finding no fault, however; those 
responsible for the insertion used their best judgment and 
supposed they had the Editor's mind on the subject. We 
would have preferred the bare announcement of the stopping-places 
and dates, rather than what might to some appear 
an advertisement and a solicitation for a large party. 

We appreciate very much the interest in this Tour displayed 



by some of the friends, particularly by Brother Dr. 

Jones, the prime mover in the excursion feature. We wish, 

however, to have it distinctly understood that neither 

the Bible and Tract Society, nor the Editor has anything 

whatever to do with the arrangements for the excursion 

party. Brother Jones inquired months ago 

whether or not the Editor would object to company on this 

Convention Tour. He was assured that we would greatly 

enjoy the fellowship of friends accompanying, although 

we would not expect to be with them much, because necessities 

require that our work through a stenographer shall 

continue at every available opportunity during the two 

months of our absence from Brooklyn. We specified this, 

so that whoever would be of Brother Jones' company 

would know in advance not to expect very much of the 

Editor's time in conversation, etc. 

We are stating matters thus very plainly, in order 
that none may join Brother Jones' excursion under any 
misapprehension, nor with the supposition that the Society 
has urged them to do so; nor should we be considered as 
a party in any sense of the word to any appeals for aid 
in connection with the excursion. We urge each one contemplating 
the matter to consider the subject on its own 
merits and to decide in respect to these matters according 
as his own conscience shall dictate to him the Lord's will. 



page 146 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
386 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal— 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 370 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Day of Vengeance," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 660 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 



SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 507 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 
and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 740 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 