The Strong Charges Against World Religion
JUST where is world religion leading mankind? You may be surprised, even shocked, at the answer to that question.
Still, we feel that you would want a frank, straightforward discussion of the matter.
But why should I be interested? you may ask. Perhaps you feel that the question does not really affect you.
Yet, are you interested in yourself and the welfare of your family? No doubt you are. Then whether you go to church or not, world religion involves you in a way that could lead to tragic consequences for both you and your loved ones.
How can this be so? Is not that stretching matters? You may feel that religion could not have that much influence. Yet, listen to one of the charges that God himself hurls against world religion: “In her was found the blood of . . . all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.”​—Rev. 18:24.
Think of that! God’s Word says that world religion bears the main guilt for all the wars that have slaughtered so many millions throughout history!
The Bible also depicts world religion as a harlot. It says that she has ‘gone to bed’ with the rulers of the earth and that those who live on earth have been “made drunk with the wine of her fornication.” This woman, world religion, is called “the mother of the harlots and of the disgusting things of the earth.”​—Rev. 17:2, 5.a
Does that shock you? Yet, that is what God’s Word says about it. And who should know the truth about religion better than God himself?
But can the world’s troubles really be blamed on religion? Well, what about Communism? And what about the oppression by the rich that has caused many to turn to Communism?
Josef Hromadka, dean of the Comenius theological faculty in Prague, Czechoslovakia, said: “I am not a Communist, I am a Christian. But I know that it is we, we Christians alone, who are responsible for Communism. . . . We ‘said, and did not.’ . . . Remember that the Communists once were Christians. If they do not believe in a just God, whose fault is it?”1b
It is not only hypocritical piety that has turned millions against the churches. There is more to it. Whom has world religion generally supported? Has it not been the oppressive rich, the wealthy landowners and powerful business interests? To find relief, many have turned to Communism.
Then, too, what about today’s moral breakdown? Is it possible that religion bears the main guilt for this too? Could it be largely to blame for the fornication, adultery, homosexuality and venereal disease so rampant throughout Christendom today?
Wars, Communism, immorality​—many people would find it difficult to believe that world religion could be responsible for leading mankind into such things. Yet, remember that Jesus Christ called the religious leaders of his day “blind guides.” He said: “If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.” (Matt. 15:14) Yes, those religious leaders were misleading the people.
Jesus even showed that those religious leaders were directly responsible for leading the Jews to the terrible destruction that came upon Jerusalem and Judea less than forty years later.​—Matt. 23:29-36.
Is there a parallel to that today? Is modern-day religion actually leading the masses of mankind to a similar destruction? Even to suggest such a thing may offend you. But what if that is exactly what God’s Word says? If so, then should we not at least take the time to consider why, and what we can do about it?
Hence, let us examine where religion is really leading mankind. Then we will see what God purposes to do about it. Also, it will become clear to you how all this affects you and your loved ones.
[Footnotes]
See the book “Babylon the Great Has Fallen!” God’s Kingdom Rules!
References are on page 29.

