From Our Readers
Gambling  While your article series “Gambling​—Does It Pay?” (June 8, 1992) was certainly informative and timely, nothing was mentioned about sports betting. Unlike playing cards, lotteries, slot machines, and so forth, sports betting can be done anytime, day or night. You don’t even have to leave your job. I believe this type of gambling is more epidemic than the type discussed in your articles. Sports betting wastes not only money but also precious time that could be spent with one’s family. Such time is used to keep track of scores and the outcome of games. Sports gambling is thus another sad commentary on this system of things.
C. Y., United States
Thank you for giving us insight into the compulsive gambler. I have had to live with the pain of being raised by a compulsive gambler. Mother was a single parent with five children. She played bingo six nights a week, every week, and does so to this day. Gambling always came first. We would beg her to spend time with us, to fix a meal for us, but it was to no avail. She sacrificed her children for bingo. Thank you for helping me understand better why she did this.
R. E., United States
Curfews  I wish to thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Why Is My Curfew So Strict?” (May 22, 1992) I will soon turn 17, and I thought it was absurd that my mother still imposed an 11:00 p.m. curfew. A few nights I got home late because of carelessness, and my mother was extremely upset! I appreciate how you brought out that parents become uneasy and anxious, fearing for our well-​being when we are not home on time. It was truly selfish of me to be responsible for such needless anxiety.
O. C., United States
Crossword Puzzles  I want to thank you for publishing crossword puzzles in Awake! I just wish there were more of them. I’m studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, but my husband is not very interested. He does not read much, and it is hard to find an incentive for him to do so. But he likes to do your crossword puzzles! In fact, we do them together, which is very good for us. Thank you.
E. X. E., Brazil
“Awake!” will continue to publish crossword puzzles on an occasional basis.​—ED.
Virginity  The article “Young People Ask . . . Why Stay a Virgin?” (April 22, 1992) has been of great help to me. I lost my virginity before I got married. Even though at that time I didn’t know Jehovah’s laws fully, it disturbed my conscience very much, and I have suffered emotionally. I cried when I read the article. It was comforting to know I have been cleansed in God’s eyes. How beneficial it would be if youngsters would read this article and decide to remain virgins! I wish I had done so.
M. S., Puerto Rico
Universe  How insignificant we are before God! That is what you showed in the article “Unlocking the Secrets of the Universe.” (March 22, 1992) Man’s telescopes are unveiling the infinite universe little by little. Their discoveries confirm to us that someone greater and wiser than we are created this mysterious universe and the laws that govern it. We should be humble enough to acknowledge this.
M. R. S., Brazil

