Do You Remember?
Have you given careful thought to recent issues of The Watchtower? If so, you will find it interesting to recall the following:
□ How have many married couples today followed the excellent example left by Aquila and Priscilla?
Aquila and Priscilla served in several different congregations. Like them, many modern-day Christians have made themselves available to move where the need is greater. They have also experienced joy and satisfaction from seeing Kingdom interests grow and from being able to cultivate precious Christian friendships.—12/15, page 24.
□ What is the Bible’s view of alcoholic beverages?
The Bible’s view of alcoholic beverages is balanced. On the one hand, the Bible says that wine is a gift from God. (Psalm 104:1, 15) On the other hand, it condemns overindulgence. (Luke 21:34; 1 Timothy 3:8; Titus 2:3; 1 Peter 4:3)—12/15, page 27.
□ What is a significant feature of the Bible book of Haggai?
Although the book of Haggai is made up of just 38 verses, God’s name is used 35 times. Such prophecy sounds lifeless when the name Jehovah is replaced by the title “Lord.”—1/1, page 6.
□ What lesson can be learned from David and Manasseh’s sins?
Despite Jehovah’s forgiving David and Manasseh, these men—and Israel with them—had to live with the consequences of their sinful acts. (2 Samuel 12:11, 12; Jeremiah 15:3-5) In a similar way, while Jehovah today forgives repentant sinners, there may be consequences of their actions that cannot be avoided.—1/1, page 27.
□ In what way are ‘the feet of those who declare the good news’ of God’s Kingdom “comely”? (Isaiah 52:7)
It is the feet that ordinarily move a person as he goes out to preach to others. Such feet really represent the person. So to the many who hear and respond favorably to the good news of the Kingdom, such messengers’ feet are indeed a beautiful sight.—1/15, page 13.
□ What is the twofold work involved in “declaring the good news”? (1 Corinthians 9:16)
First, we must proclaim the good news of the Kingdom. The second aspect of this work involves teaching those who respond favorably to the Kingdom proclamation.—1/15, page 23.
□ What personal benefits result from singing Kingdom songs at congregation meetings?
Singing gives us the opportunity to express our feelings for our Creator. (Psalm 149:1, 3) When we pour our heart into congregation singing, it can put us in the proper frame of mind and heart for the program that follows. It can spur us on to a greater share in Jehovah’s worship.—2/1, page 28.
□ When is it that the day of death is better than the day of birth? (Ecclesiastes 7:1)
The day of death can be better than the day of one’s being born if one has by then built up a good name with Jehovah, who can resurrect faithful ones who die. (John 11:25)—2/15, page 12.
□ Why should the book of Ecclesiastes help us personally?
It can help each one of us set straight our outlook on life and what we focus on. (Ecclesiastes 7:2; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17)—2/15, page 16.
□ Are Jehovah’s Witnesses fundamentalists?
No. While they have strong religious convictions, they are not fundamentalists in the sense the term has come to be used. They do not resort to demonstrations and violence against those with whom they disagree. They imitate their Leader, Jesus Christ.—3/1, page 6.
□ Not knowing the exact time of Jesus’ coming to execute God’s vengeance has what effect upon Christians?
This tends to keep Christians vigilant and gives them daily opportunity to prove that they serve Jehovah with unselfish motives.—3/1, page 13.
□ What should we consider before taking legal action against a brother who may have defrauded us?
We should consider the possible effects on us, on others involved, on the congregation, and on outsiders. (1 Corinthians 6:7)—3/15, page 22.
□ How can true happiness be obtained?
True happiness is a condition of the heart, based on genuine faith and a good relationship with Jehovah. (Matthew 5:3)—3/15, page 23.
□ What should a Christian do when called for jury duty?
Each Christian faced with jury duty must determine what course to follow, based on his understanding of the Bible and his own conscience. (Galatians 6:5)—4/1, page 29.

