World Food Security Ensured—By What Means?
“OUR best efforts may not be enough to retain the food security we have known for most of this century,” claims Lester Brown, president of Worldwatch Institute in Washington, D.C. According to New Scientist magazine, at the start of 1995, the world’s grain reserves hit an all-time low of 255 million tons—enough to feed the world for only 48 days. In previous years when reserves dipped below the 60-day mark, the supply was able to recover. But now Worldwatch is unsure of the earth’s ability to regain its losses.
After three years of poor harvests and with more developing countries using grain for livestock consumption, there is less grain available for the poor who require it as a staple. New Scientist warns that if the situation does not receive immediate attention, the one billion people who spend at least 70 percent of their income on food may begin to starve.
The Bible foretold that earth’s inhabitants in our time would experience “food shortages.” (Luke 21:11) Yet God is not indifferent to the problem. Indeed, his concern for man’s plight will ultimately be shown when his Kingdom takes control of earth’s affairs. At that time “the earth itself will certainly give its produce.” “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth; on the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (Psalm 67:6; 72:16) Then these prophetic words regarding the Creator will be fulfilled: “You have turned your attention to the earth, that you may give it abundance . . . The low plains themselves are enveloped with grain.”—Psalm 65:9, 13.
Does that marvelous promise appeal to you? Would you like to know how you can be part of it? Then ask Jehovah’s Witnesses to tell you more about this promised Paradise the next time they call at your door. If you would like to have someone come to your home to conduct a free Bible study with you, please write to Watchtower, 25 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201-2483, or to the appropriate address listed on page 2.
[Picture Credit Line on page 32]
Inset: Pictorial Archive (Near Eastern History) Est.

