From Our Readers
God’s Existence  I cannot describe how helpful I found the series “Does God Really Exist?” (February 8, 1999) It showed me the God whom I have heard so much about but had been unable to find. Thank you from the bottom of my heart for illuminating the path of truth for people like me.
C. P., Brazil
Useful Despite Blindness  Thank you for the life story of Polytimi Venetsianos, “Useful and Happy Despite My Blindness,” in the February 8, 1999, issue. Her courage and steadfast faith in God have deeply touched my heart. On the one hand, the life of this exceptional woman has been filled with loss and hardship. But on the other hand, it is rich in priceless benefits. I believe that her story will serve as a great help and encouragement to all who have got tired during this hard race for life.
K. R., Russia
Clothing  I am 11 years old, and I do not have words to express my thanks for the excellent instruction in the article “The Kind of Clothes We Wear—Does It Really Matter?” (February 8, 1999) Previously I wanted to dress like my classmates. But this article helped me to see that my clothing should be neat—not outrageous or extreme.
A. S., Estonia
I sometimes feel sad when others say that my clothes are old-fashioned or formal. Your article was very encouraging because it confirmed that following Bible principles is worthwhile.
R. L., Brazil
For many years my feelings toward Jehovah’s Witnesses were a mixture of pity and amusement. Then a friend gave me a copy of the February 8, 1999, issue of Awake! Reading the magazine was great fun and changed my opinion of the Witnesses. What particularly impressed me was the article on clothes, which described my own behavior when it comes to buying clothes. In the future, I will not be so set on designer clothes. And I will ask my friend to get me more of your magazines to read!
U. B., Germany
Pesticides  My wife and I were really pleased with the article “Chemical Pesticides Kill More Than Bugs.” (February 22, 1999) As environmentalists, we have tried to combat the poisoning of this earth. It is reassuring to find that there are people in Brazil, China, and other countries who are also concerned and who are doing something constructive.
W. G., Canada
Gossip  Many thanks for the article “Young People Ask . . . What’s So Bad About Gossip?” (February 22, 1999) Some time ago, when someone spread the rumor that I would be the next person disfellowshipped from the congregation, I discovered personally just how painful gossip can be. That lie hurt so much! The person responsible apologized, but my trust in him ended.
R. M., Switzerland
Gossip is rampant in my school, so the article was very encouraging and strengthening to me. I’m ashamed to say that I have gossiped to make others look really bad. And when friends have spoken against others, I have listened and have even joined in the conversation. So when I went through the article, I was shocked and felt that every sentence was counseling me on things I was doing. I’m very ashamed of all the gossiping I have done. I know the gossip will continue at my school, but I’m determined to be strong enough not to be a part of it.
M. W., Japan

