From Our Readers
Do-​It-​Yourself  Your article (November 8, 1989) was very interesting, but do you realize that the man climbing the extension ladder is using it the wrong way round? This is very dangerous.
G. R. H., Britain
Thank you for calling this to our attention. Extension ladders should always have the extension side out​—not in, as improperly shown in our photograph.​—ED.
Fighting Parents  I read the article “Young People Ask . . . What Should I Do if My Parents Fight?” (December 8, 1989) Although I am not so young anymore, I can remember how my parents used to fight regularly. The whole family can suffer when parents fight. But I now realize that you increase the suffering if you take sides as I did. Thank you very much for the article.
G. H., Netherlands
Satanism  I can only express profound thanks for the article on Satanism. (October 22, 1989) My mother gave a fine outward appearance, and many people thought well of her. However, she was in with a group of people who practiced demonism. I was subjected to such things as sexual abuse and drug abuse. After years of suffering, I even tried to commit suicide. At any rate, I never joined her in satanic practices, and I later became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This was a great blow to my mother because she realizes there is no greater power than Jehovah God.
A. M., United States
Religious History  Having just completed the final article in the series “Religion’s Future in View of Its Past” (December 22, 1989), I simply must write to say how very much I have appreciated the series. What a lot I have learned about Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, and other religions! The development of Christendom up to the present day was particularly interesting. Not only can I clearly see the extent of Christendom’s involvement in wars and bloodshed but I am able to recognize more clearly the privilege of having found the true religion.
G. V., Federal Republic of Germany
The concluding article in your series was one of the most beautiful articles I have read in Awake! in the almost 40 years I’ve been reading it. The article was forthright in telling of the ‘lying, deceptive, treacherous, and hateful ways that have made false religion ugly in the sight of both God and man.’
M. M., Spain
Ten Ways to Stop Smoking  I have smoked for 40 years and have tried to quit by means of acupuncture, hypnosis, and pills of all kinds, so your front-​page photo of a skull smoking a cigarette strongly affected me. (July 8, 1989) With the help of prayer, I am going to quit smoking.
B. H., United States
I am almost 15 years old. My teacher asked us to think of ten reasons not to smoke and to come up with ten ideas on how to quit. The Awake! articles were very useful to me in that I was the only one that found answers to all the questions. The teacher congratulated me and gave me a good grade.
S. C., France

