Announcements
HOW PRACTICAL IS THE BIBLE?
“How could reading the Bible, which was written centuries ago, be of real value to me in this modern world?” Have you ever heard that question? Would you like a practical answer, one that is backed up with factual evidence? You can have this and much more in the 192-page, pocket-size book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? The Bible can give true meaning to your life now, in our generation, as it has already done for a growing number of persons of all races, lands and tongues. Learn how. Read this stimulating book with the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. They will enable you to make a decision based on your own personal investigation. Send today. Both for only $1.25.
FIELD MINISTRY
“The word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword,” say the Holy Scriptures. (Heb. 4:12) How vital it is to apply the effective principles of the Word of God in dealing with problems that arise in everyday living! In the troublesome and dangerous times in which we live, accurate knowledge from God’s Word enables us to come off victorious, “conquering the evil with the good.” (Rom. 12:21) The New World Translation with its clear rendering facilitates the taking in of the needed accurate knowledge. And the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God?  builds up faith that the Bible is indeed inspired of God. In their house-to-house ministry during the month of June, Jehovah’s witnesses will be offering the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures along with the book Is the Bible Really the Word of God? for $1.25.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
July 5: The Righteous Law of the King Eternal Is the Truth, ¶1-22. Page 364. Songs to Be Used: 21, 104.
July 12: The Righteous Law of the King Eternal Is the Truth, ¶23-31, and A Happy, Prosperous Nation Under God’s Law, ¶1-10. Page 369. Songs to Be Used: 25, 40.
July 19: A Happy, Prosperous Nation Under God’s Law, ¶11-30. Page 375. Songs to Be Used: 29, 34.

