The One Who Made All Things
An article specially designed for parents to read with their children
I KNOW something wonderful. Would you like to hear it? Look at your hand. Bend your fingers. Now pick something up. Your hand can do many things, and it can do them well. Do you know who made the hand? It was God.
Look at my face. What do you see? You see my mouth, my nose and my two eyes. How can you see them? With your own eyes. And who made the eyes? It was God. Isn’t that wonderful?
You can see many things with your eyes. You can look at flowers. You can see birds. You can look at the green grass and the blue sky.
But who made these things? Did some man make them? No. Men can make a house. But no man can make grass that grows. Man cannot make a bird, a flower or any other living thing. Did you know that?
God is the One who made all these things. God made the heavens and the earth. He made people too. He created the first man and the first woman. Jesus, the Great Teacher, taught this.​—Matt. 19:4-6.
How did Jesus know that God made man and woman? Did Jesus see God do it? Yes, he did. Jesus was with God when God made man and woman.
Jesus was the first person that God made. He was the first son of God. He was an angel, and he lived in heaven with his Father.
In the Bible God says: “Let us make man.” (Gen. 1:26) Do you know whom God was talking to? He was talking to his Son. He was talking with the one who later came to earth and was called Jesus!
Isn’t that exciting? Just think! When we listen to Jesus, we are being taught by the one who worked with God in making the earth and all other things. Jesus learned much from working with his Father in heaven. No wonder Jesus is the Great Teacher.
Do you think that God was unhappy about being alone before he made his Son? No. But if God was not unhappy, why did he make other persons? He did this because he is a God of love. He wanted others to live and enjoy life. We should thank God that he lets us live.
Everything that God has done shows his love. God made the sun. The sun gives us light and it keeps us warm. Everything would be cold and there would be no life on earth if we did not have the sun. Aren’t you glad that God made the sun?
God makes it rain too. Sometimes you may not like the rain because you can’t go outside to play when it rains. But the rain helps the flowers to grow.
So when we see beautiful flowers, whom are we going to thank for them? God. And whom should we thank when we eat fruits and vegetables that taste good? We should thank God, because it is his sun and rain that make things grow. God is so good to do all these wonderful things for us!
Do you know where God is? The Bible tells us. It says that God lives in heaven.
Can you see God? No. The Bible says: ‘No man can see God.’ (Ex. 33:20) No man, woman or child on earth can see God. So no one should try to make a picture or an image of God. God even tells us not to try to make an image of him.
But if you cannot see God, how do you know that there really is a God? Think about this. Can you see the wind? No. Nobody can see the wind. But you can see the things the wind does. You can see the leaves move when the wind blows through the branches of a tree. So you believe that there is wind.
You can see the things God has done too. When you see a living flower or a bird, you see something God has made. So you believe that there really is a God.
Someone might ask you, “Who made the sun and the earth?” What would you say? Say that God made them. The Bible says: “God created the heavens and the earth.”​—Gen. 1:1.
What if someone asks you, “Did God make man and the animals too?” What will you say? Tell him: “Yes, God made man and the animals. God made the birds too.” The Bible says: ‘God created all things.’​—Rev. 4:11.
Someone may tell you that he does not believe in God. What will you say then? Why not point to a house? Ask the person: “Who made that house?” Some man did. The house did not make itself, did it?
Then take the person to the garden and show him a flower. Ask him: “Who made this?” No man did. And since the house did not make itself, this flower did not make itself. Someone made it. God did.
Ask the person to stop and listen to the song of a bird. Then ask him: “Who made the birds and taught them to sing?” God did. God is the One who made the heavens and the earth and all living things! He is the One who gives life.
And how good it is to be alive! We can hear the beautiful songs of the birds. We can see the flowers and the other things that God has made. And we can eat the foods that God has given us.
For all these things we should thank God. Most of all, we should thank him for giving us life. If you are really thankful to God, you will do something. What is that? You will listen to God and do what he tells you in the Bible. In that way you will show that you love the One who made all things.

