
What Others Have Said




France “Jehovah’s Witnesses are citizens who respect the laws of the Republic. . . . They are no threat to public order. They work, pay taxes, participate in the economic development of our country and make gifts to charities. The blend of these people from all different races and origins, meeting together in peace, is a pleasure to see. . . . If everyone were one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, we policemen would be out of work.”—Spokesman for a French police union.
Ukraine “Jehovah’s Witnesses inculcate in their children high moral principles. They teach their children to avoid behavior, actions and even attitudes that, [while] considered in today’s world as normal, can be harmful to the children themselves and others. Therefore they warn their children about the dangers of using drugs, smoking and the abuse of alcohol. They recognize the importance of honesty and hard work. . . . Jehovah’s Witnesses teach their children moral qualities, to respect the authorities, other individuals and their property and to be law abiding citizens.”—The History of Religion in Ukraine, edited by Professor Petro Yarotskyi.
Italy “Thirty thousand at the Olympic Stadium in silence . . . No litter, no noise, no shouting. That was the scene in the Olympic Stadium yesterday . . . No unseemly gesturing, not a cigarette, not a [beverage] can. Only open Bibles, people taking notes, and children sitting quietly.”—L’Unità, reporting on a convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Rome.
“Jehovah’s Witnesses teach their children moral qualities . . . and to be law abiding citizens”

Britain “The Archdeacon of Cheltenham said [the Church of England] needed bands of dedicated people going around like the Jehovah’s Witnesses.”—The Gazette, Gloucester Diocese.
The Netherlands The neighbors near the Kingdom Hall in the city of Leeuwarden presented the Witnesses there with a letter that stated: “We would like to compliment you on your excellent influence on the appearance of the Noorderweg [Noorder Road]. Your members are always well dressed, and they have very good manners. The children are well behaved, the adults never park their cars illegally, they throw no litter in the street, and the land around the Kingdom Hall is always clean and neat. We hope that you will continue to be our neighbors for a long time, for we are very happy to have you.”
Mexico Elio Masferrer, professor and researcher at the National School of Anthropology and History, said that the Witnesses helped people who had “suffered severe family crises, such as rape, family abuse, alcoholism, and drug addiction.” The teachings of the Witnesses, he said, “give dignity to people who have had feelings of low self-worth” and make it possible for them to “live without major problems by doing things that please God.”—Excélsior newspaper.
Brazil A newspaper reported: “Jehovah’s Witnesses’ organization is really impressive. The places where they gather are always clean. Everything is very well organized . . . When their events finish, the venue is cleaner than they found it. During the talks, there is absolute silence. Nobody pushes or bumps against others. Good manners prevail. . . . It is indeed an orderly religion. They know what worshipping God means.”—Comércio da Franca.
Jehovah’s Witnesses firmly believe that the Creator knows better than anyone else the principles that his human creation should live by. (Isaiah 48:17, 18) Hence, the Witnesses give him the credit when their conduct elicits positive remarks from others. Jesus said: “Let your light shine before men, that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.”—Matthew 5:16.



