Announcements
SUBJECTION TO SUPERIOR AUTHORITIES
Law-abiding, orderly men and women heed the commands of the Supreme Authority of the Universe and his King and thus come under “subjection to the superior authorities”. (Rom. 13:1, NW) Their command governing the personal conduct and worship of all creatures desiring life is set forth in these words, ‘Love Jehovah your God with your whole heart, soul, mind and strength, and your neighbor as yourself.’
During the month of May, Jehovah’s witnesses will demonstrate their subjection to the superior authorities, by obeying the command to love and serve their neighbors by offering them the knowledge so necessary to gain the way to life and approval from the supreme authorities by means of the book “This Means Everlasting Life” and a self-covered booklet. You too, dear reader, will want to obey the superior authorities; and this is the opportune time and occasion. Join in with Jehovah’s witnesses. Tell your friends and neighbors, acquaint them with this life-giving message by simply telling them what the book contains, and ask them to read it for themselves. Feel free to write in and ask any question you may have in this regard, then send us a report on the results of your efforts to assist others to gain everlasting life by being in subjection to the superior authorities. The accepted contribution for the above book and booklet is 35 cents.
CAN YOU LIVE FOREVER IN HAPPINESS ON EARTH?
Knowledge that life everlasting in happiness and unending youth is possible should and does make informed persons most joyful. Many may skeptically say, “It isn’t possible!” How this is made possible and why it is available now to men of all kinds is presented in a 32-page booklet entitled “Can You Live Forever in Happiness on Earth?” You too would like to see this come about and actually enjoy it, wouldn’t you? For your eternal welfare read the information in this booklet as it is set before you in plain, simple and easy-to-understand language. This knowledge brings with it peace of mind, contentment and satisfaction. You too can possess this knowledge. Obtain a copy, read the factual evidence it contains and be encouraged by its refreshing and wholesome truths. Sent postpaid, 5c per copy.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of May 6: Who Sees the New World’s King at the Temple? ¶1-23.
Week of May 13: Who Sees the New World’s King at the Temple? ¶24-27; and Commissioning of Witnesses in the Time of the End.

