Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you will doubtless remember these points:
● Why can the Bible aid us to have a successful way of life?
What the Bible says is practical and reasonable, showing us what the Creator of man says about how we ought to live and behave now as humans so as to have a satisfying and meaningful life.​—P. 260.a
● At Ecclesiastes 5:7, what are the “dreams” that are mentioned as coming about “because of abundance of occupation”?
These are not dreams one has while sleeping but are selfish dreams or personal ambitions resulting from becoming unduly involved in materialistic activities and thus getting sidetracked from God’s service.​—P. 286.
● Did the prophet Ezekiel, in obedience to the visionary command given him, actually lie on his left side for 390 days and on his right side for 40 days?
The Bible does not provide enough details to determine whether Ezekiel did so in a visionary way or actually lay on his side in the streets during the daylight hours. But this in no way affects the understanding of the prophecy and its application.​—P. 310.
● Why does Philippians 4:6 speak of prayer and supplication?
Supplication is a form of prayer, but not all prayer is supplication. Supplication is a more intense form of humbly entreating Jehovah God.​—P. 336.
● What determines whether a minor child will have favor before God on the basis of parental merit?
The child must be obedient to his parents and try to do God’s will to the extent his age and circumstances allow.​—Pp. 362, 363.
● When is ‘willingness to believe’ wisdom?
Only when it is based on solid evidence and reason. Belief in the existence of God and in the reliability of his Word fits this requirement.​—P. 388.
● What determines whether a person is expelled or disfellowshiped from the Christian congregation?
It is not the seriousness of the wrong nor the bad publicity resulting therefrom. The determining factor is the individual’s repentance or lack of it.​—P. 438.
● What motivates true repentance?
The repentant person has a heartfelt longing to come back into divine favor because of his love for God. He feels sorrow about having brought reproach on God’s name, rejects the bad course and rights the wrong to the extent possible.​—P. 439.
● In what sense is man uniquely in God’s image?
This is in the matter of headship where the man can reflect God’s position toward his creatures. In the family arrangement the man has no earthly head over him; his wife and children are subject to him as family head.​—P. 445.
● At Matthew 18:15, what is meant by ‘gaining your brother’?
It means to gain him in the sense of aiding him to remain in the congregation, turning him back from a course that could lead to his being expelled or disfellowshiped therefrom.​—P. 466.
● In keeping with Matthew 18:15, what kind of sins would one be obligated to lay bare between oneself and one’s Christian brother?
These would be actual sins and not imagined ones. They could include such sins as fraud and slander.​—P. 466.
● When is conformity a good thing, but when must it be avoided?
Conformity is good when it is in harmony with the guidelines set forth in the Bible and when it contributes to purposeful cooperative effort. But conformity to ways that are opposed to God’s righteous standards must be avoided if one is to enjoy divine favor.​—P. 474.
● What should you do if doubts come up in your mind about the spiritual food being dispensed by the “faithful and discreet slave” today?
Seek help from elders in the congregation. Be patient, remembering that following Jehovah’s leading brings happiness and life. Keep in mind that you became a disciple because you were firmly persuaded of the truth and convinced that those who taught you had your interests at heart. Also consider how well matters have turned out for those who have maintained faithfulness.​—P. 504.
[Footnotes]
All references are to The Watchtower for 1972.

