Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 2
Song 98
12 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone, and especially Congregation Book Study conductors, to review September 1992 Our Kingdom Ministry article “Studying The Greatest Man Who Ever Lived.” Highlight main points of article.
15 min: “Walk by Faith.” Questions and answers.
18 min: “Presenting the Good News With a Positive Attitude.” Make opening remarks based on paragraph 1. Explain that as an alternative offer to the Creation book, the Live Forever book or the Family Life book may be used if the congregation has any on hand. Then cover only paragraphs 2-5 of the article. Demonstrate well-prepared presentations that show how to offer the Creation book, make a return visit, and start a study in the Knowledge book. Give a reminder about mentioning the donation arrangement.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 9
Song 18
12 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Discuss “Preach the Kingdom.”
18 min: Review Congregation’s 1996 Service Year Report. Upbuilding, enthusiastic talk by service overseer. (See Our Ministry book, pages 100-2.) Point out wherein the congregation did well, and give commendation. Show how the activity of the regular and auxiliary pioneers has done much to help advance the work locally. Mention meeting attendance figures, stressing the importance of regular attendance. Outline practical goals the congregation can try to achieve in the coming year.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News With a Positive Attitude.” Review paragraphs 6-8 only, and demonstrate store-to-store presentations for both the initial call and the return visit. (See additional suggestions in September 1989 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4.) Encourage all to make their return visits promptly.
Song 123 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 16
Song 10
15 min: Local announcements. Mention the fine results from using the video Jehovah’s Witnesses—The Organization Behind the Name to direct interested ones to the organization. Briefly relate one or two experiences from October 1, 1992, Watchtower, pages 30-1.
15 min: “Be an Example in Speaking and in Conduct.” Questions and answers.
15 min: Christian Conduct in School. Father talks to his son or daughter to point out serious pitfalls in school environment; he stresses need to watch association and to avoid questionable activities. He reviews box on page 24 in Education brochure and explains need to set good example as a Witness. Father mentions some temptations that arise involving using drugs, dating, attending social gatherings, or participating in sports; they discuss how to avoid problems. Father encourages youth not to delay in confiding in him when having difficulties—he wants to know and to help.
Song 32 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 23
Song 21
10 min: Local announcements. Offer suggestions on how to mention the donation arrangement when offering literature, including the following: “Our literature is offered without charge, but we do accept small donations to support our worldwide work.” “Many have asked how we can distribute literature without charging for it; we are pleased that many people who appreciate its value offer small donations to our worldwide work.” “Our work is supported by voluntary donations. Many people who enjoy reading our literature make a small donation to support this Bible-educational work.” (See December 1993 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 7.) Explain why it is important to allow interested ones an opportunity to help support our vital work.
15 min: Local needs. Or a talk based on “Look Beyond the Things You See!” in the February 15, 1996, Watchtower, pages 27-9.
20 min: “Preach the Good News Everywhere.” Questions and answers. Cover paragraphs 1-15 only. Read paragraphs 3 and 5. Include local experiences of those who have had success witnessing on the street or on public transportation.
Song 215 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 30
Song 171
12 min: Local announcements. Discuss Question Box.
20 min: “Preach the Good News Everywhere.” Questions and answers. Cover paragraphs 16-35. Show how the suggestions can be applied locally. Demonstrate paragraphs 23-5. Read paragraphs 34-5.
13 min: Review Literature Offer for October. We will feature the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. Subscriptions may be offered on return visits. Discuss various points, such as: (1) Purpose for which the magazines are published, as explained in the opening pages. (2) They are published in many languages, making Bible knowledge available worldwide. (3) The Watchtower is designed for personal, family, and group study. (4) People who are associated with many different religions read them. (5) We will personally deliver the latest issues to anyone who sincerely wants to read them. (6) They are especially designed for busy people. (7) The Watchtower has been published since 1879; Awake! since 1919. (8) We distribute them without charge. (See The Watchtower, page 2; Awake!, page 4.) Conclude by relating comments made by an appreciative reader.—See April 15, 1986, Watchtower, page 32.
Song 3 and concluding prayer.

