Walk by Faith
1 Millions of people build their lives around their material possessions, foolishly trusting in the deceptive power of riches. (Matt. 13:22) They learn a hard lesson when their riches are lost or stolen or prove to be of little benefit. We are urged to pursue a wiser course, striving for spiritual treasures. (Matt. 6:19, 20) This involves “walking by faith.”—2 Cor. 5:7.
2 The word “faith” is translated from a Greek word that conveys the thought of confidence, trust, firm persuasion. To walk by faith means to face difficult conditions with confidence in God, trusting in his ability to guide our steps and in his willingness to care for our needs. Jesus set the perfect example; he kept focused on what was truly important. (Heb. 12:2) Similarly, we need to keep our hearts focused on unseen, spiritual things. (2 Cor. 4:18) We must be ever mindful of the uncertainty of our present life and acknowledge our total dependence on Jehovah.
3 We must also be firmly persuaded that Jehovah is leading us by means of his visible organization under the direction of “the faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47) We demonstrate our faith when we are “obedient to those who are taking the lead” in the congregation. (Heb. 13:17) Humbly working in cooperation with the theocratic arrangement manifests our trust in Jehovah. (1 Pet. 5:6) We should be moved to give wholehearted support to the work that the organization has been given to do. This will draw us closer to our brothers in a strong bond of love and unity.—1 Cor. 1:10.
4 How to Strengthen Faith: We must not allow our faith to become static. We need to put up a hard fight to increase it. Regularity in study, prayer, and meeting attendance will help us strengthen our faith so that, with Jehovah’s help, it can withstand any test. (Eph. 6:16) Have you established a good routine for daily Bible reading and preparation for meetings? Do you often meditate on what you learn, and do you approach Jehovah in prayer? Is it your custom to attend all meetings and to participate in them as opportunity affords?—Heb. 10:23-25.
5 Strong faith is proved by good works. (Jas. 2:26) One of the best ways to demonstrate our faith is by declaring our hope to others. Do you seek opportunities to share the good news? Can your circumstances be adjusted to enable you to do more in the ministry? Do you apply the suggestions we receive to improve the quality and effectiveness of our ministry? Do you set personal spiritual goals and exert yourself to attain them?
6 Jesus warned about getting overly involved in everyday affairs of life and allowing materialistic or selfish interests to dim our spiritual outlook. (Luke 21:34-36) We must keep strict watch on how we walk in order to avoid shipwreck concerning our faith. (Eph. 5:15; 1 Tim. 1:19) All of us hope that ultimately we will be able to declare that we ‘have fought the fine fight, have run the course to the finish, and have observed the faith.’—2 Tim. 4:7.

