Showing Others How Beneficial the Scriptures Are
MANY are the societies and organizations that print and distribute copies of the Holy Scriptures in a variety of languages. Year after year, in fact, the Bible continues to be the best seller. Should not this lead us to expect increased interest in God and his purposes by peoples around the world? The fact is that people today are showing less and less interest in God’s will. They are falling away into unbelief.
The reason for this is quite evident. Bibles are indeed widely distributed, but the Bible remains a closed book to most persons. Why? Because there is a great dearth of teachers who will aid honest people to know how to study the Bible and derive from it the riches of knowledge and understanding it contains. Those who do appreciate the value of the Bible, therefore, will be eager to fill this great need and will heartily enter into the work of proving to those who will hear how “all Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness.”—2 Tim. 3:16.a
We can teach seekers after truth how to prove from their own Bible the basic doctrines of true Christianity. We can demonstrate with Scriptural examples how wrong thoughts and wrong actions are reproved in kindness by God’s Word. We can surely also point out how the Bible sets us straight as regards our relationship with the great Giver of Life, Jehovah God. And, further, the Bible can be shown to be a wonderful source of discipline so that first things are given first consideration in our lives and time is regularly set aside for the vital study of the grand lessons of the Scriptures.
What a privilege to be able to show others how beneficial the Scriptures are! With such a satisfying field of work before us, every Christian witness of Jehovah will gladly go out and seek out some of those described in the Scriptures as ‘hungering and thirsting for righteousness.’ Having found such ones, they will regularly visit them and aid them to grow strong through the benefits to be derived from Bible study. Especially during September let us each one be steadfast in the back-call and home Bible study activity, showing honest persons how truly beneficial the Scriptures are.
[Footnotes]
See The Watchtower of November 1, 1963.

