





LIVING AS CHRISTIANS
Improving Our Skills in the Ministry​—Contacting Everyone in Our Territory




WHY IMPORTANT: Zechariah prophesied that people out of all the languages of the nations would respond favorably to the good news. (Zec 8:23) But who will teach them? (Ro 10:13-15) We have the privilege and responsibility to share the good news with everyone in our territory.​—od 84 ¶10-11.
HOW TO DO IT:
  Prepare. Do you encounter people who speak another language? You can use the JW Language app to learn a simple presentation. Or using your mobile device, you can show a person how he can find more information in his language on jw.org

  Be observant. If you are working from house to house, do not overlook opportunities to witness to passersby or those waiting in cars. If you are involved in public witnessing, stay focused on your objective to give a witness

  Be diligent. Keep trying to reach those who are not at home initially. Make an effort to contact someone at every residence, perhaps at a different time of the day or on a different day of the week. Some householders may need to be contacted by letter, telephone, or street witnessing

  Follow through. Return promptly to follow up on any interest shown. If the person speaks a different language, try to find someone who is qualified to help him in his language. You should continue calling on the person until he is contacted by publishers who speak his language.​—od 94 ¶39-40


WATCH THE VIDEO PREACHING IN “THE MOST DISTANT PART OF THE EARTH,” AND THEN CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS:





  What preparations did the brothers and sisters make to contact people in remote territory? (1Co 9:22, 23)






  What obstacles did they have to overcome?






  What blessings did they enjoy?

  What efforts can you make to contact more people in your territory?


The service overseer should make sure that all the congregation’s territory is regularly covered. Some bodies of elders have organized special days during the month so that publishers can spend an entire day working in an area that is not frequently covered.





