Why a Growing Problem?
DID you know that trafficking in humans represents the world’s third-largest criminal activity, surpassed only by drug and weapons trafficking? According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, there is a steady increase in all kinds of prostitution.
In one Latin-American country, a Congressional Committee of Inquiry reported that there are more than 500,000 female child prostitutes, even though prostitution is illegal.
In another land, there are about 300,000 child prostitutes on the streets, especially in areas where there is drug traffic.
In Asian countries about one million young girls are reportedly used as prostitutes in conditions comparable to slavery. Some lands have the reputation of being meccas for child prostitution and sex tourism.
Because of the high incidence of sexually transmitted diseases, such as AIDS, customers are willing to pay far higher prices for children who are considered more likely to be virgins and thus less likely to be infected. “The fear of AIDS has caused men to seek ever younger girls and boys, which makes the problem even worse,” explains Luíza Nagib Eluf of Brazil’s Ministry of Justice. She said: “Sexual exploitation of girls and teenagers is the most serious social problem among poor women in Brazil.”
Poverty and Child Prostitution
Child prostitution thrives in an environment of misery and poverty. According to one government official, child exploitation and prostitution in her country are “clearly linked to the disintegration of the family and are fruits of misery and hunger.” Some parents claim that poverty led them to sell their children into prostitution. Street children resort to prostitution because they see it as their only means of survival.
The newspaper O Estado de S. Paulo explains that a girl may end up as a prostitute by running with a street gang. In order to get something to eat, she may steal and only occasionally sell her body. Next, she becomes a professional prostitute.
Sometimes teenagers are sent to other countries to work as prostitutes. “The money sent by emigrant prostitutes to their families often amounts to considerable sums given the poverty of some Asian and African countries,” reports UNESCO Sources. “Prostitution within these countries is also encouraged, with tourists from wealthy countries coming deliberately to take advantage of the ‘services’ provided by young people and children.”
Describing the dangers that street children who are prostitutes are exposed to in a Latin-American city, Time magazine reports: “Some of the prostitutes are as young as 12. Frequently the products of broken homes, they sleep wherever they can find a space during the day, and cruise the discos, where the sailors hang out, at night.”
Under the influence of drugs, a child prostitute may be subjected to indignities she normally would never agree to. For example, according to Veja magazine, the police found 92 videotapes in which a medical doctor recorded barbarous torture sessions of more than 50 women, some of these underage.
Despite this gruesome reality, a young prostitute stated: “If I looked for work, I would not be able to earn enough to eat because I have no profession. My family knows everything, and I do not want to give up this life. The body is mine, and I do as I wish with it.”
Yet, these girls had never set prostitution as a goal for themselves. According to a social worker, many young prostitutes “want to marry” and dream of a “Prince Charming.” While there are complex situations that lead to their taking up the life of a prostitute, one researcher claims: “The most shocking is that the majority were raped in their own homes.”
An End to Child Prostitution?
There is hope, however, for these unfortunate children. Prostitutes of all ages have changed their course in life. (See the box “People Can Change,” on page 7.) God’s Word, the Bible, has helped millions of people worldwide to become good neighbors and faithful family members. Concerning people who were formerly fornicators, adulterers, thieves, greedy persons, drunkards, we read: “That is what some of you were. But you have been washed clean, but you have been sanctified, but you have been declared righteous in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.”—1 Corinthians 6:9-11.
Today, as in Bible times, there are individuals who are changing their ways for the better. Still, more is needed to stem the tide of sexual exploitation. Some governments and other organizations are fighting against sex tourism and child prostitution. But, realistically, there is little that men can do to eliminate misery and poverty. Lawmakers cannot prevent the thoughts and attitudes that are at the root of immorality.
However, instead of human efforts, another means will solve all these problems—God’s Kingdom. The following article will explain.
[Blurb on page 6]
Poverty often contributes to child prostitution
[Box on page 6]
A High Price
  When she was merely six years old, Daisy was sexually molested by one of her brothers. As a result, she stayed with her older brother until at 14 years of age she began to work in a nightclub. After a few days, Daisy fell ill. When she recovered, the owners confronted her with a debt, forcing her to work as a prostitute. About a year later, she was still in debt, and it seemed that she would never become free. However, a sailor paid the rest of her debt, taking her to another city, where he treated her like a slave. She left him, and later she lived with another man for three years, after which they married. Because of many serious marital problems, she attempted suicide three times.
  Eventually, both she and her husband began to study the Bible. But Daisy felt unworthy of becoming one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. When she was shown from the Bible that Jehovah God accepts people who make the needed changes, she dedicated her life to him. Daisy made great efforts to do what is right, but she didn’t feel that it was enough and thus had periods of depression. Happily, though, she has accepted help to overcome the traumas caused by sexual abuse and her life as a child prostitute and to achieve and maintain balance.
[Box on page 7]
People Can Change
  When Jesus Christ was on earth, he felt pity for afflicted, sinful people. He understood that prostitutes, regardless of their age, could change their life-style. Jesus even said to the religious leaders: “Truly I say to you that the tax collectors and the harlots are going ahead of you into the kingdom of God.” (Matthew 21:31) Although despised because of their way of life, such righthearted ones received forgiveness by their faith in the Son of God. Repentant sinners were willing to abandon their lives of prostitution in order to receive the blessings of God’s Kingdom. Thereafter, they lived in harmony with God’s righteous standards. Today also, people of all kinds accept the truth from God’s Word and change their way of life.
  Consider what happened to Maria, Carina, and Estela, mentioned in the first article. In addition to resisting pressure from her mother to continue as a prostitute, Maria had to put up a strong fight to stop abusing drugs. She explains: “I used drugs to suffocate my feelings of worthlessness for living a life of prostitution.” Maria tells how she was received by the Christian congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses: “I was impressed by the love shown by the members of the congregation. All—children and adults—treated me with respect. I observed that the married men were faithful to their wives. I am very happy to be accepted as their friend.”
  When she was 17 years old, Carina was visited by Jehovah’s Witnesses. She began to study the Bible, although for a time she maintained her work as a prostitute. Gradually, she began to appreciate Bible truths. So she decided to move to a distant city, and there she became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
  Estela, who early in life was involved in prostitution, revelries, and heavy drinking, became interested in the Bible. She concluded, however, that God would never forgive her. In time, though, she came to understand that Jehovah God does forgive repentant ones. Now a member of the Christian congregation, married, and raising three children, Estela says: “I am very happy and thankful to Jehovah because he took me out of the mud and has accepted me in his clean organization.”
  These accounts support the Bible’s statement that God’s will is that “all sorts of men [and women] should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”—1 Timothy 2:4.
[Picture on page 7]
Child prostitutes are often involved in drugs
[Picture Credit Line on page 5]
© Jan Banning/Panos Pictures, 1997

