A Video That Deserves Serious Thought
“This video really makes you think!”
“It went straight to my heart!”
“I was overcome with emotion!”
1 Is that how you felt after you first watched the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? Some years ago, a young brother was going through a difficult time in his life, all because of the friends he had chosen. They caused him to lose interest in the truth, and he lost his relationship with Jehovah. Then the Real Friends video was released. He wrote: “As I watched the video over and over again, tears rolled down my face. I thanked Jehovah for the help at the proper time.” The video motivated him to turn his life around and to acquire the right kind of friends. He added: “It is obvious that you are up-to-date with what is affecting young ones.” Parents and youths, why not watch the video again at your next family study? Pause it after each part, and discuss together openly and honestly the questions in the following paragraphs.
2 Introduction: What is a true friend?​—Prov. 18:24.
3 Roadblocks to Friendship: How can you overcome the feeling of being left out? (Phil. 2:4) Why must you be willing to improve your personality, and who can help you to do that? What will open up opportunities to make more friends, and where can they be found?​—2 Cor. 6:13.
4 Friendship With God: How can you develop a closer relationship with Jehovah, and why is doing so worth the effort? (Ps. 34:8) Who can best strengthen your friendship with God?
5 The Wrong Kind of Friends: Who are bad associates? (1 Cor. 15:33) How can the wrong friends lead one into spiritual ruin? What does the Bible account about Dinah teach you?​—Gen. 34:1, 2, 7, 19.
6 A Modern-Day Drama: How did loneliness affect Tara? How did she justify her association with worldly youths? To what dangers did they expose her? Why did her parents fail to see the danger she was in, but with what attitude did they help her to recover spiritually? How did a pioneer sister prove to be a real friend to Tara? Why must Christians heed Proverbs 13:20 and Jeremiah 17:9? What important lesson did Tara learn?
7 Conclusion: What lessons have you learned from this video? How can you use it to help others?​—Ps. 71:17.

