Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting September 11
Song 20
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? in preparation for the discussion that will be held at the Service Meeting the week of September 25. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the September 15 Watchtower and the September Awake! In one of the demonstrations, show how to handle the potential conversation stopper “I have my own religion.”​—See Reasoning book, pp. 18-19.
20 min: Benefit From the Service Meeting and the Theocratic Ministry School. Talk and audience discussion based on Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will, from the subheading on page 64 to the subheading on page 69.
15 min: Branch Letter. Talk and audience discussion based on the letter appearing on the front page of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Include comments on the Organized book, page 109, paragraphs 1-3.
Song 126 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 18
Song 213
 5 min: Local announcements.
15 min: How Did We Do Last Year? Service overseer reviews the past service year, focusing on the good things accomplished in the ministry. Give appropriate commendation. Mention one or two areas that need attention in the coming year. Comment on the activity of the pioneers, commending them for their good work. Relate the good results achieved from efforts to assist inactive ones.
25 min: “Special Campaign October 16–November 12!” Enthusiastic discussion by an elder. After reading the announcement provided in the letter to the body of elders dated June 6, 2006, distribute one copy of Kingdom News No. 37 to each person in attendance. Then proceed with a question-and-answer discussion of the article. Outline local arrangements for complete coverage of the territory. Encourage all publishers to share fully in this campaign. Demonstrate a brief presentation.
Song 50 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 25
Song 94
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for September. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the October 1 Watchtower or the October Awake! while engaging in street witnessing.
25 min: “A Video That Deserves Serious Thought.”a While discussing paragraph 1, ask the congregation to make some brief personal expressions about the video Young People Ask​—How Can I Make Real Friends? Then get right into a discussion of each question presented in paragraphs 2-7. In conclusion, encourage families also to watch together in the near future the video on DVD entitled Young People Ask​—What Will I Do With My Life?
10 min: Local experiences. Invite audience to relate experiences enjoyed while placing the special issue of Awake! or while starting Bible studies on the initial call using the Bible Teach book. One or two outstanding experiences may be reenacted.
Song 183 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting October 2
Song 36
10 min: Local announcements. Review Question Box.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Witnessing From House to House.”b As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

