How Genuine World Peace Will Come
THE “God who gives peace” has his own provision for bringing world peace, genuine peace. That provision is the government of his own Son, the Messianic kingdom. Of the Messiah, the prophet Isaiah under inspiration long ago wrote:
“The princely rule will come to be upon his shoulder. And his name will be called . . . Prince of Peace. To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom in order to establish it firmly and to sustain it by means of justice and by means of righteousness, from now on and to time indefinite. The very zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.”​—Isa. 9:6, 7.
That heaven-based government will bring lasting peace, not by some “balance of terror,” but by the elimination of all causes for terror. It will accept as earthly subjects only those who have fulfilled the words of Micah 4:3 and who have therefore already beaten “their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears. They will not lift up sword, nation against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.” With peace-loving subjects like these, one can see why the prophecy continues, saying, “And they will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.”​—Mic. 4:4.
United in the pure worship and service of the true and living God, the earthly subjects of the Messianic rule will not experience the divisive effect of giving allegiance to a confusion of political kingdoms and ideologies. There will be none of these. God’s Word tells us that his Son’s kingdom “will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” (Dan. 2:44) “Sudden destruction” faces all such political kingdoms because they stand in opposition to God’s rule over earth and favor continued man-rule of earth despite the evidence of its utter failure.
Then earthly survivors will be able to be at peace with the earth, not polluting it in commercial greed, nor poisoning it with radioactivity from nuclear weapons, but making it into a restored paradise, an earth-wide garden of God. More wonderful yet, God’s government will provide the healing means to enable its earthly subjects to enjoy peace within their own bodies. By the ransom sacrifice of God’s Son, their fleshly weakness and imperfection, and the sickness, old age and death that this brings, will be erased. Even countless victims of war, as well as persons dying from other causes, will be resurrected to an opportunity to prove worthy of life everlasting under that Kingdom rule. Thereby God “will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Rev. 21:4.
If you wish to escape “sudden destruction” with the present unrighteous system of things and enjoy life under the rule of the “Prince of Peace,” what should you now do?
[Picture on page 19]
Those who survive the coming “sudden destruction” by God’s kingdom will be at peace with one another, with the animals and with the earth, making it into an earth-wide paradise

