Auxiliary Pioneering​—A Door to Greater Activity
1 Jehovah’s people eagerly look forward to a future when we will be under God’s Kingdom rule only, free from the burdens of this system of things. What sheer pleasure we will experience in waking up each morning to contemplate the prospect of spending all of our time, energy, and strength directly in Jehovah’s service, transforming the earth into a paradise, instructing resurrected ones in Jehovah’s ways, or engaging in other worthwhile theocratic activity!
2 Even now, Jehovah’s people in ever-increasing numbers are getting a foretaste of the joys of serving Jehovah full-time. In recent years, many have found that their circumstances allow for taking up the pioneer work. These have reasoned that in this way they are able to be more fully occupied in Jehovah’s service. They have offered themselves willingly and are seeking to have a greater share in Kingdom service during this period of ingathering.​—Ps. 110:3.
PROGRESSIVELY EXPANDING YOUR MINISTRY
3 In anticipation of the greater activity we hope to share in, many are making wise use of stepping-stones that progressively enable them to expand their Kingdom service. One such stepping-stone is the auxiliary pioneer service. Many who have taken up this activity have been richly blessed in seeing “that Jehovah is good.” (Ps. 34:8) They have been moved to submit a second auxiliary pioneer application with a little check in the box indicating that they wish to serve continuously as an auxiliary pioneer until further notice. Getting experience at this level of activity has helped many prepare for regular pioneering. The transition is an easy one, they have found. Could you auxiliary pioneer in June, July, and August, progressively using such activity as a stepping-stone to starting regular pioneer service in September?​—Compare Malachi 3:10.
4 The summer months offer splendid opportunities for baptized youths to expand their ministry. What activity could you young ones engage in this summer that would be more beneficial than a month or two in the auxiliary pioneer service? What an enriching experience this could be! There is much joy to be found in sharing with others the precious truths you have learned. You can open up to other sheeplike ones the same bright hope for the future that you have. Your young friends in the congregation who are not yet dedicated will be encouraged by your example, and perhaps some of them will be moved to ‘roll their works upon Jehovah’ and have their plans for the future become “firmly established.”​—Prov. 16:3.
5 Those youths who are not yet baptized are warmly invited to consider how they can expand their Christian activity. While they may work most often with their parents, at times they could also work with zealous responsible youths or older persons. Think what a source of mutual refreshment and encouragement there can be as young and old accompany one another in the ministry!​—Rom. 1:12; Isa. 40:30, 31.
6 Jehovah’s blessing enriches us spiritually and moves us to give our best in his service. May the effort that we each put forth according to our ability and our circumstances be pleasing to Jehovah as we prepare ourselves to serve him eternally.

