Booklets to Help Us Make Disciples
1 Jehovah’s people have gladly followed Jesus’ command to “make disciples of people of all the nations.” (Matt. 28:19) Over the years, we have used various means to get people interested in the Kingdom message. We have appealed to them to study God’s Word and exercise faith in the Kingdom promise. Books and magazines have been the basic message carriers, but booklets, too, have played their part in helping to make disciples.
2 Our June literature offer will be five booklets for 25¢. Even publishers with limited experience will find it easy to make this offer, and many booklets will undoubtedly be placed. The important thing to have in mind is that our booklets can help make disciples. If possible, each set of five should include at least one of the following three booklets: A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It, Is There a God Who Cares? and There Is Much More to Life! Our aim is to start Bible studies with those who take the booklets, and these three have been especially designed for that purpose.
HOW WILL YOU PRESENT THE BOOKLETS?
3 It is best to feature only one booklet in making your presentation. When talking with someone who is disturbed about the growing uncertainty of life today, show him the front cover of the booklet A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It and ask if he feels that such a future is possible. Help him see that despite the problems men have created for the earth, conditions like those depicted on the cover are what the Bible promises. The booklet contains information regarding that Bible-based hope.
4 If you prefer to use the booklet There Is Much More to Life! you could say: “Although many people today see life only from the standpoint of day-to-day living, some want to know from where we came, what the meaning of life is, and what the future holds. Perhaps you have wondered about these matters. If so, you will be pleased to learn the Bible’s answer to life’s problems as they are explained in this booklet.”
5 Is There a God Who Cares? asks a question that is on the minds of many. When featuring this booklet, you could say: “In talking with people in the neighborhood, we are finding that there are some who have doubts as to God’s existence. Other persons feel that if there is a God who cares, why would he permit humans to experience untold grief and suffering? This booklet presents evidence to show that God does exist and that he cares for mankind. It offers a real hope for the future.”
6 You may prefer to use other presentations that are just as effective for you. Keep in mind that our objective is to make disciples, and placing booklets is a means to that end. Jesus went on to say that making disciples should include “teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.” Make the starting of new home Bible studies your goal in June, exercising faith in Jesus’ further words, “Look! I am with you.”​—Matt. 28:20.

