Do You Want to Conduct a Bible Study?
1 Jesus commissioned Christians to do more than just preach. He urged them to make disciples. The 1987 Yearbook shows that an average of 2,726,252 home Bible studies were conducted each month during the last service year. Did you have a share in this joyful work?
2 The booklets A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It, Is There a God Who Cares? and There Is Much More to Life! are excellent aids for starting new home Bible studies. These booklets are concisely written and contain helpful information that is easy to understand. During the busy times in which we live, many people appreciate it when we get right to the point. Since the booklets are small in size, the householder is not made to feel that he is undertaking some difficult or involved task when giving consideration to the subject that has aroused his interest.
3 A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It is designed primarily for those who believe the Bible but who are concerned with the growing uncertainty of life. It shows how security is possible both now and in the future for those who learn and apply Bible teachings.
4 There Is Much More to Life! offers encouragement to those who have been inclined to view life only from the standpoint of day-to-day living. Others want to know from where man came, the meaning of life, and what the future holds. This booklet is very timely for them also. Interest in this subject is not limited to any one age group. The material presented deals with questions that plague many today and gives satisfying answers.
5 Is There a God Who Cares? answers questions such as: Why would a God of order allow men to become so disorderly? Is it possible to learn why God has permitted wickedness? Does God really care what happens to us?
6 Young publishers who have never conducted Bible studies, new publishers who feel inadequate because of lack of experience, and even more experienced ones who presently find themselves without a study may discover that starting a Bible study in one of these booklets is easier than starting a study in a book.
7 Rehearse simple introductions that lead into one of the booklets. Make an effort to start a study on the initial call. Use the illustrations to teach the householder and stimulate his thinking. Be consistent in making this effort to start Bible studies during June.
8 Remember that making simple presentations can help us in starting Bible studies. Try to get the booklet into the householder’s hands so he can follow your discussion of the points closely. After discussing a point, simply ask the question at the bottom of the page and endeavor to draw out his thinking on the point.
9 If you genuinely want to conduct a Bible study, put forth sincere effort and ask for Jehovah’s help. As you regularly engage in the house-to-house ministry, watch for opportunities to start Bible studies on the initial call. Promptly follow up all interest. Be discerning, enthusiastic, and positive. The inspired promise is sure when it says: “God himself will show us favor and bless us . . . that your way may be known in the earth.”​—Ps. 67:1, 2.

