Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
NOTE: Our Kingdom Ministry will schedule a Service Meeting for each week during the summer. Congregations may make adjustments as needed to allow for attending the district convention and then for a 30-minute review of the program highlights at the Service Meeting the following week. The day-by-day review may be assigned in advance to two or three qualified brothers who will be able to focus in on key points. This well-prepared review will help the brothers to remember key points for personal application and use in the field. Any experiences used or occasional comments from the audience should be brief and to the point.
WEEK STARTING MAY 31
Song 32
 5 min: Local announcements. Suggest that any tracts left over be used up in the early part of June.
20 min: “Booklets to Help Us Make Disciples.” Discussion of article with some audience participation. Have three demonstrations of placing booklets as suggested in paragraphs 3 to 5.
10 min: “Include Meetings in Your Vacation Plans.” Discuss article with audience, making it clear how one may find addresses of Kingdom Halls when away from home. Invite expressions showing how some have benefited from meeting with other congregations during vacation periods.
10 min: “Will You Cling to the Truth?” Talk based on article in March 15, 1987, Watchtower.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 7
Song 156
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in magazine work on Saturday. Accounts report, including Society acknowledgments of contributions sent in during May.
20 min: “Do You Want to Conduct a Bible Study?” After question-and-answer coverage of article, have well-prepared publisher demonstrate how to start a study in a booklet on initial call. After booklet offer is accepted, publisher can display A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It and say: “This is a subject that just about everyone is interested in these days. Wouldn’t you say so? Notice what the booklet says on page 3.” (Read opening paragraph and then ask question on paragraph.) In conversational manner, draw householder’s attention to what Isaiah 32:17, 18 says about security and ask: “Do such conditions appeal to you?” Chairman can point out that such an informal approach may allow for continued discussion of additional paragraphs and starting a study.
In another demonstration, show a return visit on someone who previously took set of booklets including Is There a God Who Cares? Publisher starts conversation by mentioning that when he called before he did not have time to point out some of the features of the booklet. Using his own copy of booklet, publisher draws attention to questions at the bottom of page 3 and comments on conditions that cause people to be concerned about whether God cares about mankind. Mentions to householder that the questions are designed to make the reader reason on the subject and suggests they go over a few more paragraphs.
15 min: What Drew You to Serve Jehovah? Experiences from selected publishers relating what appealed to them about the truth and caused them to want to serve Jehovah. Discuss with publishers in advance so they have specific and upbuilding points in mind.
Song 181 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 14
Song 123
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: “Auxiliary Pioneering​—A Door to Greater Activity.” Question-and-answer coverage. Include opportunities for regular or auxiliary pioneers to comment on how pioneering has helped them stay close to Jehovah and improve their relationship with him.
15 min: “Do You Always Get the Point?” Talk on article in the April 1, 1987, Watchtower.
Song 128 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 21
Song 129
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in magazine work on Saturday. Demonstrate 30-second presentation featuring one of current magazines.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—In Evening Witnessing.” Question-and-answer discussion. When discussing paragraph 3, have prepared publisher demonstrate a presentation for evening witnessing, highlighting points mentioned in the Reasoning book and November 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry. When considering paragraphs 4 and 5, outline precautions to take in view of local circumstances, considering some points found in April 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.
15 min: Local needs or Train Your Child From Infancy. Talk by qualified elder based on article in May 22, 1987, Awake!
Song 162 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JUNE 28
Song 193
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News. Include highlights from June 1, 1987, Watchtower article “A New School to Open!”
20 min: How Attending Conventions Over the Years Has Strengthened My Faith. Interview several of the more experienced and appreciative publishers, drawing from them experiences of attending conventions and the benefits derived. May also consult Watch Tower Publications Index for appropriate encouraging experiences.
15 min: Offer for July​—Live Forever book. Demonstrate current Topic for Conversation and transition into offer for the month. (See pe p. 41 par. 18.) Also, ask audience for suggestions on points they have used effectively in placing the book. Briefly discuss appropriate presentations for holiday weekend. Encourage full participation in field service on Saturday and on first Sunday of July.
Song 92 and concluding prayer.

