Kingdom Proclaimers Report
□ THE “great persecution” against the early Christian congregation served to scatter many disciples of Christ. (Acts 8:1) However, this persecution backfired because those who were scattered “went through the land declaring the good news of the word.” (Acts 8:4) Philip continued to preach, and “with one accord the crowds were paying attention.” (Acts 8:6) As persecution backfired in the first century, so it did in a village in northern Thailand.
A special pioneer of Jehovah’s Witnesses began preaching in this village, but at first the villagers would not listen. When he talked to the local preacher, however, the people gathered around to listen. Some came to realize that the Witness knew the Bible better than their minister, so they began to study the Bible with the pioneer even though others harassed them. Some of their ducks were killed, the pioneer’s life was threatened, and the house of one interested man was burned down. The man said: “They can burn my house, but they cannot burn my heart.” Those studying with the Witness rode a long distance by bicycle to attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. Four of them got baptized, and six others still attend meetings along with them.
Reward for Honesty
□ The brothers in Zambia have built a good reputation for honesty, and this has resulted in blessings to them, as well as helped others to identify the truth. An elder, who is a regular pioneer, was traveling on a bus and overheard a Witness on the bus talking to others about the resurrection. A passenger asked her: “Why do you Witnesses claim that your religion is the only true one?” The brother joined the conversation and said to the passenger that Jehovah will reward his Witnesses because they teach the truth from the Bible.
After midnight on this long journey, the bus arrived at a roadblock. It was raining hard. A soldier entered the bus and asked if there were any of Jehovah’s Witnesses on board. There were three. Then he said: “Okay, Witnesses remain seated, the rest go out with your bags.” All the others went out in the rain, and after the inspection, they came back with their luggage and their clothing soaked.
Back on the bus, the soldier said: “The reason I let the Witnesses remain is that they are honest people. We have had much experience and found that they are the only ones who are honest; when we ask what is in their bags, they tell us the truth.” As the bus drove on, the brother asked: “Which is the true religion?” One person answered: “The one that is not soaked in the rain.”
Yes, honesty helps identify the true religion, and it certainly has its rewards!

