Help One Another to Serve Regularly
1 Regular field activity is a sign of spiritual strength. However, when one is ill plans get frustrated, things no longer get done and help is needed.
2 Jehovah is a superb example of being regular in all his activities. He provides for our spiritual and material needs regularly. (Rev. 22:2; Matt. 6:11) Our very existence depends on the regularity found in his creation, and even though we are undeserving, he does not forget us but is constant in his love toward us.—Jas. 1:17.
3 We certainly appreciate the benefits from such regular service from Jehovah, do we not? Such appreciation will move us to respond in like manner by making room in our busy lives to serve him regularly, not letting a month go by without in some way sharing in preaching the good news and in reporting it.
4 There is need, too, for us to help one another to be regular in the service, for reports show that last year some 37,000 in the U.S., or about five per congregation on the average, allowed their field service to become first irregular and finally inactive. If there are any in your congregation, do you know who they are? But, more importantly, what can be done to help them? First of all, elders can take the lead in calling on them, possibly taking along some ministerial servants who could effectively follow up with loving assistance. Individually, though, we also have a responsibility toward such ones who are “related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) So, we encourage you to offer to call on some of them after checking with elders.
5 Often, what is needed is simply for us to take a personal interest in them and offer to take them with us in field service, perhaps accompanying us in making return visits or on a Bible study. This in itself may serve to rekindle their joy and the love they once had for the field service. For some, it may be helpful to strengthen their appreciation for spiritual things. This can be done by our sharing with them some particularly appealing material in the publications, or some interesting Scriptural points learned at the circuit or district assemblies, or some encouraging experiences heard at the Kingdom Hall or elsewhere. This may encourage them to attend meetings regularly, and, in turn, they can be assisted to share in field service.
6 When we put forth the effort to serve regularly ourselves, “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” our faith will be “steadfast” and “unmovable.” We will then be able to help others who may have become irregular or inactive. We can be assured that our “labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.”—1 Cor. 15:58.

