Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 2
Theme: Showing Love for Neighbor.
10 min: Song 61 and Announcements on page 3.
25 min: “What Has Happened to Love?” Lively audience discussion. Last 10 minutes of part, publishers will relate experiences they have enjoyed when distributing the current tract or a previous one.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—With the Tract and Brochure.” Briefly discuss and demonstrate each approach. After each presentation, analyze it with the audience. Invite all to share as fully as circumstances permit, distributing the tract, brochure and magazines.
 5 min: Song 15 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 9
Theme: Strengthen Faith—Serve Regularly.
15 min: Song 78. General announcements. Brief comments on theme. Discuss Question Box with audience.
20 min: Building to Jehovah’s Glory.—1 Chron. 29:9-13.
(10 min.) Talk covering highlights of article “Building to Jehovah’s Glory” in May 1, 1979, Watchtower. Emphasize that all things should be used to honor Jehovah since they belong to him. (1 Chron. 29:11) Under subheading “Building for the Future,” briefly review history of expansion of organization world wide. In considering “Building with a Purpose,” highlight reason for expansion of facilities.
(10 min.) Discussion with audience on part we individually can play in building to Jehovah’s glory. Cover following points:
1. Honor Jehovah with our valuable things, such as time, energy, material things, and so forth.—Prov. 3:9.
2. As in David’s day, support by individuals shows appreciation of Jehovah’s blessing.—1 Chron. 29:13.
3. Voluntary contributions from the heart are encouraged.—2 Cor. 8:12; 9:7.
Privilege of contributing to local congregation.
Privilege of contributing directly to the Society individually or as a congregation.
4. Contributions indicate our love for Jehovah and he blesses those who contribute voluntarily.—1 Chron. 29:14-17; Mal. 3:10.
20 min: “Help One Another to Serve Regularly.” Stimulating talk based on article. Emphasize need to keep personally strong by serving regularly; also to assist others who need some help. In considering paragraph 5, include demonstration of experienced publisher calling on one who has not recently associated. Start with discussion of 2 Peter 1:5-8 and share points learned from talk “Neither Inactive nor Unfruitful,” Saturday afternoon of “Living Hope” District Convention. Select a few of the qualities mentioned in verses and bring in appropriate points remembered from talk. For example, on FAITH: Loss of faith can begin with “clean” association with nice neighbors, workmates, and so forth, or by being so wrapped up in daily concerns for life that one thinks about God less and less. Each day must give thought to fact that God exists and not let busy schedule crowd out prayers and Bible reading. On SELF-CONTROL: May need self-control in things not wrong in themselves—when to turn off TV or leave friend’s house. Getting more rest may help enjoy service and meetings more. For God’s spirit to help us, must learn to say “No” when faced with temptation. It is love of God and neighbor that motivates us to action and fruitfulness, but need to deepen love so it not only exists, but “overflows,” making works not forced, but spontaneous from heart. After discussion, tactfully invite and arrange to go to Kingdom Hall together on Sunday. Chairman concludes part by considering 1 Corinthians 15:58.
 5 min: Song 92 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 16
Theme: Ready to Tell Our Hope.—1 Pet. 3:15.
12 min: Song 54. “Our Circuit Assemblies—Spiritual Feasts to Strengthen All of Us.” Talk and audience discussion.
Brothers assigned to handle the following two parts will coordinate their development in handling the material. These two parts blend together.
13 min: “Helping One Another (Part III): To Speak at the Doors.” Audience discussion.
25 min: Prepare to Speak.
(4 min.) Chairman briefly reviews benefits of arrangement for giving assistance. To aid those who have mutually agreed to work together for awhile, the following demonstrations may be of help: (1) preparing together, and (2) working together in the field.
(10 min.) Preparing together. Two sisters meet to prepare together the first presentation under Presenting the Good News. Throughout preparation they apply points in paragraph 4.
(2 min.) Chairman invites audience to comment on what they can use from what was demonstrated.
(6 min.) Working together in the field. Demonstrate a realistic application of points in paragraphs 5 and 6. At the door, both sisters speak but with experienced publisher carrying most of discussion, including the presentation of brochure and magazine offer, which is not accepted. Call ends with publisher encouraging householder to further consider information in tract. On way to next door, publishers discuss the call and what might be done at the next door for improvement.
(3 min.) Tract distribution provides opportunity to prepare together and work together in the field. Encourage those who desire assistance to make it known to their study conductor, and invite publishers to volunteer to help others. Working together as companions in service will prove to be mutually upbuilding and beneficial.
10 min: Expressions from publishers who have benefited from working with others in the past. Song 59 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 23
Theme: Serve Jehovah Joyfully.
10 min: Song 63 and local announcements.
15 min: Talk by elder on “Youth’s Place in the Christian Society,” based on April 1, 1979, Watchtower. Highlight opportunities available to youth for praising Jehovah. Cover also main points in second study article showing dangers set before youth by demon-controlled system. Discuss why and how they can be avoided. Encourage youth to stick close to Jehovah’s organization and enjoy blessings of Kingdom service.
15 min: Youths Serve with Joy in the Field. Discussion with group of young publishers who are good examples. Chairman can open by commending youths for what they are and what they can do in praising Jehovah. Discuss opportunities to share in house-to-house work and draw out comments. During discussion some could express feelings they might have, such as: (1) Not always easy to talk with older people. (2) Same is true when classmates answer the door. (3) Feel they are not qualified to answer questions from householder. Chairman discusses points with youths and draws out comments on these helpful suggestions: Need to develop proper mental attitude (2 Tim. 2:22); determine points a youth could develop with an adult; how young publishers could approach youths who answer the door; advantages of working with older publishers at times as well as with other youths; how older youths can help younger ones prepare for field service. Conclude by encouraging youths and older ones to share joyfully in telling out the good news.—Rom. 10:10.
15 min: “How Are You Using What You Learned This Month?” Brother assigned this part will discuss with publishers in advance how they have benefited from the following: (1) Assisting inactive ones to see why we should be regular in service. (2) Helping one another to speak effectively at the doors. (3) Reporting field service.
 5 min: Song 109 and prayer.

