Our Circuit Assemblies—Spiritual Feasts to Strengthen All of Us
1 Beginning with September, a new series of circuit assemblies will begin throughout the United States. But before we discuss what is ahead, let us pause and reflect on the circuit assembly program just concluded. Did you get to attend that spiritual feast? We certainly hope so. Most brothers did and many wrote to the Society to express their appreciation for the fine program that served to strengthen us all.
2 Most who wrote the Society commented on the direct way in which the program helped us all to recognize the dangers of Satan’s unclean world so as to maintain a clean congregation. One district overseer wrote: “The majority of the brothers by far seem to appreciate and respond when the program ‘tells it like it is.’” Another brother wrote about a young brother in his congregation who had questionable associations: “He felt the whole program was directed at him. He said he had some changes to make.” This brother also wrote: “I believe this assembly has had a greater impact than any in many years.”
3 But now what does the future hold? Well, beginning this month the new program starts, with its theme, “Proving Ourselves Fruitful Disciples.” One part of the program will deal with building with fire-resistant materials and how this can help us produce fruitage. Are we building fire-resistant qualities into new disciples? What are these fire-resistant qualities? Are we really reaching hearts by the art of teaching? And what are some of the fiery tests that affect Christians today?
4 The new program will also help us in our daily lives as Christians. Have you considered how one could become involved with “Babylon’s” bad fruitage in one’s secular work? What are some ways our Christian brothers and sisters have avoided “Babylon’s” unclean things at their places of employment? And, just what is the basis for all of us to progress in bearing Christian fruitage? We are sure you will enjoy hearing how these and other timely questions will be answered on the new circuit assembly program. Truly it is a faith-strengthening program. Be sure to include it on your schedule of upcoming theocratic activities.

