Part 3—Helping One Another—To Speak at the Doors
1 Jesus said: “Everyone that is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.” (Luke 6:40) The majority of his disciples were just ordinary people like us. By going with Jesus, listening to him and watching his methods of teaching, they were soon ready to be sent out by twos to preach the good news to their neighbors. They took to heart the command to “make disciples . . . baptizing them . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you.”—Matt. 28:19, 20.
2 As disciples of Jesus today, we are under obligation to preach the good news and “make disciples.” That Jehovah’s blessing is obviously upon our preaching at the doors of our neighbors, as it was in the first century, is shown each month by the number baptized. These persons in turn take up the disciple-making work, and thus, the number preaching has increased.
3 Many of us today, as in Jesus’ day, need assistance in order to become disciple-makers. In various congregations provisions exist to aid us to be better teachers. The last two issues of Our Kingdom Service discussed arrangements for experienced publishers to lend a helping hand. When you volunteer to assist another or another offers to assist you to speak at the doors, what can be done?
4 Two things are recommended: (1) preparing together, and (2) working together in field service. In preparing together as companions in service, spend some time discussing suggested presentations from Our Kingdom Service. Discuss what can be used as introductory remarks, how to get into the presentation, into the Bible, into the literature offer, as well as concluding the call and starting a study where possible. After getting the points in mind, take turns being the publisher and then the householder. These practice sessions will do much to help you to speak with confidence at the door. As Jesus had the truth, so we have it, too, and it is what other people need to gain life under Kingdom rule.
5 On your way to the territory, by reviewing with each other the points you want to use, you will have them fresh in mind when you get to the first door and you will be off to a good start. You can decide if the one with more experience takes the first door or two. Or, after the introduction, both might share in reading scriptures and commenting. As you work together, discuss how your presentations might be improved. Be encouraging and supportive to each other as companions in the service.
6 Working together will result in learning practical things you can apply at the door. You will see the need to be friendly, natural and conversational; how you can use questions to stimulate interest and to determine how the householder is thinking; how to be adaptable; the need to listen to the householder. You will see how the presentation can easily lead into placing the offer and starting a Bible study where possible.
7 You will also learn how to handle indifference, even opposition, at the door. Many will not listen, but we do not get upset. We are looking for sheeplike ones. (John 10:4) Calmly we go to the next door, realizing our work is also a dividing work. We learn confidently to go ahead in Jehovah’s strength, knowing it is his work and that he will bless our efforts.
8 Many of us desire assistance so that we can speak effectively to people at the doors. On the other hand, many of us have the experience to give needed assistance. As Paul counseled: “Let each of us please his neighbor in what is good for his upbuilding.”—Rom. 15:2.

