Presenting the Good News—With the Tract and Brochure
1 In the world of mankind, young and old admit often and freely that there is a great need for love. Haven’t you found that to be so in your field activity? How sad it is that people are not aware of how or where to find the love they need! And what a marvelous opportunity Jehovah is giving us to show millions, by our combined efforts world wide, ‘What Has Happened to Love’! Who could not be excited about participating in this effort?
2 Although you may feel free to use any presentation that appeals to you and that is suitable to your personality and makeup, here are some suggestions. Those with experience might say: “This morning (afternoon) I’m visiting my neighbors to discuss a vital need in our community. Note the question that is the title of this tract. [Give householder tract as you read title.] If more love were shown in our community it would be a far more enjoyable place to live, wouldn’t it? [Allow for comment.] How enjoyable life would be if these circumstances were eliminated! [Point to illustration on page 2.] Note the words of our Lord Jesus, quoted from Matthew 24:12, here on page 3. He stated that part of the sign of our living in the last days would be that ‘the love of the greater number would cool off.’ Is it possible that we are seeing this in our lifetime?” (Allow for comment.)
3 If circumstances allow you to continue, open your Bible to 2 Timothy 3:1-5 and discuss appropriate points with the householder. Start a Bible study where possible.
4 Likely you will have many opportunities to place the brochure and two magazines. You might say: “Many people have asked questions about Jehovah’s Witnesses, wanting to know something about their beliefs and activities, which include my coming to your home today. In this brochure [in showing cover, read title, then turn to pages 26-27] you have a summary of ‘Questions often asked by interested persons.’ This is your copy with two magazines for only 25c.”
5 For you who are newer in field service, you may wish to say: “I recently became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses because of looking for an improved quality of life, a fellowship where love exists world wide regardless of race or nationality. Please allow me to give you this printed message as a gift. [Give tract.] While you may have your own religion, you will find some scriptures in here that I am sure you will enjoy reading.”
6 If you are young in years, you might find it easy to say: “I’m being trained by my parents to show concern for other people. One of the ways I can do this is to visit my neighbors with an encouraging message from the Bible. Here is your free copy.” (Give tract.) Where interest is shown and your parents (or others) are at the door with you, they may wish to assist you to develop the interest.
7 What can we do to stimulate interest where a tract was left at a not-at-home? Return where possible. You could say: “I was by your home [state about when] to leave you a copy of this free tract. In the event you did not receive it, I brought you another.” (Hand to householder and proceed with one of the above presentations.)
8 Distribution of tracts has introduced the truth to thousands of people, many of whom will be sharing this tract with others. By sharing as fully as our circumstances permit, thousands more will be helped to learn of Jehovah’s great love for mankind.

