“What Has Happened to Love?”
1 ‘I like my privacy and have never encouraged visitors to drop in unannounced,’ wrote one successful businesswoman, who added: ‘One evening about 7:30, there was a knock on my door. It was a widow who lives on my floor. She was lonely and asked if she could come in and visit for a while. I politely but bluntly told her I was busy. She apologized and left. I felt quite proud of myself for not getting trapped by such a bore. The next evening a friend telephoned and asked if I knew the woman in my building who had committed suicide the night before. If you have not already guessed, she was the woman who knocked on my door!’
2 How tragic! The attitude of this woman, whose letter was published in many newspapers, is typical of those in a world where love has grown as cold as ice. Very few want to burden themselves by reaching out and showing love to others. Yet what a vivid contrast this should be with us! We want to help others. What an opportunity we have to prove that our love has not grown cold toward people by distributing the tract “What Has Happened to Love?” People need to know that there are still persons with genuine love.
3 Millions of people feel lost, afraid and miserable. Young people often feel bitter, unwanted, not knowing what to do with their lives. Frustrated, unhappy married persons turn to divorce for relief. Loneliness has become a prison for many. This is all very sad and our hearts go out to so many people who do not know how to find happiness. (Matt. 9:36) But, happily, we can do something to help by showing these people what is missing in their lives: love for Jehovah, and love for neighbor.
4 As you go from house to house during September, try to talk with people from the Bible, perhaps discussing with them one of the Scripture references on page 3 of the tract. Endeavor to start a Bible study on the initial call. If circumstances are not right to start a study then, offer the brochure and two magazines for 25c. However, use your good judgment for we want the householders to know we are there because we love them and want to help them—not just to place literature. If no one is at home, leave the tract out of sight. (It is illegal to put items in the mailbox.—See Our Kingdom Service, April 1976, Announcements, page 2.) A territory can be reported as worked when we cover it with tracts.
5 Aside from a full share in the house-to-house distribution of the tract, each of us can take advantage of his own special territory assignment—those people we already know. Remember, our schoolmates, workmates, neighbors, friends and relatives may miss receiving a tract at their doors, so offer them one. It is clear that if we are to have results, we need to be prepared and alert to our opportunities. Have in mind what you want to say and use the tracts effectively.
6 Young and old, new and experienced, yes, all of us want to show that we will reach out to help others. We will also do what we can to help the incapacitated ones to share in this work. (8/79 km) As the world grows even colder in its love, let us grow warmer and more intense in our love. As we fulfill our desire to help one another we will have happiness and satisfaction, inciting others to serve Jehovah. May our work with the tract have Jehovah’s rich blessing.—Rev. 22:17.

