





How Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Treat Those Who Used to Belong to Their Religion?


We strive to treat everyone with love, kindness, and respect. If one of Jehovah’s Witnesses has slowed down or stopped in his worship, we reach out to him,a reassure him of our love, and try to rekindle his spiritual interest.—Luke 15:4-7.
In some cases, a person’s actions may lead him to being removed from the congregation. (1 Corinthians 5:13) However, because we deeply love our fellow believers, we strive to help that person beforehand so that he does not need to be removed. And even if he is removed, we still show him love and respect, just as the Bible encourages us to do.—Mark 12:31; 1 Peter 2:17.
What leads to a person being removed from a congregation?
The Bible clearly states that if a Christian commits a serious sin and refuses to change, he should be removed from the congregation.b (1 Corinthians 5:11-13) The Bible determines which sins are so serious that they could lead to a person being removed. For example, it lists such actions as adultery, drunkenness, murder, domestic abuse, and theft.—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10; Galatians 5:19-21; 1 Timothy 1:9, 10.
However, we do not immediately remove from the congregation a person who has committed a serious sin. Congregation eldersc first try to help him change his course. (Romans 2:4) They strive to reach his heart with mildness, gentleness, and kindness. (Galatians 6:1) This approach may move the wrongdoer to realize his mistakes and repent. (2 Timothy 2:24-26) If, despite repeated efforts to help him, he makes a practice of breaking the Bible’s moral code and does not repent, he must be removed from the congregation. The elders simply announce to the congregation that the person is no longer one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.




Elders strive to reach a wrongdoer’s heart with mildness, gentleness, and kindness



What is accomplished by removing a person who is determined to practice sin? For one, the congregation upholds God’s standards of moral cleanness and protects itself from that person’s negative influence. (1 Corinthians 5:6; 15:33; 1 Peter 1:16) In addition, the wrongdoer may be moved to reject his sinful practice and to strive to change.—Hebrews 12:11.
How do Jehovah’s Witnesses treat those who have been removed from the congregation?
The Bible says that Christians should “stop keeping company” with someone who has been removed from the congregation, “not even eating with such a man.” (1 Corinthians 5:11) So we do not socialize with someone who has been removed. However, we do not ignore him completely. We treat him with respect. He is welcome to attend our religious services, where he may be greeted by Jehovah’s Witnesses.d He may also request spiritual assistance from the elders.




Those who have been removed from the congregation are welcome to attend our meetings



What of someone who is removed from the congregation but whose spouse and young children are still Jehovah’s Witnesses? The religious ties he had with his family change, but blood ties remain. Since they live in the same house, his marital relationship and normal family affections and dealings continue.
A person who was removed can request visits from the elders, who will provide loving Scriptural counsel and warmly appeal for him to repent and return to God. (Zechariah 1:3) If he stops his wrongful course and demonstrates a sincere desire to live by the Bible’s moral code, he is welcome to be part of the congregation again. The congregation will “kindly forgive and comfort him,” just as the Christians in Corinth did when a former sinner changed his ways.—2 Corinthians 2:6-8.
How do those who were previously removed feel?
Note the comments of some of Jehovah’s Witnesses who were removed from the congregation and later decided to return to God.
“When I decided to return to the congregation, I thought the elders would want to know everything I’d done during the decades since I had been removed. Instead, they just said, ‘We want you to focus on going forward.’ After that, I felt so relaxed.”—Maria, United States.

“The congregation was looking forward to my return. I felt valued. My spiritual brothers and sisters helped me to feel forgiven and to move forward. The elders were always there to help me recover. They consoled me and helped me see that Jehovah still values and loves me.”—Malcom, Sierra Leone.

“I am happy that Jehovah loves his people enough to see that his organization is kept clean. What may seem harsh to outsiders is both necessary and really a loving thing to do. I am grateful that our heavenly Father is a loving and forgiving God.”—Sandi, United States.

Comments from legal experts who are not Jehovah’s Witnesses
What do law courts and experts have to say about Jehovah’s Witnesses removing unrepentant wrongdoers from their congregations? Note the following comments.
  “It is to be expected that a religious body which is guided by and which seeks to apply scriptural principles will have the power to [expel a sinner when appropriate]. Among other things, this is sensible, if not essential, because someone who is unable or unwilling to abide by scriptural principles not only does not properly belong as a member of such a body but also, unless removed, may have an undesirable influence on the faithful.”—The High Court of Justice, England and Wales, June 7, 2019.

  “The courts in Europe and elsewhere have either found that the [removal] decisions . . . are perfectly lawful and legitimate means of exercise of Jehovah’s Witnesses’ constitutional right to freedom of religion . . . or are not even within the domain of jurisdiction of state courts.”—Professor Paulo Pinto de Albuquerque, former judge of the European Court of Human Rights.





a Although we refer to the person as male, the information in this article applies to both genders.
b Previously, we referred to unrepentant wrongdoers as being disfellowshipped. But now we simply use the Bible’s wording and refer to them as being removed from the congregation.
c Elders are mature Christian men who teach from the Scriptures and shepherd Jehovah’s people by helping and encouraging them. They are not paid for their work.—1 Peter 5:1-3.
d In extreme cases, an individual may leave the congregation and actively try to undermine it or he may actively promote wrong conduct. When this happens, we follow the Bible’s command not to “say a greeting” to such a person.—2 John 9-11.

