





How Are Jehovah’s Witnesses Trained for Their Personal Ministry?


Jehovah’s Witnesses receive ongoing training in all facets of Christian living, which includes their personal public ministry. This ministry is the work that Jesus commanded his followers to do—the preaching and teaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matthew 24:14; 28:19, 20) We receive that training at our weekly meetings and our annual conventions and assemblies. Jehovah’s Witnesses who have responsibilities in the congregation or in the organization receive further training at special Bible schools.
In this article
What training do Jehovah’s Witnesses receive?

Bible schools for Jehovah’s Witnesses

What is the training given to the Witnesses based on?

Do Jehovah’s Witnesses have to pay for their training?

How have Jehovah’s Witnesses benefited from their training?


What training do Jehovah’s Witnesses receive?
Congregation meetings. Every week, we attend two meetings at our places of worship called Kingdom Halls. One meeting is normally held midweek; the other is on the weekend. They are open to the public and no collections are taken.
  Midweek meeting. We receive instruction in reading, the art of conversation, public speaking, and preaching and teaching. The training is provided through talks, discussions, demonstrations, and video presentations. This training helps us be more effective as we share the Bible’s message with others and conduct personal Bible studies with interested ones. All who attend the meetings benefit from this training. Above all, our meetings strengthen our faith in God and our love for him and for our fellow believers.

  Weekend meeting. This two-part meeting begins with a Bible discourse that is especially designed for the general public. The second part of the meeting is a question and answer discussion of an article published in the study edition of The Watchtower.a The articles discuss and explain Bible topics and principles that help us both in our ministry and in our personal life.


Assemblies and conventions. Every year we have three large gatherings, each of which is attended by many congregations. These joyful events focus on a specific Bible-based theme and include discourses, skits, interviews, and videos. As with our congregation meetings, assemblies and conventions further our knowledge of the Bible and help us to be better ministers of the good news. Once again, the public is welcome to attend, and no collections are taken.
Bible schools for Jehovah’s Witnesses
For more advanced training, some of Jehovah’s Witnesses are invited to attend various Bible schools. What are these schools? What is their purpose and duration? And who may enroll?
Pioneer Service School
  Purpose: To train full-time ministers, called pioneers,b to become more effective in the preaching and teaching work. The course includes classroom discussions, skits, talks, and workshops.

  Duration: Six days.

  Enrollment: Those who have completed their first year as pioneers are invited to attend. Longtime pioneers who have not attended in the past five years may be invited to attend again.








School for Kingdom Evangelizers
  Purpose: To give specialized training to experienced full-time ministers. Students further develop their preaching and teaching skills, and they study Bible topics in depth. Many graduates are invited to areas where more evangelizers are needed.

  Duration: Two months.

  Enrollment: Pioneers can apply to attend if they meet certain requirements and have the circumstances to serve wherever there is a need.








School for Congregation Elders
  Purpose: To help eldersc care for their responsibilities in the congregation, such as teaching and shepherding, and to deepen their love for God and for their fellow believers.—1 Peter 5:2, 3.

  Duration: Five days.

  Enrollment: Newly appointed elders as well as experienced elders who have not attended the school in the past five years are invited to attend.








School for Circuit Overseers and Their Wives
  Purpose: To train traveling ministers, called circuit overseers,d to carry out their responsibilities more effectively. (1 Timothy 5:17) The curriculum also helps these Christian elders and their wives to gain more insight into the Scriptures.

  Duration: One month.

  Enrollment: New circuit overseers and their wives are invited to attend after one year in their assignment. Thereafter, they are invited again about every five years.








Kingdom Ministry School
  Purpose: To help elders and ministerial servantse care for their congregation responsibilities in the light of current situations, trends, and needs. (2 Timothy 3:1) The school is held every few years.

  Duration: Varies, often one day.

  Enrollment: Circuit overseers, elders, and ministerial servants.








Bethel Service School
  Purpose: To help Bethelf members to succeed in their work and to deepen their love for God and for one another.

  Duration: Five and a half days.

  Enrollment: New members at Bethel are required to attend. Longtime members who have not attended the school in the previous five years may be invited to attend again.








Watchtower Bible School of Gilead
  Purpose: To instill in the students a deeper appreciation for God’s written Word and to help them apply what they learn. (1 Thessalonians 2:13) The spiritually mature Christian men and women who attend Gilead become even greater assets to Jehovah’s organization and the worldwide Bible educational work. Graduates may be assigned to the field or to a branch office, whether in their home country or in another land.

  Duration: Five months.

  Enrollment: Branch offices invite selected full-time ministers to apply. The school is held in the United States at the Watchtower Educational Center at Patterson, New York.








School for Branch Committee Members and Their Wives
  Purpose: To train Branch Committeeg members to oversee the work carried out at a branch office and the spiritual activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country or countries assigned to their branch office.

  Duration: Two months.

  Enrollment: The World Headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses invites selected Branch Committee members and their wives to attend the school, which is held at the Watchtower Educational Center at Patterson, New York.







What is the training given to the Witnesses based on?
The Bible is always the primary textbook for the training that Jehovah’s Witnesses receive. We believe that the Bible is inspired by God and that it contains the very best instruction for all aspects of Christian living.—2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
Do Jehovah’s Witnesses have to pay for their training?
No. The instruction is free. The activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses are supported by voluntary donations.—2 Corinthians 9:7.

a The Bible and our Bible study aids, including videos, are available on our website, jw.org.
b A pioneer is an exemplary baptized Witness—male or female—who desires to spend a specified number of hours each month sharing the Bible’s message with others.
c Elders are mature Christian men who teach from the Scriptures and shepherd Jehovah’s people by helping and encouraging them. They are not paid for their work.
d A circuit overseer is a full-time minister who visits a different congregation in his circuit each week. He encourages his spiritual brothers and sisters by means of Bible-based talks and by accompanying them in the ministry.
e Ministerial servants render a variety of practical services in behalf of their brothers and sisters. They thus give the elders more time for teaching and shepherding.
f Bethel is the name given to the branch offices of Jehovah’s Witnesses. The full-time ministers who serve there support the activities of the Witnesses in the local branch territory.
g A Branch Committee comprises three or more spiritually qualified men.

How have Jehovah’s Witnesses benefited from their training?





“Because I am shy, I found it hard to talk to strangers about the Bible. But the training I received at the midweek meeting has helped me to grow in confidence and to improve my teaching skills. I am also better at speaking to others in the congregation and at my job.”—Natasha, United States.






“Attending the School for Kingdom Evangelizers helped me develop godly qualities, such as love, patience, and kindness. As a result, I feel I have become a better Christian, friend, and neighbor. The school also taught me how to do research on Bible topics and how to explain God’s Word in a way that reaches hearts.”—Stephen, Nigeria.






“The School for Congregation Elders helped me develop the humility I need to serve as an elder. The talks impressed upon me the need to follow Jesus’ example.”—Luca, Italy.






“The Kingdom Ministry School taught me the importance of being approachable, kind, and warm as I deal with others. I learned that when I do things for others, I should be motivated by love, not by mere duty.”—Samuel, United Kingdom.






“Gilead school helped us to examine ourselves in the mirror of God’s Word. (James 1:22-25) We thus saw where we needed to make changes to our personalities and in our service to Jehovah. We also learned to think more of others than of ourselves and to let love guide us in all that we say and do.”—Elnathan and Princess, Philippines.




