Gilead’s 61st Graduation a Spiritual Treat
“WHAT a spiritual feast!” “What a practical and upbuilding program!” Expressions such as these were heard regarding Gilead’s 61st graduation program, held on September 5, 1976. And a spiritual treat it was, not only for the twenty-six missionaries graduating, but also for the 1,968 others who were in attendance.
It was a beautiful late-summer day as all those relatives and friends, including the members of the Brooklyn Bethel family, filled the Jehovah’s Witnesses Assembly Hall in Long Island City. The students, averaging twenty-seven years of age, had come from six lands and were being sent to eleven different countries in Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas.
After the opening song, and a prayer by Albert Schroeder, the chairman, Leo Greenlees, spoke first. He mentioned how, due to earnest desire, realistic planning and sincere prayer, they were now realizing their goal to enjoy expanded privileges of service as missionaries. Then followed a series of eight ten-minute talks, truly encouraging and most practical.
First came Gilead instructor Karl Adams. He noted the importance of a good relationship with Jehovah God and the value of endurance. With the application of wisdom, gained from God’s Word, the graduates would be able to endure with joy, even as counseled by the disciple James. (Prov. 4:7; Jas. 1:2-5) Gilead instructor and registrar Ulysses Glass observed that in Israel, as illustrated with John the Baptist and Jesus Christ, the privileges a man might enjoy were at times determined by his birth into a certain tribe​—a God-ordained arrangement. But these missionaries have their work cut out for them by reason of their dedication and volunteering, rather than by reason of their birth. God knows what is best for each one, and to submit to him actually means greater freedom.​—Jer. 10:23; Prov. 3:5, 6.
Next to speak were the chairmen for 1976 of the six Governing Body committees.
Milton Henschel pointed out that the abundant love of God accounts for all our blessings, spiritual and material, present and future. God’s permitting his servants to undergo hardships and suffering does not mean that he does not love us. Regardless of what may come, there is need to remember that God’s love is strong, enduring and near at hand.​—Rom. 8:35-39.
After Karl Klein read a number of heartwarming telegrams and other messages from various continents, Grant Suiter was heard. He called attention to our hands, which are the most wonderful of all tools. Rather than be “fooling around,” our attitude should be, “God, show me how best to use my hands.” He was followed by Raymond Franz, who himself had attended Gilead School and served some twenty years in foreign assignments. He urged following the cultured and highly educated apostle Paul, who learned to be content regardless of circumstances. Like Paul, the Gilead graduates may well be called upon to bear the ‘brand marks of Christ’ due to hardships and persecution.​—Gal. 6:17; Phil. 4:11, 13.
Daniel Sydlik spoke next. He noted that life was made up of many beginnings, and missionary activity was about to begin for the graduating class. Whether they remain in their assignment will chiefly depend upon whether they are happy in it or not. God’s Word is full of expressions about causes for happiness. In a similar vein, Lloyd Barry, also a Gilead graduate, who had spent upward of twenty-five years serving in Japan, stressed the importance of having joy in order to endure. (Ps. 100:2; Neh. 8:10) Joy enabled Jesus and his early followers to serve faithfully. Barry further pointed out the need for self-discipline in being successful and joyful as a missionary. He supported his theme by references to examples of faithfulness in the missionary service until old age and even death.
The final speaker was Theodore Jaracz, another Gilead graduate, who dwelt on the importance that Gilead School put on spiritual things and contrasted this with the stress that so many theological seminaries put on secular matters. As a result, Gilead graduates were better equipped than ever to make disciples. More having been given to them, more would be expected of them. (Luke 12:48) After this talk all students received their diplomas, and one of them read a fine letter of appreciation for all that they had received.
The program resumed at 1:30 with an abbreviated Watchtower Bible study conducted by Nathan Knorr, followed by a delightful musical program by the graduates. Thereafter they presented two dramas. The first stressed the importance of personal prayer, and the second the need for Christians to be whole-souled in their service to God as they bring all their tithes into God’s storehouse. (Mal. 3:10) Rounding out the day’s spiritual treat was a prayer by Fred Franz, to which all were able to say a most heartfelt “Amen!”

