Proclaiming Liberty in the “Land of the Free”
“LAND of the Free”​—Thailand means just that. Many still remember this land as “Siam,” extolled in song as one of those “faraway places”​—a picturesque and exotic land that finds much of its charm in its happy, easygoing people. These are proud of their native culture and of the fact that they have never suffered long subjection to others, as in the days of “empire building” when most neighbor countries became colonies of Britain or of France.
In the unfriendly world of today, Thailand struggles to preserve its traditional freedoms. But now a new kind of liberty is being proclaimed there. This includes not only freedom from oppressive human authorities, but also freedom from poverty, from sickness and even from death itself! All these freedoms came into prospect when Jesus told his disciples, “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”​—John 8:32.
This “truth” is the powerful message set out in God’s Word, the Bible. However, for many years this truth seemed to make little progress in the “Land of the Free,” especially among the largely Buddhist population. It was not that these Buddhists violently opposed the Bible message, as did the religious Jews who sought to kill Jesus. (John 8:36, 37) The Thai Buddhists are by nature tolerant; they appreciate freedom enough to grant it to others, especially in matters of religion. They have a common saying, “All religions teach people to do good.” So, as would be expected, there is complete freedom to preach Bible truth in Thailand, and that has already proved to be a blessing to many honest-hearted ones.
Why, then, were early years of the proclamation of Bible truth in this land without marked progress? It must be put down to the environment and background of this peace-loving people. Through many centuries they have had little involvement in the turmoils of the nations. They have been a nation apart from the great, bustling world. They have been content to live placidly along their klongs (waterways), enjoying the abundance of rice and other products of the fertile soil. They have had no expectancy of a Messiah and no conception of a fatherlike God to whom they could pray. Their “Lord Buddha,” as they respectfully call him, neither taught about God nor denied his existence. When asked about God they are apt to reply, in all honesty, “Mai koei kit,” meaning “I have never thought.” Thailand has indeed been a ‘faraway place’ with regard to Bible truth.
PROCLAIMERS OF LIBERTY ENTER THAILAND
Have you not thrilled to read of the faith and endurance of the apostle Paul and his companions as they carried the truth to faraway nations? The first modern-day witnesses of Jehovah to enter southeast Asia had a similar task. They were just a handful, but they fanned out and crisscrossed a huge section of the Asian continent in their urge to proclaim the good news. Into Thailand, Indochina, Burma and across the Burma Road into China they went. They differed in nationality, appearance and personality, but they were easily recognized. How so? They all carried big bags. They needed them. These were full of books containing Jehovah’s liberating message​—in many languages. They were all resourceful, too, whether in providing for their simple needs, in avoiding cholera during epidemics or in getting a night’s sleep in some bug-infested bed. They were beaten, robbed and even left for dead, but they carried on. They were sealed off, as it were, by strange languages. But they endured.
First of Jehovah’s Witnesses to come to Thailand was Claude Goodman of England, on his way to India in 1931. He spent just one week in steaming Bangkok, visiting people in the business section and leaving much literature in English. Some five years later, Frank Dewar came from New Zealand, and he stayed for one year, witnessing also in English, after which he was joined by Willi Unglaube from Germany. Next there came an Australian, Ted Sewell, and another German, Kurt Gruber, who fled there from Penang to avoid internment at the outbreak of World War II in 1939. But still there was no progress among the native Thai people, nor was there Bible literature available in the Thai language.
Then it happened! Kurt and Willi, who were making a preaching “sweep” through northern Thailand, appeared in Chiang Mai with their big bags. A book, in English, fell into the hands of Chomchai, the young and zealous headmistress of the Presbyterian Girls’ School in that city. It was like a match dropping into dry kindling. Out on their bicycles went Chomchai and her companions, searching for those “two Witnesses.” They soon found them, and following hours of discussion, they became free from Babylonish doctrines, such as the Trinity and hellfire-torment teachings. A few months later, a group including Chomchai and the former headmaster of the Presbyterian Seminary were baptized beside a waterfall. Chomchai began translating Bible literature from English into Thai, and until this day she perseveres at this work.
HARDSHIPS OF WAR YEARS
By 1941, all seemed set for a wider work of liberation, but by now it was a world at war. Early that year, the Japanese occupied Thailand. First the Australian Witnesses were interned for four years because their country was at war with Japan. Later the Germans were arrested because they were Jehovah’s Witnesses, and these were outlawed by the Axis Powers. Willi Unglaube alone remained free, “underground” in the up-country (of northern Thailand) and was courageously supported by new Witnesses in that area. Some native Thai Witnesses were also arrested, including Chomchai. However, in spite of the Japanese occupation, Thai officials took willing action in releasing the German and Thai Witnesses.
By 1947, lines of communication were again open, Bible literature was pouring into the country and the first Thai Watchtower magazine appeared​—mimeographed and only at the rate of 200 copies a month at first, but how valuable to all those who could read only Thai! By now there were 65 devoted Witnesses proclaiming the good news from door to door in the five congregations in the country. However, with a population of fifteen million, this could be only a beginning. The book “Let God Be True” was now on its way in the Thai language.
TRAINED HELP FROM ‘FAR AWAY’
The faithful roving pioneers (full-time workers) had done their work of sowing seed throughout the length and breadth of the land. But now a different kind of work was needed. Missionaries from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead in the United States arrived and set the pattern in conducting Bible studies in the homes of the people, and as these workers from ‘far away’ learned the native language themselves, their work became more effective. Native Thai “special pioneer” workers joined them in this service, and in due course a Kingdom Ministry School, conducted primarily for the training of local overseers, served a most useful purpose. Additional missionary workers, native Filipinos, came directly to Thailand from their own country and helped to add new spirit to the work.
Particularly from 1967 on, the proclamation of Bible truth has made significant advances in Thailand. The Witnesses had been preaching with a purpose, expecting results, and they were not disappointed. Over 40,000 Thai books, “Let God Be True” and From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained, had been scattered far and wide throughout the country, and now the foreign and native missionaries were beginning to teach, as well as preach, in Thai. It is noteworthy, too, that quite a few of those preaching Bible truth were now from Buddhist backgrounds. They had been rewarded because of their ‘seeking and groping’ after God. (Acts 17:27) There they were, only one here and one there​—but how precious they were!
NATIVE WITNESSES GET BUSY
One of the first of these to accept Bible truth was a girl who lived near the Burmese border. She was born a Buddhist, yet wanted to know about her Creator. Coming into possession of a Bible and a booklet in Thai, she was fired by the message she read and wanted to become a proclaimer of the truth she was learning. With her family, she had joined the Presbyterian Church, and there she asked to be trained as a preacher. But she only met with excuses. Then one day an earnest “special pioneer” Witness appeared on her doorstep. She had already been warned that he was a ‘wolf in sheep’s clothing,’ but since he talked about the Bible she just had to listen and take from him the Thai book “Let God Be True.” He was persistent in calling on her again and again, and did just what she had longed for​—taught her the Bible and how to be a proclaimer of the good news. She, too, became a “pioneer” Witness.
Down in Bangkok, a Thai “pioneer” worker called on a young man who was a member of a typical hardworking ancestor worshiping Chinese family. He, too, was searching. Once again, the combination of an honest heart, the book “Let God Be True” and patient teaching by the Witness produced results. In spite of violent opposition from that large family, he too accepted the liberation call and became a “pioneer” Witness.
In Phitsanulok, central Thailand, a sincere man had become an elder and a preacher in the Presbyterian Church. There was a rift, and his own church broke away from the parent body, but he continued to cycle some fifteen miles (24 kilometers) out there each Sunday to preach. Jehovah’s Witnesses contacted him and he studied the truth with them. Soon he was convinced. He continued his weekly cycle trips, but now to preach Bible truths. The false religious signs were taken down from the church building and it became a real Bible study center. Several other members of the church studied with him, and in due course these also were baptized by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
A Thai Witness who learned the Bible message in the Netherlands returned with her Dutch husband to her native land. She visited her Buddhist relatives who were widely scattered over an area to the north of Phitsanulok. She invited them all to a family reunion, poured out Bible truths to them and took them to the congregation meetings in Phitsanulok. Many began to show interest, and they took turns at making the rugged trip to the meetings, four miles (6 kilometers) being traveled on foot. Taped talks were sent to them, including one by the circuit overseer entitled “What Jehovah’s Witnesses Believe.” When “pioneer” Witnesses were at last able to visit them, the joy they had on arrival made their fatigue vanish. These humble people were already offering prayer at each mealtime, and they had used tapes extensively in witnessing to the community. Shortly, the as-yet-unwed father of the family took his eight children with him to the district officer for the occasion of his legal marriage to their mother. Both of them came right out of Babylonish religion and also quit smoking.
Meanwhile the Witness from the Netherlands had sent Bible literature to other relatives. They also showed interest and “moved house” so that they could join the first group. Actually, moving house was really no problem to them. A few days’ work with bamboo and leaves, and a fine new home awaited them!
Some thirty miles (48 kilometers) away, a young man of Islamic origin had obtained a Thai copy of From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained. He pored over it in his isolation. Then he made a trip to Bangkok to get more Bible literature, and also for association and training along with Jehovah’s people. On returning to his wife and farm he started preaching with great zeal and boldness in a largely Buddhist community. This was a wild gun-toting marijuana-smoking district situated on the fringe of the law. One of the “toughs” there, impressed by the calm behavior of the new Witness when the Witness was challenged to a fight, became interested. He also quit smoking and started bearing witness about the truth to others. As a result, he became a target of his former “gang” mates. To test him, they stole his buffaloes, and finally they shot and killed him. To avoid a violent “gang” vendetta, the other Witness, his wife and other interested ones now “moved house” to join the nearby group of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Together, they built a small Kingdom Hall on a hill and set up their own homes around it. Now all of them could have peaceful association together and turn their attention to liberating still others.
Over the years there have been problems in reaching this large Buddhist population, but perseverance is having its reward. Out of a total of more than 700 zealous Witnesses in Thailand, 213 have been baptized in the past two years. The attitude of the common people is changing, and that soft wall of polite mental resistance is beginning to break down. World events, even right on Thailand’s doorstep, are making many doubt whether their philosophy of Tam Dee Dai Dee (Do Good​—Receive Good) is sufficient in this present system of things. Truth​—Bible truth—​is encouraging many to take more positive action in accepting Jehovah’s kingdom by Christ Jesus, so that they may really be ‘set free’ with prospect of everlasting blessings on a paradise earth.
[Map of Thailand on page 645]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
CHIANG MAI
PHITSANULOK
BANGKOK

