Can You Increase Your Praise to Jehovah During April?
1 The psalmist David had a heartfelt desire to acceptably praise Jehovah, and so he declared: “I shall laud Jehovah very much with my mouth, and in among many people I shall praise him.” (Ps. 109:30) April is a fine time to ‘add to all his praise’ by increasing our share in the field ministry. (Ps. 71:14) Are you planning to be among the many who do this by joining the auxiliary pioneer ranks?
2 Plan Now: “The plans of the diligent one surely make for advantage,” we are reminded at Proverbs 21:5. This calls for your taking the matter to Jehovah in prayer, putting him first in your plans. (Prov. 3:5, 6) Next, take a close look at your current schedule to determine where adjustments can be made to spend an average of two hours a day in the ministry. Your “buying out” time from other activities allows you to devote more time to the preaching work.​—Eph. 5:16.
3 Communicate and Cooperate: The apostle Paul spoke of certain ones who were “a strengthening aid” to him in accomplishing his ministry. (Col. 4:11) Discuss your plans with others who want to enroll in April. Their support and companionship can bring mutual spiritual benefits. The service overseer can help you if you have questions about service arrangements or territory to work.
4 Cooperation and support from within the family can help individual members to auxiliary pioneer. Household chores may have to be temporarily redistributed. The schedule for handling these duties may also need adjusting. A family conference to discuss these needs could be helpful in accomplishing your objective. Good communication and cooperation are the key to success.
5 Keep a Positive Outlook: Do not be quick to rule out auxiliary pioneering because of unfavorable circumstances. Young people in school, retired people, housewives with children, family heads working full-time, all have been able to make the sacrifice​—and gladly so—​to auxiliary pioneer in April. They agree with the psalmist that “on the part of the upright ones praise is fitting,” and they have not considered it too costly to put forth the extra effort required to spend 60 hours in the ministry. (Ps. 33:1) If you are unable to enroll, why not share in the joy by increasing your activity as a congregation publisher?
6 For many, auxiliary pioneering in April has been a stepping-stone to the regular pioneer service. Having built up their activity, they found that the transition to the regular pioneer work proved to be much easier.
7 Yes, the season lends itself to increased theocratic activity in April. The additional hours of daylight allow for doing more witnessing in the morning and early evening. We want to do all we can to praise our God, Jehovah. Auxiliary pioneering in April is a fine way to show our appreciation for his many acts of undeserved kindness toward us.

