Hold Fast the Public Declaration of Your Hope Without Wavering
1 The Watchtower Study is the primary means by which spiritual “food at the proper time” is provided for God’s people today. (Matt. 24:45) We attend this important meeting with two main objectives​—to be built up spiritually and to make public declaration of our hope to others.​—Heb. 10:23-25.
2 Benefiting Ourselves: It is estimated that in most congregations only a third of the audience study the lesson in advance. About the same number share in commenting. The solid spiritual food presented in the Watchtower Study cannot be fully assimilated during the meeting itself. You need to set aside time to study the material in advance.
3 When preparing for the study, you may find it helpful first to read and think about the questions in the box near the end of the article. These can help focus your attention on the main points to be considered in the lesson.
4 During the study listen carefully to what is said. Pay attention to the conductor’s opening remarks; these comments set the stage for the study. He may raise three or four questions that will be answered, or he may review some highlights from last week’s lesson if this week’s is a continuation of the same subject. If there is some adjustment in our understanding of a Bible prophecy or a Scriptural principle, he will call this to our attention. Of course, comments by the conductor must be brief, since one purpose of the study is to give the congregation an opportunity to express their hope. Listen carefully as others comment on what they have learned; this can help strengthen your faith.
5 Declare Your Hope: Do you regularly offer comments during the study? Brief, pointed remarks are preferred. (Compare Luke 21:1-4.) A simple comment from the heart is appreciated by all. Usually the first comment on a question should be brief and direct. This allows others to bring in a scripture or draw attention to a detail in the paragraph. In this way many can make public declaration of their hope. Comments should always be positive and upbuilding.
6 If you have just started attending the study or if you are nervous about commenting, you may wish to ask the conductor for assistance. Ask him to look for your hand when a certain paragraph is considered. Perhaps you can volunteer to read a cited scripture text and make a brief application of its meaning. You might make a few notes in the margin to help you recall what you want to say when you comment. If you are a youngster, remember that your comments are welcome and appreciated.​—Matt. 21:16.
7 It is vital that we express our faith, and the Watchtower Study provides a fine opportunity to do so. If you are hesitant to comment, do what you can to overcome the problem, and make yourself give at least one answer. You will have contributed to the meeting, and you will feel better for it. So why not plan to give at least one comment at the very next Watchtower Study?​—Prov. 15:23.

