Make Them Feel Welcome at the Memorial
1 In the past few years, only 1 out of 3 persons in attendance at the Memorial was a publisher of the good news. Likely the same will be true this year. Some may attend at the urging of a relative or an acquaintance who lives in another city, while others may have been invited by local publishers. Still others who attend, although baptized, are no longer active in the ministry. We sincerely welcome all who show respect for Jesus’ command: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”​—1 Cor. 11:24; Rom. 15:7.
2 Assigned attendants should be alert to welcome everyone, especially a new one, as he arrives at the Kingdom Hall. However, all of us can have a share in following the course of hospitality at the Memorial. (Rom. 12:13) How so?
3 On that evening some publishers will be very busy providing transportation for interested people. Others may be able to arrive early and be on hand to greet visitors who come on their own. When a stranger enters the hall, greet him warmly, and start a conversation. Ask him if he knows anyone in the local congregation. If he does, take care of him until that individual arrives. (Compare Luke 10:35.) If he does not know anyone personally, why not invite him to sit with you during the meeting? Explain how the wine and the bread will be used during the program. He may need your assistance in looking up scriptures quoted by the speaker.
4 At the conclusion of the Memorial celebration, let him know you are pleased he came. He may have questions about our work that you can answer. Your personal interest may lead to a discussion on some Bible topic, either at the Kingdom Hall or elsewhere. Some excellent studies have been started by alert brothers who have taken this commendable initiative. Before he leaves the Kingdom Hall, introduce him to others, and give him a warm invitation to return.
5 What a pleasure it is to welcome our dear brothers and sisters who have not been attending the meetings regularly or have not been active in the ministry for some time! Rather than asking questions about why they have stayed away, simply express your joy to have them present. Perhaps something they hear during the Memorial discourse will move them to reevaluate their dedicated relationship with Jehovah. The warm welcome you give and the genuine concern you display may touch their hearts. Let them know that you look forward to seeing them again.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
6 A special public talk entitled “True Religion Meets the Needs of Human Society” will be given in most congregations on April 10. Make sure that all who attend the Memorial celebration are invited and assisted to be present. It is our hope that those attending these special meetings will feel welcome and experience the warm spirit of fellowship among Jehovah’s people.​—Ps. 133:1.

