Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 7
Song 200
15 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Briefly discuss “Offer Young People Ask Book,” and encourage publishers to use that book when appropriate.
15 min: “Hold Fast the Public Declaration of Your Hope Without Wavering.” Question-and-answer coverage by Watchtower Study conductor. Get comments from those who have overcome fear of commenting at meetings. Emphasize need for advance preparation. Encourage congregation to prepare for full share in congregational study of The Watchtower every week.
15 min: “Declare the Thrilling Message in Revelation.” Audience discussion. Have well-prepared publishers demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 2-4. After each demonstration have audience comment on what they learned from presentation. Encourage all to participate in offering Revelation Climax book this month.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 14
Song 205
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Draw attention to specific points in current magazines that may be used in the field ministry this week.
15 min: “Can You Increase Your Praise to Jehovah During April?” Question-and-answer coverage. Get comments from those who have auxiliary pioneered in past. Have them explain how they adjusted their affairs to take advantage of this privilege. Encourage all who plan to auxiliary pioneer in April to turn in their applications as soon as possible.
20 min: “Make Them Feel Welcome at the Memorial.” Question-and-answer coverage. After paragraph 3 have brief demonstration of ministerial servant welcoming new person to Memorial.
Song 150 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 21
Song 143
10 min: Local announcements, including accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Discuss box entitled “Food at the Proper Time.” Encourage all to invite interested ones to special talk to be given on April 10.
20 min: “Help Them Act On the Message.” Discussion. Have well-prepared demonstrations of presentations in paragraphs 2 and 3.
15 min: Local needs, perhaps in connection with Memorial arrangements. Or “Evolution,” Reasoning book, pages 121-9. To be handled as family discussion. Youth who has been asked to write report for school on evolution explains to parents what ideas he will use and how he will present them. They discuss reasons why these arguments should be effective. Parents sincerely commend him.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 28
Song 112
15 min: Local announcements. Discuss and demonstrate appropriate ways to witness in local territory with April offer. Relate experiences showing how some publishers have obtained subscriptions where genuine interest was shown on return visit.
15 min: Using selected highlights from pages 19-32 of the 1994 Yearbook, elder discusses worldwide expansion of Kingdom work and emphasizes positive aspects of support from local congregation. Show how Jehovah is richly blessing his people, including those who are limited in what they can do.
15 min: “The Giver of ‘Every Good Gift.’” Talk by elder, based on December 1, 1993, Watchtower, pages 28-31.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.

