From Our Readers
Malnutrition  I read the series “Malnutrition—‘The Silent Emergency’” with much interest. (February 22, 2003) In Japan we don’t have much of a problem like this, so I was very surprised at what I read. I hope the good news of God’s Kingdom can be preached all the more to people suffering from this problem.
Y. T., Japan
Music Videos  I sometimes receive your magazines from an acquaintance who is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. I thought the article “Young People Ask . . . Should I Watch Music Videos?” (February 22, 2003) was very well done. It was quite specific and revealed the dangers concealed in modern music.
M. M., Japan
When I received the article, I read it all the way through immediately. A lot of my friends watch music videos, and they love to talk about them. The article has helped me not to give in to the temptation to watch them. I am 12 years old, and the article came just in time for me.
K. W., United States
I really enjoyed the article. I am a full-time evangelizer and know that it’s important for me to set a good example for other young ones. So when youths ask me why I haven’t seen a certain music video, now I can say that it’s because I don’t want to ruin my relationship with Jehovah. Please continue to print informative “Young People Ask . . .” articles.
R. B., United States
I’m nearly 21, and I enjoy watching music videos. You were right to note, however, that these videos have an influence on those who watch them. Often, young ones like a piece of music because of its tune or rhythm but do not worry about the words. This is especially so when the words are in a foreign language. The videos often reveal what spirit that music really conveys. Sometimes I am surprised to see the video for a song that I thought was appropriate! When I see a debasing video, I switch channels and do not listen to that song anymore.
T. G., France
Wildebeests  I really liked the article “The Great Migration.” (February 22, 2003) I love animals, and when a new issue of Awake! arrives, the first thing I do is read any articles about them. I was amazed to read that when in danger, the female wildebeest can interrupt the birth process and complete it at a safer time and place! Please keep publishing these beautiful articles.
K. R., Italy
Unforgivable Sin  I do not know how to express my gratitude to Jehovah and to you for the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Is There an Unforgivable Sin?” (February 8, 2003) I have been looking for such information for some time. I had been trying to understand Hebrews 10:26, and I thought it applied only to the 144,000, who are going to heaven. Thanks for clearing this up.
R. A. P., Ghana
Syria  I really appreciated the originality of the article “Syria—Echoes of an Interesting Past.” (February 8, 2003) Being very keen on history and geography, I found it interesting to be able to link Bible verses with a precise spot on the map. I hope that you will publish other articles of this sort.
M. P., France
[Picture Credit Line on page 30]
UN/DPI Photo by Eskinder Debebe

