Gilead’s Spiritual Harvest
“WE ARE approaching a final harvesttime,” pointed out F. W. Franz, vice-president of the Watch Tower Society, on Sunday morning, March 9, 1969. The occasion was the graduation of the 47th class of the Society’s missionary school, Gilead. The ninety-seven graduating students, and over two thousand of their friends and relatives who gathered for the special day wondered what final harvest the speaker meant and how they personally were involved.
The answers came quickly. The dynamic speaker quoted Jeremiah 8:20: “The harvest has passed, the summer has come to an end; but as for us, we have not been saved!”
Making the spiritual application, he showed that Christendom has failed to produce the spirituality that might allow her to be preserved alive in the future. In joyful contrast, the spiritual harvest now going on among Jehovah’s witnesses has been abundant, as indicated by Amos 9:13. (Lev. 26:3-5) Because the work of the spiritual Christian harvesters had God’s blessing, a great fruitage has resulted. Thus when the final destruction comes at the war of Armageddon, those who have this abundant spirituality will be saved into the new order.
The high point of the day was a talk by N. H. Knorr, the president of the Society, entitled “The Implanting of the Word.” It was based on James 1:21, which reads: “Put away all filthiness and that superfluous thing, moral badness, and accept with mildness the implanting of the word which is able to save your souls.”
“This implanting of the word is not only to be done to the persons outside, it is to be done in ourselves.” This was important, he stressed, for it would mean the saving of our lives.
Too soon the pleasant day came to its end, and the final song and prayer were over. But students and visitors alike had greatly benefited from the special occasion. All were determined to let the word take even deeper root in their hearts and to have a full share in the spiritual harvest now so that they might enjoy God’s rich blessings forever.

