Announcements
● Literature offer for September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? October: Subscription to either Awake! or The Watchtower or both. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and either Should You Believe in the Trinity? or “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” December: Mankind’s Search for God.
● The presiding overseer or someone assigned by him should audit the congregation’s accounts on September 1 or as soon as possible thereafter.
● It is important that brothers planning charters to visit Bethel correspond by mail with the Bethel Office first. Please provide information on the number coming and the dates. The Society will provide directions and the route charter buses should take. Letters to Brooklyn Bethel should be addressed to Watchtower, Bethel Office, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, NY 11201. Those brothers planning charters to visit Watchtower Farms should address correspondence to Watchtower, Bethel Office, R R 1, Box 300, Wallkill, NY 12589.
● A new Watchtower Publications List has been prepared, and four copies are being sent to each congregation. They should be distributed to the secretary and the brothers caring for literature, magazines, and accounts.
● During the next round of visits beginning in September 1990, the circuit overseer will spend some time with the congregation secretary and the accounts servant to go over accounting procedures. This personal assistance on the part of the circuit overseer will help assure that the congregation accounts are being handled properly according to the Society’s instructions on caring for the congregation’s records.
● New Publications Available:
“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” 1990 Edition​—English
Mankind’s Search for God​—Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Korean, Spanish
Sing Praises to Jehovah (Large size)​—Thai
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Kinyarwanda, Polish, Vietnamese
Watch Tower Publications Index 1950-1985​—Spanish
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Tausug
How Can Blood Save Your Life?​—Chinese, English, French, Greek, Italian, Spanish, Swedish
Is There a God Who Cares?​—Hindi
Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Unitedly Doing God’s Will Worldwide—​Persian, Samoan
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Persian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986-1989​—English
Watch Tower Publications Index 1988​—Portuguese
Tract No. 13​—Samoan
Tract No. 14​—Samoan
Tract No. 15​—Samoan
Tract No. 16​—Samoan

