Appreciating Our Pioneers
1 Fellow workers for the Kingdom of God strengthen one another. (Col. 4:11) When we consider that the primary work of the Christian congregation is to preach the good news, there are compelling reasons to appreciate the full-time workers in our midst.​—Mark 13:10; Rom. 16:2; Phil. 4:3.
WHY?
2 In a direct way, pioneers build up the congregation by working with less experienced publishers in various features of the preaching work. This includes magazine witnessing, preparing for and making return visits, and starting and effectively conducting home Bible studies. In addition, pioneers can set an example in courageously witnessing informally. Their support of midweek group witnessing arrangements affords them opportunity to be of assistance to others. Their positive influence in the field can be felt especially when pioneers support field service on the weekend, a time when most other publishers are able to share.
3 Pioneers help congregations in thoroughly and frequently covering the territory. This enables people to become better acquainted with our message and to feel more at ease when we visit them because they know who we are. The many hours pioneers spend in the territory leaving literature with interested persons and cultivating the interest​—in effect, planting and watering seeds of truth—​can only lead to a more productive territory.​—1 Cor. 3:6.
IN THE CONGREGATION
4 Many have been encouraged to enter full-time service because their heart was touched by the zeal and enthusiasm of faithful pioneers. One sister had been hesitant about becoming a regular pioneer because there were none in the congregation. But when encouraged by the circuit overseer, she went ahead and enrolled. Others soon followed, and that congregation now has a sizable number of zealous pioneers.
5 There may be times when the elders will ask a pioneer to assist a person who has become irregular or inactive. This assistance could include conducting a Bible study with the individual. The pioneer’s faith and zeal could thus contribute to rekindling the person’s love for the truth and help reactivate him to work at fulfilling the obligations of his dedication.​—1 Thess. 5:14.
ENCOURAGE THE PIONEERS
6 The pioneers, while doing much to encourage others, themselves need encouragement in order to continue joyful in their service. (Rom. 1:12) Do you speak positively about the pioneer ministry? When did you last commend a pioneer for his or her work and self-sacrificing spirit? Pioneers especially appreciate having someone to work with in field service during those hours of the day when few publishers are out. Can you accompany the pioneers and perhaps spend longer hours in support of the preaching work?
7 How else can you encourage the pioneers? Besides giving commendation, you can express your appreciation for such hard workers in a tangible way by sharing a meal with them, voluntarily assisting them with their travel expenses, and in other ways supporting them as you are able.​—Compare 1 Thessalonians 5:12, 13.
8 With elders and ministerial servants taking the lead in the congregation, pioneers and publishers will give full support to well-organized arrangements for service. All of us will thus be using what gifts we have in “ministering to one another.”​—1 Pet. 4:10, 11.

