Be Alert to Start Bible Studies
1 Starting and conducting home Bible studies is part of our commission as Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Matt. 28:19, 20) Therefore, will you be one of God’s fellow workers in doing this? (1 Cor. 3:9) What a privilege it is to help others come to know the greatest Personage in the universe!
2 With so many problems connected with fast-changing world events, many honesthearted individuals are looking for answers as to why these things are happening. Long ago Jehovah provided the answers to their questions. When sincere ones are instructed in the Word of God, they are comforted. Hence, we need to be alert to opportunities to start Bible studies.​—Prov. 3:27.
BE ALERT TO OPPORTUNITIES
3 Have you considered starting a Bible study with a close relative or an acquaintance who is not in the truth? Knowing them will give you an edge in using discernment as to the appropriate time to discuss the matter with them. Have in mind that a well-chosen question or a word at the right time may awaken their interest in the truth. When an individual’s curiosity is aroused, fruitful discussions often follow, and a Bible study may be started.
4 In many cases the fine conduct of a Christian mate has served to open the way for an unbeliever to come into the truth. (1 Pet. 3:1, 2) Unbelieving mates and other unbelieving family members generally appreciate it when they are recognized and respected by members of the congregation. Showing personal interest in them can go a long way toward building friendly relations. By working together with the mate or family member in the truth, you may be able to establish a Bible study.
5 While engaging in the house-to-house work, we may try to start a Bible study on the initial call. How can this be done? Some publishers have had success in doing this when the householder is asking questions that can be answered directly from a publication. If the person agrees to read the literature or if he invites us in, we can seize the opportunity to continue the discussion and perhaps demonstrate a study. Use your judgment on how long to stay on the initial call. It may be beneficial to return at a later hour or a later date to continue the discussion. On future calls, you may wish to continue discussing the subject you introduced on the first call. Or you could take up a question raised at the conclusion of the previous visit.
INFORMAL OCCASIONS
6 Informal witnessing can be another fruitful avenue in our efforts to start home Bible studies. In our day-to-day activities, we come in contact with many individuals who may wish to study. To aid us in being effective, we can use some of the tested introductions from the Reasoning book to start conversations. And do not hold back from offering a Bible study initially because the person lives elsewhere and we may not have the opportunity to conduct the study ourselves.
7 Be alert to occasions for informal witnessing, and be prepared by carrying a good supply of tracts and magazines that will heighten the listener’s interest in the truth. (Eccl. 11:1) If an individual shows interest in the truth and is not in your congregation’s territory, obtain his address and other necessary information and pass this on to the congregation where he lives so that someone can properly care for him.
8 The disciple-making work is not for just a few. It is for all in the congregation. Keeping in mind that it is a Christian commission to become disciple makers will encourage us to be alert to opportunities to start Bible studies.

