Get Acquainted With New Convention Releases
1 Two new releases, a book and a brochure, have been added to our rich supply of spiritual food. Released at the “Pure Language” District Conventions, these new publications are sure to have a powerful impact on our field ministry in addition to helping all of us to speak the pure language more distinctly.​—Zeph. 3:9.
2 When releasing the new brochure, the convention speaker said: “In the field ministry​—house to house, on return visits, and during Bible studies—​we are often asked why we will not take blood. To help you to answer that question, it is a joy to release a new publication. It is this magazine-size brochure, How Can Blood Save Your Life?” Have you made the vital information in this brochure your own by reading it carefully? It is important for you to do so in order to strengthen your own faith and to be prepared to help others understand the Christian view of blood.​—Acts 15:28, 29.
3 The well-documented information in the brochure will further equip you to explain your stand and wishes to any doctor. However, this new brochure is not primarily for doctors or lawyers. It is designed and specifically written for the public. You can see how its twofold purpose makes it a most valuable instrument for our use at this time. It is suggested that you carry one or two copies of it with you in the field. Make full use of this valuable information for your personal benefit and for helping others to show proper respect for blood.
A NEW BOOK
4 Just imagine the value of the new book Mankind’s Search for God for helping us in our ministry. Studying it will give us a clearer understanding of other religions and their historical background. It will help us become better equipped to preach to people of Christendom as well as those who adhere to other religions. Because of the mass movements of population during this 20th century, we may find people of many different languages and religions when we preach from house to house. This presents a real challenge when we are not familiar with the beliefs and customs of these people. With the aid of this new book, we need not feel at a loss when we encounter people of a variety of religious backgrounds in our territory.
5 The information in this new book has been researched and reviewed by individuals who are thoroughly familiar with the subjects discussed. Therefore, we can speak authoritatively when using statements found in the book. Certainly, providing such information at this time is another evidence of Jehovah’s great love for people of all nations. Let us make a concerted effort to get well acquainted with this new publication and then use it effectively in helping sincere people of different national and religious backgrounds. Yes, using this new publication effectively will give us the satisfaction of knowing that we are making the good news known to all sorts of people as we find them in our assigned territory.​—Matt. 28:19, 20; Titus 2:11.

