Honor the Creator of All Things
1 During the 19th century, Satan hatched an insidious scheme to blind mankind​—the theory of evolution. (2 Cor. 4:4) This theory is a blatant denial of the Bible account of creation and of man’s fall into sin. It would make Jesus’ ransom sacrifice and the Bible teachings on the Kingdom and everlasting life meaningless. Moreover, the evolution theory paves the way for violence and war, sexual immorality, and all kinds of lawlessness. Who will warn mankind about the dangers of this deadly teaching?
2 During the month of September, we will be doing so, since we will be busy proclaiming Jehovah’s creatorship. In the house-to-house ministry, in street work, during rest breaks on the secular job, and at school, we will be featuring the book Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? We desire everyone to know how the evolution theory dishonors mankind’s Creator.
GIVE AN EFFECTIVE WITNESS
3 When witnessing informally or from house-to-house, you may wish to start a conversation by making reference to periodic news items regarding the strong opinions held by some people on the subject of evolution. Numerous expressions have been made regarding the question as to whether the theory of evolution should be taught in the public schools. Although a person may have read or heard much about related arguments and even heated debates on this subject, he will no doubt find quite interesting a straightforward statement in the Bible that has a direct bearing on the subject. Then refer to what is stated at Hebrews 3:4. Read the text and comment briefly on it.
4 If the person appears to be somewhat religiously inclined, you could mention that religious persons as well as those who believe in evolution often give credit to an impersonal “Nature” or a personified “Mother Nature” as being the creative force behind all the marvelous things we see about us. But the Bible does not leave unidentified our Grand Benefactor and the Creator of this marvelous universe. Attention can be drawn to Revelation 4:11. After reading the scripture, the person may wish to express himself regarding the matter. You can tie in a specific point or two from the Creation book and, if appropriate, encourage him to read it.
AT SCHOOL
5 As a new school year opens, all you young servants of Jehovah will want to review your Creation book and consider ways to interest fellow students as well as your teachers in it. Some have found that just leaving the publication on their desk invites discussions. Others have approached teachers and school administrators on the subject of creation and have been able to distribute a number of books that way.
6 All of us rejoice in the prospect of living in a world where everyone will honor Jehovah. In the Revelation, John saw magnificent spirit creatures bow before Jehovah and proclaim, “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.” (Rev. 4:11) May we echo those words in our ministry during September!

