Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 3
Song 154
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Are You Equipped for the Field? Outline essentials for field service bag, including Bible, Reasoning From the Scriptures, the booklet Good News for All Nations, tracts, pencil, current offer and magazines, house-to-house record, and so forth. Being mentally equipped calls for review of points to be highlighted in literature. Also, pray for holy spirit and help in finding sheeplike ones.​—Phil. 4:6, 7.
20 min: “Honor the Creator of All Things.” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering paragraphs 3 and 4, have effective publisher demonstrate Topic for Conversation and make offer. Show specific arrangements being made to return.
15 min: Elder talks with several exemplary youths. Discuss main points from Young People Ask book, chapter 17, “Should I Quit School?” Emphasize need for parents to guide young ones in choosing curriculum that helps them acquire practical, useful skills that will help them to build their future with God’s organization and pursue Kingdom interests.
Song 225 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 10
Song 71
 5 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Give reminder of field service arrangements, encouraging support for evening witnessing.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines.” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering paragraph 8, demonstrate how magazine route can be set up with person who shows genuine interest, highlighting article of local interest in magazine.
15 min: “Get Acquainted With New Convention Releases.” Pointed discussion with audience, emphasizing some key points from each publication that will be helpful locally. Brothers should not delay making this information their own.
10 min: “We Appreciate the Older Ones!” Talk by elder, based on information in February 1, 1986, Watchtower, pages 28-9. Make local application. Could comment specifically on working with such ones in field, slowing pace to accommodate. Can assist with shopping, doctor appointments, and so forth, and benefit from their wisdom and experience.​—Job 15:10; Prov. 16:31; 1 Tim. 5:1, 2.
Song 116 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 17
Song 160
 8 min: Local announcements. Accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Give commendation to congregation for support of worldwide work.​—Prov. 3:9.
20 min: “Be Alert to Start Bible Studies.” Question-and-answer discussion. Give information on number of studies congregation is conducting. On paragraph 5, show how study can be started on initial call. Begin demonstration with householder showing little interest in evolution but gladly accepting tract Life in a Peaceful New World. Publisher considers a paragraph or two from tract and makes specific appointment to return. Next, demonstrate direct approach, using one of the introductions in Reasoning book, page 12, under “Home Bible Study.” Comment on how evening witnessing affords greater opportunity to start studies with whole families, since husbands are usually at home then.
17 min: “When You Teach, Reach the Heart.” Talk discussing four main points in August 1, 1984, Watchtower, pages 13-17. Help audience appreciate need to conduct progressive Bible studies. Also, comment on when to discontinue unproductive studies.
Song 121 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 24
Song 69
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage Saturday magazine activity. Two brief demonstrations, one where interest is shown, the other where householder shows no interest in magazines but agrees to read tract. Where interest is shown, publisher may refer person to statement about worldwide Bible educational work on page 2 of The Watchtower or page 4 of Awake! Or he may state in substance that what he is doing is part of a worldwide Bible educational work that is supported by voluntary donations. Conversation may open the way to offer a free home Bible study.
20 min: “Appreciating Our Pioneers.” Service overseer discusses information with two or three pioneers. Draw out pioneers on how they have encouraged others, and have them comment on what has especially encouraged them locally. Commend congregation for support of pioneers.
15 min: Local needs. Or presiding overseer handles discussion of “Questions From Readers” in January 1, 1983, Watchtower, pages 30-1, “How can we assist those in our congregation who have a disfellowshipped relative?”
Song 62 and concluding prayer.

