
Patience​—Endurance With a Purpose




LOVE

JOY

PEACE

PATIENCE

KINDNESS

GOODNESS

FAITH

MILDNESS

SELF-CONTROL




BECAUSE life has become so difficult in these “last days,” we need patience more than ever before. (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Many people around us are not patient. They are selfish, they like to argue, and they have no self-control. So we need to ask ourselves: ‘Have I become impatient like the people around me? What does it mean to be truly patient? What can I do to make patience a part of my personality?’



WHAT IS PATIENCE?

What does the word “patience” mean as it is used in the Bible? It means more than simply putting up with a problem. A patient person endures with a purpose, that is, he hopes that things will get better. He does not think only of himself, but he also cares about the feelings of others, even those who may have irritated or mistreated him. He continues to hope that their relationship will improve. It is not surprising that the Bible says that patience results from love.a (See footnote.) (1 Corinthians 13:4) Patience is also part of “the fruitage of the spirit.” (Galatians 5:22, 23) So, what do we need to do to be truly patient?



HOW TO BECOME PATIENT

To become patient we need to pray for the help of Jehovah’s spirit, which he gives to those who trust in him. (Luke 11:13) That spirit is very powerful, but we still need to act according to our prayers. (Psalm 86:10, 11) This means that we must do our best to show patience each day and make it a part of our personality. But sometimes we may fail. What can help us?
We need to study and imitate the perfect example of Jesus. When the apostle Paul talked about “the new personality,” which includes patience, he encouraged us: “Let the peace of the Christ control your hearts.” (Colossians 3:10, 12, 15, footnote) To do so, we have to follow Jesus’ example and have complete trust that at the right time, God will correct matters. If we have that trust, we will not lose our patience, no matter what is happening around us.​—John 14:27; 16:33.
We all want the new world to come as soon as possible. But we learn to be more patient when we think about how patient Jehovah has been with us. The Bible assures us: “Jehovah is not slow concerning his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.” (2 Peter 3:9) So when we think about Jehovah’s patience with us, we will also be more patient with others. (Romans 2:4) What are some situations where we need to be patient?



SITUATIONS WHERE WE NEED PATIENCE

There are many situations in our everyday life where we need patience. For example, it takes patience not to interrupt others if we feel we have something important to say. (James 1:19) We also need patience when someone irritates us. Instead of reacting impatiently, it is good to remember how Jehovah and Jesus react to our weak points. They do not focus on the many little things we do wrong. Rather, they see the good qualities we have and patiently give us time to improve.​—1 Timothy 1:16; 1 Peter 3:12.
We also need patience when someone tells us that we said or did something wrong. Perhaps our first reaction is to be offended and defend ourselves. But God’s Word tells us to react in a different way. It says: “Better to be patient than to be haughty in spirit. Do not be quick to take offense, for the taking of offense is the mark of a fool.” (Ecclesiastes 7:8, 9, footnote) So even if an accusation is completely false, we need to be patient and think carefully before we react. That is what Jesus did when others wrongly accused him.​—Matthew 11:19.
Parents especially need to be patient when they have to help their children to correct their attitude or avoid bad desires. Take the example of Mattias, who serves in Bethel in Scandinavia. When Mattias was a teenager, his schoolmates kept making fun of him because of his beliefs. At first, his parents did not know this was happening. But then they saw that he was beginning to doubt his beliefs. Gillis, Mattias’ father, says that he and his wife needed a lot of patience in this situation. Mattias would ask questions such as: “Who is God? What if the Bible is not God’s Word? How do we know that it is actually God who wants this or that from us?” He would also ask his father: “Why am I to be judged if I don’t feel and believe as you do?”





Gillis explains: “Sometimes our son’s questions were expressed in anger, not against his mother or me, but against the truth, which he felt made life so difficult for him.” How did Gillis help his son? “My son and I would sit and talk for hours.” Usually, Gillis just listened to Mattias and asked him questions to try to understand his feelings and opinions. Sometimes Gillis explained something to his son and told him to think about it for a day or so before they talked about it again. At other times, Gillis would say that he himself needed a few days to think about something his son had said. Through these regular conversations, Mattias began to understand the meaning of the ransom and to understand that Jehovah loves us and has the right to rule over us. His father says: “It took time, and it was often difficult, but slowly, love for Jehovah grew in his heart. My wife and I are so happy that our patient efforts to help our son through his teenage years paid off and reached his heart.”
While Gillis and his wife patiently helped their son, they trusted that Jehovah would help them. Gillis says: “I often told Mattias that our deep love for him moved his mother and me to pray even more intensely that Jehovah would help him to understand.” These parents are truly happy that they were patient and did not give up!
We also need patience when we are taking care of a family member or a friend who has an illness that lasts for a long time. Take the example of Ellenb (see footnote), who also lives in Scandinavia.





About eight years ago, Ellen’s husband had two strokes that damaged his brain. Because of that, he is no longer able to feel happiness, sadness, or pity. This situation is extremely difficult for Ellen. She says: “It has taken a lot of patience and many prayers.” She adds: “My favorite scripture that brings me comfort is Philippians 4:13, which says: ‘For all things I have the strength through the one who gives me power.’” With Jehovah’s power and support, Ellen copes with the situation patiently.​—Psalm 62:5, 6.



IMITATE JEHOVAH’S PATIENCE

Of course, the best example of showing patience is Jehovah himself. (2 Peter 3:15) In the Bible, we often read about Jehovah’s great patience. (Nehemiah 9:30; Isaiah 30:18) Do you remember how Jehovah reacted when Abraham asked Him several questions about His decision to destroy Sodom? Jehovah did not interrupt Abraham. He patiently listened to each of Abraham’s questions and worries. Then, Jehovah showed that he had heard Abraham’s worries and assured him that He would not destroy Sodom even if there were just ten righteous men in that city. (Genesis 18:22-33) Jehovah always listens patiently, and he never overreacts!
Patience is a very important part of the new personality that all Christians must have. If we do our best to become truly patient, we honor our caring and patient Father, Jehovah, and we will be among “those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”​—Hebrews 6:10-12.



The quality of love was discussed in the first of this series of nine articles on the fruitage of God’s holy spirit.
Name has been changed.

