VOL. XIV. DECEMBER 15, 1893. NO. 24. 

REPRESENTATIVE OR SUBSTITUTE? 



A BROTHER inquires whether the following 
may not be considered a fair statement of 
the truth as presented in the Scriptures; viz.:— 

"The human race was tried in Eden in the 
person of Adam its representative. His failure 
was the failure of those whom he represented, 
and hence the whole race was sentenced to 
death. Again, God purposed another trial, 
and this time put Christ Jesus as man's representative. 
Christ's obedience was perfect; 
and hence not only did he thus secure everlasting 
life for himself, but the same also for 
all the race whom he represented in his trial. 
Is not this the correct, the Scriptural view? 
If not, wherein is it at fault? Please answer 
through the WATCH TOWER." 

We reply: No; this is an incorrect and unscriptural 
view, and a very misleading one. 

Christ's death was man's ransom (corresponding 
price), substituted for Adam's death; 
and hence applicable to all who lost life under 
his sentence. Christ's death being substitutionary 
was of course a representative death, 
for or instead of the dead race of Adam; i.e., 
a corresponding price in exchange for a purchase, 
which makes possible their release from 
the death penalty, in God's due time. But 
during the thirty-three years before he died, 
Christ represented not the world but himself: 
and since his resurrection he represents, before 
the bar of divine justice, not the world but 
believers. "He died for all;" and will bring 
all to a knowledge of this truth: but he represents 
or advocates for only "the household 
of faith." "We have an advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." 

Instead of saying that Adam represented the 
race in trial, let us say that he was tried individually, 



and that the race in his loins (as part 
of himself) shared his sentence and all that 
he actually (not representatively) entailed upon 
them— mental, moral and physical decay- 
death. Adam's trial, even if passed successfully, 

R1601 : page 371 

would not have entitled anyone but himself 
to everlasting life. His children would 
each have been obliged to stand an individual 
trial before being adjudged worthy of either 
everlasting life or death. 

Similarly, Christ's trial was an individual trial. 
His faithfulness proved him worthy of everlasting 
life. It in no sense proved any one else 
worthy of everlasting life; and no one gets everlasting 
life as a consequence of his obedience. 

But divine mercy and justice had arranged 
that another great transaction should be accomplished 
by the same act of obedience (the 
surrender of his life) which proved our Lord's 
love of the Father to be perfect. That other 
thing was God's acceptance of that death as a 
sacrifice, a ransom, a substitute, a corresponding 
price for the life of Adam and the race 
which lost life in him. This substitutionary 
(not representative) sacrifice of our Lord, by 
meeting the claims of justice against Adam and 
his race, sealed the New Covenant and made 
divine mercy possible. 

Now, that the claim of God's justice against 
the race has been met, it may hope for mercy 
at the hands of him who bought all with his 
own precious blood. 

R1601 : page 372 

What will Christ do to those whom he purchased, 
—the dead, the sick, the dying, the ignorant, 
the weak, the blind— the mentally, 
morally and physically dead or dying. 

We answer, In full harmony with the divine 
will, he purchased all, for the very purpose 
of granting to each member of the race 
an impartial trial for everlasting life. All 
worthy ones will be proved and granted "the 
gift of God, eternal life, through Jesus Christ 
our Lord." All those proved unworthy will 
be destroyed by the second death. 

When will this trial take place? 

It comes to all men proportionately as each 
comes to a knowledge of the truth. But during 
this age only the Church of believers comes 
to a sufficiency of light to make the trial complete, 
with a final verdict. All others, the 



masses of mankind, will receive their trial later 
on— in the blessed Millennial age, the great 
"day of judgment" (or trial) which God has 
graciously ordained.— Acts 17:31. 

Is Christ now, or will he ever be, the representative 
of all men? 

No; he bought all, but he does not represent 
all. He represents only those who "come 
unto God by him"— faithful believers. (Heb. 7:25). 
It is also clearly stated by John that 
Christ's sacrifice is the propitiation for the 
sins of all, but that only we (believers) have 
him as our advocate or representative. (1 John 2:1,2; 
Rom. 3:25.) Having mediated and 
ratified the New Covenant, he has opened the 
door of its blessed provisions to all; and all shall 
come to a knowledge of the truth. Then any 
and all who accept the conditions of the New 
Covenant are represented before justice by the 
value of the "blood of the New Covenant," 
which speaks pardon for all of their weaknesses 
and shortcomings, in proportion as these are 
not wilful. 

Whenever any member of the race enters, by 
faith in the ransom-sacrifice, into the provisions 
of the New Covenant, that moment he 
has a reckoned standing before God, a reckoned 
covering of his sins, which continues so long as 
he continues under its protecting, sheltering 
mercy. That covering is Christ's meritorious 
sacrifice (made once for all), applied for all in 
a general way by the New Covenant provisions, 
but specially only for those who come under 
that New Covenant's terms, all of whom are 
represented by their Redeemer before the bar 
of justice as perfect,— reckonedly. 

This covering by the provisions of Mercy 
under the New Covenant, and this representing 
of the mercy-covered ones by Christ, will 
last as long as it will be needed— until all of 
the weak and fallen race who thus come to God 
through Christ, desiring divine favor and seeking 
to render obedience, shall have attained 
perfection— mental, moral and physical: which 
will be at the close of the Millennial age. 
Then this covenant will cease; for perfect beings 
require no mercy. Perfect beings can 
render perfect obedience to the perfect law; 
and mercy or any excuse for failure could not 
be granted. When Christ has finished his 
work at the close of his Millennial reign, he 
will first have destroyed the reign of sin and 
death, begun by Adam's fall, will have granted 
each member of the human family a full and 
gracious opportunity of reconciliation with 
God, under the terms of the New Covenant, 



and will have destroyed all wilful sinners (Psa. 145:20; 

Heb. 10:26,27; Rev. 21:8);~and 

then all the remainder he will present before 

the Father, perfect and unreproveable.— 1 Cor. 15:24; 

Col. 1:22. 

This New Covenant of mercy, under which 
God accepts those who approach him, in the 
merit of Christ, is therefore for the very purpose 
of permitting the work of restitution. 
Under its provisions, the fallen but penitent 
sinner is accepted as though he were perfect, 
and is treated as a child of God during the 
period of his reformation of character and constitution 
—during the period in which, under the 
Lord's supervision, he is being restored, with 
added experience, to all that was lost in Adam. 

What we have described relates to the world 
in general. Now let us look at the Church 
under the New Covenant. Her relation to the 
New Covenant is during the Gospel age. But 
to her the covering mercy of that Covenant is 
not to permit time for reaching physical, mental 
and moral perfection by a process of restitution, 
but to give her a standing before God 

R1601 : page 373 

where she can offer herself unto God a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God through 
the merit of Christ— under the merciful provision 
of this New Covenant. 

The call of the Gospel age is for the Bride 
class. The condition of that call is— obedience, 
faithfulness, self-sacrifice in God's service, 
even unto death. But only perfect ones 
are eligible to such a call, even as no blemished 
animal could be laid upon God's altar during 
the typical Law dispensation. So, then, the 
New Covenant is absolutely necessary, with its 
provision of covering of our sins by the merit 
of our Redeemer's sacrifice. All who come 
under the blessed provisions of that New Covenant 
are acceptable as sacrificers during "the 
acceptable year of the Lord"— the Gospel age, 
until the foreordained number shall have made 
their calling and election sure. Then the call 
to sacrifice and its very high reward of spirit-nature 
and join t-heirship with our Redeemer, 
being at an end, the New Covenant will thereafter, 
during the Millennial age, shield all of 
the remainder who may desire to benefit by it 
and thus to return to divine favor and everlasting 
life. 

Thus we answer, at length, that the idea of 
Christ's representative work as set forth by the 
Brother's question is wholly incorrect. Our 



Lord gave himself a ransom, a corresponding 
price a substitute for all, but he represents before 
the bar of justice since his resurrection, 
only those who come unto God by him under 
the gracious terms of the New Covenant, sealed 
or ratified by his death. 

Adam's trial was a personal one and not a 
representative one; and so was our Lord's 
trial a personal and not a representative one. 
As the effects or results of Adam's failure were 
inherited by those in him, so the results of 
Christ's obedience will be shared by all who 
believe INTO him.-Rom. 5:18,19; John 3:16. 



R1603 : page 373 

IS NOT THE DOCTRINE DANGEROUS? 



SOME Christians, whose hearts have been 
greatly blessed by the opening of the eyes 
of their understanding, on the subject, "The 
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is 
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,"— 
ask, with fear, Is it not dangerous to give this 
teaching to our unconverted friends and children? 
Will it not hinder their coming to God? 
If they have for years failed to come to God 
while under the fear of eternal torment in hell, 
would not the gospel of God's love and mercy 
merely harden their hearts and prevent their 
coming at all? 

And is it not a dangerous doctrine even for 
Christians? Is there not danger that such, if 
they should lose the fear of hell, might become 
thieves, robbers, murderers, or otherwise evil 
doers? 

We answer, No; there need be no such fears. 
The professing Christian who would become 
an evil doer upon learning that his fears of 
everlasting torment are groundless, never was 
a Christian; never was a child of God;— was 
at best only a tare, a "child of the wicked one." 

And as for those who for years have had the 
fear of eternal torment before their minds, we 
suggest that what fear failed to do, God's love 
may do for them. It is written, "The love of 
God constraineth us"— or draws us— to him 
and his service. True, "The fear of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom"— but the true 
fear or reverence of God's mighty power is 
meant;— that inspired by the Scriptures and 
not that which results from human misrepresentations 



of the divine character. Concerning 
the latter the Lord says, "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men."— 
Isa. 29:13. 

Many unsound minds have been completely 
unbalanced by these awful fears. And no sound 
mind can weigh and then accept the thought 
that an infinitely wise and just being could 
have arranged such a plan as is generally accredited 
to our God by his people,— That he 
created billions of human creatures under conditions 
which (all denominations agree) exposed 
them to the risk of an eternity of misery. 
Some even go further in saying that he predestinated 

R1603 : page 374 

which should go into this unthinkable 
misery before he began the work of creation; 
and that, although he has created billions, 
he has unalterably arranged that only a "few" 
shall find the narrow way and that, all told, 
only a "little flock" shall be saved from 
everlasting misery. 

True, some comparatively sound minds, some 
seemingly wise people, do accept these doctrines; 
but we deny that they ever really 
weighed them. They were told that the Bible 
so taught, and that "to doubt is to be damned." 
So they believed without proof or any kind of 
evidence,— except that certain parables of our 
Lord and certain symbols of Revelation might 
be so construed. 

Indeed, those persons who have persistently 
refused to believe such doctrines (presented by 
all denominations in the name of over one 
hundred millions of the most intelligent people 
of the world) deserve credit for having 
more than ordinary soundness of judgment. 

As the truth was the very food that your soul 
needed and still needs, so it is the food needed 
by all sound minds; and it is still more 
needful to those of unsound minds. Let the 
light of God's Word shine out. It will scatter 
darkness, and bring, instead, joy and peace 
and blessing. 

If you know one upon whom the truth has 
had no good effect, you know a score upon 
whom its effect has been blessings beyond price; 
and you know of not a single one that has 
been injured by it. The man or woman who 
becomes outwardly more wicked by a knowledge 
of God's goodness and love manifested 
in Christ's sacrifice for our sins,— to grant to 
the children of Adam a full individual opportunity 
of gaining everlasting life by obedience 



to the terms of New Covenant— is really none 
the worse at heart, but merely acts out his true 
character more openly. But these, if there are 
such, are very few. On the contrary, the instances 
of conversions through the knowledge 
of the truth are very many— not only infidels 
and skeptics, but many open law-breakers. 
Three prisoners in Sing Sing Prison, N.Y., are 
rejoicing in the truth, and preaching Christ 
and a gospel of the love and justice of God, 
of which they and we are not ashamed.— 
Rom. 1:16. 

However, while doing good in spreading the 
truth to all whom we can reach, as we have 
opportunity, we are to remember that the 
special design of the present truth is for the 
household of faith, and for them we do and 
should make our special effort, as the Apostle 
enjoined. 



R1604 : page 374 

THE COMING CRASH IN EUROPE. 



THE following from the pen of a worldly man 
—an editorial in a secular journal— expresses 
our sentiments excellently. The "world" 
is awaking, faster than the nominal church, to 
the facts of our times, which the TOWER for 
fourteen years has been showing to be the forecast 
of Scripture prophecy. We quote 
verbatim. 

"One of these days there is going to be the 
greatest upset of political institutions which 
has ever occurred. That it has been often 
predicted ought not to blind us to the fact that 
the time for it is steadily drawing nearer. An 
unexampled preparation for it has been made 
by applied science in the realm of war as well 
as industry and by the undermining of the 
foundations of religion. 

"Take France. The new session of its 
Parliament opened with a declaration against 
Socialism as the chief feature of the Administration 
program, and Socialism has rent the 
Cabinet to pieces. Socialism is beyond peradventure 
the one supreme issue before the 
French people. It was not long ago that a 
group of Bishops declared France atheistic, 
and the declaration is neither extravagant nor 
absurd. The church there, whatever its name, 
has ceased to have authority. It can command 



nobody. It is powerless in the cities: it is as 
powerless as during the Revolution. 

"Take Italy. The Cabinet there went to 
pieces after a riot in the Parliament house, 
and the King is at his wit's end, no statesmen 
having the courage to try to carry on a government 
in the face of the raging discontent, for 
which the bank scandals were only an outlet. 
Every revolutionary ism thrives in that country; 
always has, but formerly was in a measure 
controlled by the church. The church 

R1604: page 375 

now can do nothing. The Italian newspaper 
press is directed almost entirely by men indifferent 
to the church when not hostile to it, 
and not a few of the most influential papers in 
the chief cities are owned by Jews. 

"Take Germany. It was only a few weeks 
ago that the report to the Congress of Socialists 
was printed in this country, showing that 
the Socialist vote will soon exceed that of any 
other party in the Empire. The discontent 
there has been increased by the agrarian campaign, 
caused by the high prices of land and 
consequent high rents, by the sharp competition 
from abroad and by the treaties, which 
Bismarck denounced, passed in pursuance of 
the Emperor's scheme to form a commercial 
union for Central Europe. One dispatch yesterday 
announced that the Parliamentary situation 
in Germany is so complicated that no one ventures 
to forecast the issue, and that the peasantry 
are threatening to go over bodily to the Socialists. 
Another dispatch relates that an editor 
was sentenced to prison for six weeks for insulting 
Caprivi; which undoubtedly means, 
severely criticising him on account of his policy. 
Another dispatch relates that an infernal 
machine was received at the Chancellerie 
yesterday, but happily discovered to be such 
before it exploded and killed some one. And 
the church in Germany can assist the State no 
more in preserving order than in any other 
European country, Catholic or Protestant. 

"The recent news from Austro-Hungary is 
the same— Cabinet troubles, proclamations of 
martial law, complaints from the Emperor that 
the people are trying to deprive him of his 
prerogatives. 

"And the policy all over Europe is to keep 
adding to the weight on the safety valve. Immense 
armies are maintained not only against 
aggression but against rebellion. People are 
taxed to poverty to support soldiers to crush 



them. This cannot continue much longer. 
There will be an outbreak one of these days, 
and then such a tumbling of institutions as was 
never seen before. The applications of science 
and the undermining of the foundations of religion 
have prepared the way for the crash." 



R1601 : page 375 

ECHOES FROM THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS. 

A GLIMPSE AT THE SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA. 



IN the hope of deepening the sympathy of 

God's consecrated people for the whole 

world which "God so loved," even while they 

were yet sinners, and which Christ shed his 

blood to redeem, and which he comes again 

to restore and bless, and in which mission of 

his Millennial reign we are called to be 

workers together with him, we publish the following 

interesting paper on "The Work of 

Social Reform in India," by B. Nagarkar, a 

native representative at the World's Parliament 

of Religions. We publish the address in full, 

both for the information it contains, and also 

as an illustration of the indirect influence of 

the Bible upon the character and sentiments 

of at least one of that benighted race— and not 

only one, but of a considerable class who are 

feeling after God. Mr. Nagarkar said:— 

"Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen: The 
conquest of India by England is one of the 
most astonishing marvels of modern history. 
To those who are not acquainted with the social 
and religious condition of the diverse races 
that inhabit the vast India peninsula, it will 
always be a matter of great wonder as to how 
a handful of English people were able to bring 
under their sway such an extensive continent 
as Hindoostan, separated from England by 
thousands of miles of the deep ocean and lofty 
mountains. Whatever the circumstances of this 
so-called conquest were, they were no more 
than the longstanding internal feuds and jealousies 
—the mutual antipathies and race-feelings 
—between caste and caste, creed and creed, 
and community and community, that have 
been thrown together in the land of India. 
The victory of the British— if victory it can be 
called— was mainly due to the internal quarrels 
and dissensions that had been going on for 



R1602 : page 375 

ages past between the conflicting and contending 
elements of the Indian population. Centuries 
ago, when such a miserable state of local 
division and alienation did not exist in India, 
or at any rate had not reached any appreciable 
degree, the Hindoos did make a brave and 
successful stand against powerful armies of 
fierce and warlike tribes that led invasion after 
invasion against the holy home of the Hindoo 
nation. Thus it was that from time to time 
hordes of fierce Bacteians, Greeks, Persians and 
Afghans were warded off by the united armies 
of the ancient Hindoos. Time there was when 
the social, political and religious institutions 

R1602 : page 376 

of the Aryans in India were in their pristine 

purity, and when as a result of these noble institutions 

the people were in the enjoyment of 

undisturbed unity, and so long as this happy 

state of things continued the Hindoos enjoyed 

the blessings of freedom and liberty. But time 

is the great destroyer of everything. What 

has withstood the withering influences of that 

arch-enemy of every earthly glory and greatness? 

In proportion as the people of India 

became faithless to their ancestral institutions, 

they fell in the scale of nations. 

DIVISION AND DEPREDATION. 

"At first they fell a prey to one foreign power 
and then to another, and then again to a third, 
and so on, each time degeneration doing the 
work of division, and division in its turn doing 
the ghastly work of further and deeper 
degeneration. About two hundred years ago 
this fatal process reached its lowest degree; and 
India was reduced to a state of deadly division 
and complete confusion. Internecine wars 
stormed the country, and the various native and 
foreign races, then living in India, tried to 
tear each other to pieces ! It was a state of 
complete anarchy, and no one could fathom 
what was to come out of this universal chaos. 

"At this critical juncture of time there appeared 
on the scene a distant power from beyond 
the ocean! No one had heard or knew 
anything of it. The white-faced sahib was 
then a sheer novelty to the people of India. 
To them in those days a white-faced biped 
animal was synonymous with a representative 



of the race of monkeys, and even to this day 

in such parts of India as have not been penetrated 

by the rays of education or civilization, 

ignorant people in a somewhat serious sense 

do believe that the white-faced European is 

perhaps a descendant of apes and monkeys! 

For aught I know the ever-shifting, ever-changing, 

novelty-hunting philosophies of the occult 

world and the occult laws, of spirit presence 

and spirit presentiment in your part of the 

globe may some day be able to find out that 

these simple and unsophisticated people had 

a glimpse of the "Descent of Man" according 

to Darwin. Whatever it may be, no one 

could ever have dreamt that the people of 

England would ever stand a chance of wielding 

supreme power over the Indian peninsula. At 

first the English came to India as mere shopkeepers. 

Not long after they rose to be the 

keepers of the country, and ultimately they 

were raised to be the rulers of the Indian empire. 

In all this there was the hand of God. 

It was no earthly power that transferred the 

supreme sovereignty of Hindoostan into the 

hands of the people of Great Britain. Through 

the lethargic sleep of centuries the people of 

India had gone on degenerating. Long and 

wearisome wars with the surrounding countries 

had enervated them: the persistent cruelty, 

relentless tyranny and ceaseless persecution of 

their fanatic invaders had rendered them weak 

and feeble, even to subjection, and a strange 

change had come over the entire face of the 

nation. 

DECAY OF ANCIENT INSTITUTIONS. 

"The glory of their ancient religion, the 
purity of their social institutions and the strength 
of their political constitution had all been 
eclipsed for the time being by a thick and 
heavy cloud of decay and decrepitude. For 
a long time past the country had been suffering 
from a number of social evils, such as 
wicked priestcraft, low superstition, degrading 
rites and ceremonies, and demoralizing customs 
and observances. It was indeed a 
pitiable and pitiful condition to be in. The 
children of God in the holy Aryavarta, the 
descendants of the noble Rishis, were in deep 
travail. Their deep wailing and lamentation 
had pierced the heavens, and the Lord of love 
and mercy was moved with compassion for 
them. He yearned to help them, to raise them, 
to restore them to their former glory and 
greatness; but he saw that in the country itself 



there was no force or power that he could 

use as an instrument to work out his divine 

providence. The powers that were and long 

had been in the country had all grown too 

weak and effete to achieve the reform and regeneration 

of India. It was for this purpose 

that an entirely alien and outside power was 

brought in. Thus you will perceive that the 

advent of the British in India was a matter of 

necessity and, therefore, it may be considered 

as fully providential. 

"It is not to be supposed that this change 
of sovereignty from the eastern into the western 
hand was accomplished without any bloodshed 
or loss of life. Even the very change in 
its process introduced new elements of discord 
and disunion; but when the change was completed 
and the balance of power established, 
an entirely new era was opened up on the field 
of Indian social and political life. This transfer 
of power into the hands of your English 
cousins has cost us a most heavy and crushing 
price. In one sense, it took away our liberty; 
it deprived us, and has been ever since depriving 
us, of some of our noblest pieces of ancient 
art and antiquity which have been brought 

R1602: page 377 

over to England for the purpose of adornment 
of, and exhibition in, English museums and 
art galleries. 

"At one time it took away from the country 
untold amounts of wealth and jewelry, and 
since then a constant, ceaseless stream of money 
has been flowing from India into England. 
The cost, indeed, has been heavy, far too 
heavy, but the return, too, has been inestimable. 
We have paid in gold and silver, but we 
received in exchange what gold and silver can 
never give or take away— for the English rule 
has bestowed upon us the inestimable boon of 
knowledge and enlightenment. And knowledge 
is power. It is with this power that we 
shall measure the motives of the English rule. 
The time will come, as it must come, when, if 
our English rulers should happen to rule India 
in a selfish, unjust and partial manner, with 
this same weapon of knowledge we shall compel 
them to withhold their power over us. But 
I must say that the educated natives of India 
have too great a confidence in the good sense 
and honesty of our rulers ever to apprehend 
any such calamity. 

"Our Anglo-Saxon rulers brought with them 
their high civilization, their improved methods 



of education and their general enlightenment. 
We had been in darkness and had well nigh 
forgotten our bright and glorious past. But a 
new era dawned upon us. New thoughts, new 
ideas, new notions began to flash upon us one 
after another. We were rudely roused from 
our long sleep of ignorance and self-forgetfulness. 
The old and the new met face to face. 
We felt that the old could not stand in the 
presence of the new. The old we began to 
see in the light of the new; and we soon learned 
to feel that our country and society had been 
for a long time suffering from a number of social 
evils, from the errors of ignorance and 
from the evils of superstition. Thus we began 
to bestir ourselves in the way of remedying our 
social organization. Such, then, were the 
occasion and the origin of the work of social 
reform in India. 

SOCIAL REFORM NEEDED. 

"Before I proceed further, I must tell you 
that the work of reform in India has a two-fold 
aspect. In the first place we have to revive 
many of our ancient religious and social 
institutions. Through ages of ignorance they 
have been lost to us, and what we need to do 
in regard to these institutions is to bring them 
to life again. 

"So far as religious progress and spiritual 
culture are concerned, we have little or nothing 
to learn from the west— beyond your compact 
and advanced methods of combination, 
co-operation and organization. This branch 
of reform I style as reform by revisal. In the 
second place, we have to receive some of your 
western institutions. These are mostly political, 
industrial and educational; a few social. 
But in every case the process is a composite 
one. For what we are to revive we have often 
to remodel, and what we have to receive we 
have often to recast. Hence our motto in 
every department of reform is, 'Adapt before 
you adopt.' I shall now proceed to indicate 
to you some of the social reforms that we have 
been trying to effect in our country. 

"The abolition of caste— what is this Hindoo 
institution of caste? In the social dictionary 
of India, 'caste' is a most difficult word 
for you to understand. Caste may be defined 
as the classification of a society on the basis of 
birth and parentage. For example, the son or 
daughter of a priest must always belong to the 
caste of priests or Brahmans, even though he 
or she may never choose to follow the ancestral 



occupation. Those who are born in the 
family of soldiers belong to the soldier caste, 
though they may never prefer to go on 
butchering men. Thus the son of a grocer 
is born to be called a grocer; and the son of a 
shoemaker is fated to be called a shoemaker. 
Originally there were only four castes— the 
Brahman, or the priest; Kihateiya, or the 
soldier; Vaishya, or the merchant; and Shudra, 
or the serf. And these four ancient castes 
were not based on birth, but on occupation 
or profession. In ancient India, the children 
of Brahman parents often took to a martial 

R1603 : page 377 

occupation, while the sons of a soldier 
were quite free to choose a peaceful occupation 
if they liked. But in modern India, by a 
strange process, the original four castes have 
been multiplied to no end, and have been fixed 
most hard and fast. Now you find, perhaps, as 
many castes as there are occupations. There 
is a regular scale and a grade. You have the 
tailor caste and the tinker caste, the blacksmith 
caste and the goldsmith caste, the milkman 
caste and the carpenter caste, the groom 
caste and the sweeper caste. The operation of 
caste may be said to be confined principally 
to matters of (1) food and drink, (2) matrimony 
and adoption, (3) the performance of 
certain religious rites and ceremonies. 

CASTE DEFINED AND EXPLAINED. 

"Each caste has its own code of laws and its 
own system of observances. They will eat 
with some, but not with others. The higher 

R1603 : page 378 

ones will not so much as touch the lower ones. 
Intermarriages are strictly prohibited. Why, 
the proud and haughty Brahman will not deign 
to bear the shadow of a Shudra or low caste. 
In the west you have social classes; we in India 
have 'castes.' But remember that 'classes' 
with you are a purely social institution, having 
no religious sanction. 'Castes' with us are 
essentially a religious institution, based on the 
accident of birth and parentage. With a view 
to illustrate the difference between 'classes' 
and 'castes,' I may say that in western countries 
the lines of social division are parallel, 
but horizontal; and, therefore, ranging in the 
social strata one above another. In India 



these lines are perpendicular; and, therefore, 

running from the top to the bottom of the 

body social, dividing and separating one social 

strata from every other. The former arrangement 

is a source of strength and support, and 

the later a source of alienation and weakness. 

Perhaps at one time in the history of India, 

when the condition of things was entirely 

different, and when the number of these castes 

was not so large, nor their nature so rigid as 

now, the institution of caste did serve a high 

purpose; but now it is long, too long, since 

that social condition underwent a change. Under 

those ancient social and political environments 

of India, the institution of caste was 

greatly helpful in centralizing and transmitting 

professional knowledge of arts and occupations, 

as also in grouping, binding together and preserving 

intact the various guilds and artisan 

communities. But centuries ago that social 

and political environment ceased to exist, 

while the mischievous machinery of caste continues 

in full swing up to this day. Caste in 

India has divided the mass of Hindoo society 

into innumerable classes and cliques. It has 

created a spirit of extreme exclusiveness. It 

has crowded and killed legitimate ambition, 

healthy enterprise and combined adventure. 

It has fostered envy and jealousy between class 

and class, and set one community against 

another. 

[Concluded in our next.] 



R1599 : page 378 

ANNUAL REPORT WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 



CONSIDERING the financial depression of 

the year ending Dec. 1, '93, which has 

very generally affected everybody and everything, 

it is not surprising that the work of the 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY also has been 

somewhat hindered. 

We have many indications that the spiritual 
condition of the WATCH TOWER subscribers is 
better— their love and zeal stronger— than ever 
before; and this naturally would have meant 
larger donations to the Tract Fund and more 
of them,— had it not been for the financial 
stringency. Under the circumstances, therefore, 
the showing of this report, below, is most 



satisfactory. 
R1600 : page 378 

The fact that the donations aggregated little 
less than for '92 may therefore be considered 
an improvement of one-half over that year; 
and it will be remembered (refer to our report 
of one year ago) that '92 was a marked improvement 
over the several years preceding it. 

Another item which no doubt influenced the 
total was the Chicago Convention. An estimate, 
made at the time, showed that the total 
expense of those who attended that Convention 
was five thousand dollars or more. This 
extra expense no doubt affected the Tract Fund 
receipts to a considerable extent. And while 
we have had many reports of good accomplished 
by that Convention, it is still a question 
whether the same time and money spent 
in colporteuring DAWNS, publishing and distributing 
Tracts, etc., might not have accomplished 
still more good— have yielded still 
greater returns to the King's glory. 

Indeed, we have been favorably impressed 
with a suggestion made by one who was present 
at the Chicago Convention, and who usually 
attends the Allegheny Convention, that 
hereafter our Conventions, held for several 
years past, be discontinued; that thus the interests 
of the general work would be conserved. 
And although we have enjoyed these annual 
gatherings greatly— the personal greetings and 
communions with visiting saints— we feel that 
there is wisdom in this suggestion of their discontinuance 
in favor of the Fund for the propagation 
of the truth by means of tracts, etc. 

Another reason, almost as weighty, and one 
of growing importance to the work, is the 

R1600 : page 379 

item of time. Each year, as the number in 

attendance increases, the demands upon the 

time of the Editors of the WATCH TOWER increases; 

so that the time for preparation before 

these Conventions, and the time spent 

after them in getting caught up on work which 

meantime gets behind, in addition to the time 

spent during the Conventions, means in all 

two months— the one-sixth of each year. We 

of course enjoy this use of our time; and our 

only question is, regarding the best and wisest 

use of that time. It seems to us wisest and 

most to our Lord's praise to use this time for 

the benefit of all the saints in preparing and 



publishing truth in a printed form, at least 

until the MILLENNIAL DAWN series has been 

completed. Together, these considerations 

seem to us a sufficient reason for discontinuing 

the General Conventions heretofore held 

at Allegheny on the anniversary of our Redeemer's 

death. At all events, we can well 

dispense with the meeting next Spring, since 

it is so short a time since the Chicago Convention. 

And this economy will undoubtedly redound 

to the benefit of the work for '94. 

SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT. 



During the year, Dec. 1, '92 to Dec. 1, '93, 
there have been circulated, free, the following: 

Copies OLD THEOLOGY, Tracts, 1 ,082,0 1 1 
" ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 139,577 

Since tracts vary in number of pages it is 
customary to state them in pages. The foregoing, 
so stated, represent 19,893,428 pages. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT. 



Receipts from Good Hopes, $5100.40 

" other sources, $2798.86 

Total $7899.26 

Expended for Tracts, TOWERS, etc., 

sent out free, $5794.88 

" Postage on same, 355.80 

" Labor, mailing same, 708.00 

" on Foreign translations of 

M. DAWN, VOL. I, and in 

forwarding the work in 

general, 1519.18 

$8377.86 

This shows a balance of $478.60; but this 
amount is really not yet due, being represented 
by two notes not yet matured. 

We point with pleasure to this showing. 
While our total receipts would not amount to 
one half the salary of a popular preacher, the 
results are large. Our Society has no salaried 
officers, and the item of "Labor" is for mailing 
and other necessary work. Your donations 
go directly for the spread of the truth, according 
to our best judgment. We trust that 
all the friends will be pleased with the showing, 



especially those whose contributions are 
therein represented; and, more than all others, 
we trust that our Lord approves it. 

The "Good Hopes" plan has proved so 
much of a blessing to those who have adopted 
it, that no doubt many will desire its continuance 
(It is not our plan but the Apostle's— 
1 Cor. 16:2), laying by them on the first day of 
each week something for use in the Lord's cause. 

We urge no one to give to this Society (those 
who approve the work and its methods need 
only to know of their opportunity), but we do 
urge all of our readers to follow the apostolic 
rule and set apart for the Lord's service a 
weekly thank-offering. If it be but one cent 
a day, or one cent a week even, it will surely 
bring a blessing. 

It is fair to presume that all Christian people 
set apart some portion of their incomes for 
the propagation of what they believe to be 
truth. WATCH TOWER readers have learned 
that in the past they have unintentionally 
helped to spread error. The question for each 
to decide is, How can I now use time and 
means at my command, to the best advantage, 
in counteracting those errors and spreading the 
truth?— for the glory of God and the blessing 
of his people? To all such we say, Consider 
carefully to what extent the WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY can assist you in this matter, 
and act according to your judgment. 

DAWN COLPORTEUR WORK. 



While the colporteur work, for the circulating 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, is under the supervision 
and patronage of this Society, it is self-supporting 
to a very large degree;— the only 

R1600 : page 380 

liabilities being in the way of credits to Colporteurs 

(the Society now stands responsible for 

about $7,000.00 of such accounts, much of 

which, however, will yet be paid by the Colporteurs), 

and in the preparation of foreign 

translations— on which account an item appears 

above in the Treasurer's account. 

Total number of volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN put into circulation during the past year 
was 120,916. 

The number of Colporteurs engaged in this 
ministry of the truth is one hundred and fourteen: 
of these seventy-two give their entire 



time and the remainder almost all of their time 
to this service. Many of these have started 
quite recently. And besides these there are 
probably two thousand of our readers who do 
what they can, in connection with their ordinary 
duties of life. 

All who report any effort expended in the 
service of the truth report corresponding 
blessings in their own hearts. They that watered 
others were themselves watered. They 
whose hearts burned with love to the Lord and 
his people, so that they were led to service and 
sacrifice, have been kept firm by the power of 
God in the truth. 

Let us each watch, pray and labor during 
the new year. All who do so will be blest. 
He who is most faithful and earnest will be 
the most blest. The "harvest" is great indeed, 
and the laborers are few in comparison. 



page 380 

STUDIES IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

-INTERNATIONAL S.S. LESSONS.- 

SUGGESTIVE THOUGHTS DESIGNED TO ASSIST THOSE OF OUR 
READERS WHO ATTEND BIBLE CLASSES WHERE THESE 
LESSONS ARE USED; THAT THEY MAY BE ENABLED TO 
LEAD OTHERS INTO THE FULNESS OF THE GOSPEL. 



R1603 : page 380 

THE BIRTH OF JESUS. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIIL, DEC. 24, MATT. 2:1-11. 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he 
shall save his people from their sins."— Matt. 1:21. 

We have elsewhere presented the Scriptural 
evidences that the date usually celebrated 
as the anniversary of our Lord Jesus' 
birth is incorrect and that, instead of being 
Dec. 25, B.C. 4, it really was about October 
1, B.C. 2*; nevertheless this need not mar 
our pleasure, nor our appreciation of the 
great fact so generally celebrated on the 
wrong date; for its lessons are as appropriate 
to one date as to another. 



The great thought of this lesson is that 
the first-born of every creature left the 
glory of a spirit existence, the glory which 
he had enjoyed with the Father before the 
world was made, and in conformity to the 
divine plan for human salvation "humbled 
himself" to human nature, became a man, 
"was made flesh, and dwelt among us."— 
John 1:14; Phil. 2:7-9. 

But why did he do this? The Scriptures 
reply that he took our form and nature- 
trie form of a servant— for the suffering of 
death. It was for the sin of man that he 
was to atone; and, to do so, to pay our debt, 
to give our ransom price, to be our substitute, 
he must be a man;— that as by a man 
came death, by a man also should come the 
resurrection of the dead. 

No wonder, then, that the birth of the babe 
Jesus, the first step in the divine plan for 
our salvation from sin and death, was hailed 
by angels as well as by the wise men and 
the shepherds as a most notable, a most 
momentous event. And only those who 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., pages 54-62. 

R1604 : page 380 

see quite clearly the necessity for a ransom 
(a corresponding price), before sin could be 
forgiven or one member of the condemned 
race of Adam could be set free from the 
death penalty resting upon all, can appreciate 
the depth of meaning there is in that 
song which the angels sang: "Glory to God 
in the highest; on earth peace, good will 
toward men." 

The great salvation of which the man 
Christ Jesus is the center is all of divine arrangement 
—to the Father of glories therefore 
we ascribe the "highest" glory for all 
the blessings which through it we enjoy. 

The infant Jesus was the first ray of light 
and hope to men; because he would become 
a man, and as the man would give his life 
a ransom for Adam and all condemned in 
him; and thus, by virtue of having paid our 
price, "bought us with his own precious 
blood [his life given]," he would be legally 

R1604: page 381 

qualified before the divine law to be the 



"Mediator of the New Covenant," which 
he sealed or made effective with his own 
precious blood;— "the blood of the New 
Covenant shed for many for the remission 
of sins. "-Matt. 26:28. 

The great plan for human salvation, begun 
by the birth of Jesus, has not yet reached 
completion. It will not be complete 
until his people have been saved from their 
sins and from the penalty of their sins- 
death, which includes degradation mental, 
moral and physical. The ransom, thank 
God, has been paid, and Justice has accepted 
it; and now the Mediator of the New Covenant 
is seeking out "his people." First, during 
this Gospel age, he seeks his peculiar 
people, his "Bride;" and in the age to follow 
this, the Millennium, he will cause the 
knowledge of the divine offer of life under 
the terms of the New Covenant to be made 
general: all shall know, and then "whosoever 
will may take of the water of life 
freely." And all whom he now is or ever 
shall be willing to own as "his people" will 
gladly avail themselves of that New Covenant's 
gracious arrangements and return 
to full favor with God;— all others will be 
wilful sinners, and as such will be cut off 
from life in the Second Death. 

Let us, then, who know the blessed story 
of the love of God in Christ tell abroad the 
gracious message, the foundation for which 
was laid in the birth of Jesus,— "Behold, 
we bring you glad tidings, of great joy, 
which shall be unto all people." "He shall 
save his people from their sins." Let us 
make sure that we have accepted him and 
are "his people." Let us be true wise men 
and present to him our treasures— all that 
we have and are— our hearts. 

page 381 

REVIEW. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIV., DEC. 31. 

Golden Text— "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you all. Amen."— Rev. 22:21. 



R2238 : page 381 



THE ANGELS' SONG. 

"It came upon the midnight clear, 

That glorious song of old, 
From angels bending near the earth, 

To touch their harps of gold: 
'Peace on earth, good-will to men' 

From heaven's all glorious King. 
The world in solemn stillness lay 

To hear the angels sing. 

"And lo, the days are hastening on, 

By prophets seen of old, 
When with the ever-circling years 

Shall come the time foretold, 
When the new heaven and earth shall own 

The Prince of Peace their King, 
And the whole world send back the song 

Which now the angels sing." 



page 381 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write you 
a few lines, knowing that letters from the 
Lord's children are never unwelcome. 

The work in and near New York seems 
to be progressing satisfactorily. For myself, 
I can say that I am encouraged every 
day to new efforts. 

It has been my privilege for about a month 
past to give Scripture readings every Sunday 
morning at a Gospel Temperance mission 
near my home, and some of those who 
attend have ears to hear the truth; and I 
hope a few, at least, will before long be led 
out into the full light. 

Our meetings on Sunday afternoon are 
well attended, and are very profitable to us 
all. We adopted the suggestion in the 
TOWER, and changed our Friday evening 
meeting from a Bible study to a devotional 
meeting, and are delighted with the results. 
We feel that it fills a long felt want, and 
that the Lord has directed his people in this 
matter, giving them meat in due season. 

My attention has been very much attracted 
of late to the manner in which the 
world is being prepared for the truth. The 
people could never accomplish their own 
liberation from the thraldom of sin and 



death, but they are being so thoroughly 

educated by the thousands of methods now 

at work, that I do not doubt that they will 

readily accept the new conditions when 

offered. For instance, the new Populist 

party is growing so rapidly that its adherents 

confidently assert that they will elect 

the President in 1896. One of the fundamental 

doctrines of this party is nationalism, 

or government control of, first, such enterprises 

page 382 

as railroads, telegraphs and banks, and, 
finally, all the industries, for the benefit of the 
masses— a refined socialism— which would 
relieve the people of the burdens imposed 
upon them by capitalists and monopolists. 

Reformers are writing and preaching 
wholesome truths everywhere to the common 
people, while above all the true Church 
is announcing the glad tidings of the Kingdom 
so near at hand. So we see by the 
signs of the present that it is high time to 
awake. The Day Star has already arisen, 
and soon the Sun of Righteousness in full 
splendor will shed his rays over all the earth; 
but the vail is still upon the face of the 
nations, and it will be a little while yet before 
it is removed by the rude hand of experience, 
God's great teacher. "Be wise, 
therefore, O ye kings, and be instructed, ye 
judges of the earth. Serve the Lord.... 
Kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish 
from the way. ...Blessed are all they that 
put their trust in him." 

Yours in Christ, EDWIN C . MOTT . 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-This, Thanksgiving 
Day, seems a fitting time to remember 
the dear friends and servants of our Lord, 
who have been so much to us in the past. 

I have been something of an invalid the 
past few weeks by reason of trouble with 
my eyes— thus precluding the possibility of 
reading or study. So I have tried to digest 
some of the impressions received in the past 
season; and, first, I cease not to give thanks 
to God for the truth (as shown to me 
through the DAWN series and WATCH 
TOWER), which is gradually enabling me to 
see and understand the signs of the times; 
for without this light the recent Religious 
Congress would have seemed altogether 



different. I should have looked upon the 

coming together of the representatives of all 

known religions and creeds upon a common 

platform (i.e., a universal acknowledgment 

of a God), as the beginning of the 

new age or Millennium, and have thought 

that the gospel, through these representatives, 

was being preached to all nations, 

and that peace and righteousness were beginning 

to fill the earth. 

But now the case seems different. These 
representatives seemed anxious to impart to 
others supposed light and wisdom, not 
thinking they stood in need of any themselves; 
and so they seemed to part as they 
came: each more firmly than ever convinced 
that he and his followers alone understood 
God's dealings with the children of men 
—many leaving out our dear Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ, and nearly all forgetting 
him as the ransom-price. Verily, they 
are "blind leaders of the blind." 

The enclosed $50.00 is a gift from Mrs. 
P. and myself, to be used for the cause of 
our dear Lord as you may see best. 

With earnest prayers for you both, that 
you may be "kept for the Master's use," 

Yours in our Redeemer, T. PENFIELD. 



DEAR SIR: -I enjoy the DAWNS and the 
TOWER greatly. The last number, containing 
the article on the Religious Parliament, 
is excellent;— a grand, Christian analysis of 
that Babel-like gathering. I sent mine, to-day, 
to one who will thoroughly appreciate 
it. Do you know, Mr. Russell, many of your 
warmest "followers" are Episcopalians- 
born and raised in that great old church— 
and among the number your sincere friend, 
MRS. E. J. BROOKS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
just completed the reading of the November 
TOWER; and the strange doings of the 
great Religious Parliament, held in the name 
of Christianity, must convince any candid 
mind that God has no hand in such strange 
vagaries, other than a hand for chastisement. 
It must inevitably further bewilder the unstable, 
and in its result make the darkness 
ten-fold more dense. 

My heart blesses Him who is the light of 



the world, that I reached the light of his 
eternal truth before the doings and sayings 
of that Congress reached me. Once, in my 
younger days, I barely escaped confirmed 
skepticism by contemplating a compound 
of such strange contradictions; and my heart 
swells with gratitude to Christ that he is 
using you and others of his children in defense 
of the truth and, more, that I also am 
permitted to do something for its spread. 
It is little indeed that I can do, but all I can 
do is done gladly. He has ever held me 
above the sinking point, just able to swim; 
but, thanks be to his dear name, he has ever 
kept me safely amid a cloud of trials and 
dangers; and now, when the "clouds and 
darkness" that are round about him are 
rolling down upon us, my soul rests calmly, 
sweetly trusting his precious blood to save. 
How sweet to lift our eyes above the gloomy 
clouds, and to contemplate the bright morning 
soon to dispel the gloom ! 
Your brother in Christ, W. F. EATON. 



Supplement, Zion's Watch Tower. 
-DEC. 15th, 1893.- 



Officers of the WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 

DEAR FRIENDS AND CO-LABORERS: -My present judgment is that during the year 
189 , by denying myself 

and taking up my cross, I shall be able to lay aside on the first day of each 
week for Home and Foreign Mission work- 
to assist in publishing MILLENNIAL DAWN in other languages, in publishing the 
series of Old Theology Tracts 

quarterly, and in reprinting old ones, in various languages, in the gratuitous 
circulation of large quantities of them 

through the mails as sample copies and by the hands of brethren who have the 
heart and the opportunity so to use 
them, and, in general, as the officers of the Society may deem best— the 

amount of 

per week, as per my letter on the other side. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send you what I shall have 
laid aside for this cause at the 

close of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order, Postal Money 
Order or Postal Note, as I may find 
most convenient, and will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, 

"BIBLE HOUSE," ALLEGHENY, PA. 



Signed 

Post Office State 



The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," because nothing is 
actually promised— only your 

generous hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they now appear to 
you. The plan proved not only 

so beneficial to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, last 
year, that we again commend it to all as 

Scriptural and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan can tear out and 
fill both of these memorandums. 

One should be kept for the refreshment of your memory: the other please mail to 
us at your earliest convenience. 



WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY. 
MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Secretary: 

DEAR SISTER:— I have read with interest of the openings for the DAWN and 
Tract work in foreign lands 

and here at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in the spread 
of the Glad Tidings of the lengths 

and breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us in God's 
great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, voice, time, money, 
influence, all— to give to others 

this knowledge which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted my own heart 
and placed my feet firmly upon 
the Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, how to use 
my various talents more to my Redeemer's 

glory and for the service of his people— those blinded by human tradition who 
are, nevertheless, hungering for 

"the good Word of God," and those, also, who are naked, not having on the 
wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in the filthy rags of their 
own righteousness. I have decided that so 

far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule so clearly laid down 
for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according to my thankful 
appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute to the several 
parts of the Lord's work 

specified on the back of this letter. Of course I cannot in advance judge or 
state particularly what the Lord's bounty 

may enable me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the sum 
indicated to be merely my conjecture or 

hope, based upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more than I 
here specify; and should I not succeed 
in doing as well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know of my 



endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be able to do in 
this cause is to enable those in charge 

of the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to form estimates, 
lay plans, make contracts, etc., with 

some idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this my highly 
appreciated privilege. 

(For my "GOOD HOPES," see over.) 



page 383 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XIV., 1893. 



JANUARY 1. Page 

The Prevailing Type of Preaching 2 

Retrospective and Prospective 3 

The Political Outlook 4 

Exaltation via Humility 5 

AtCloseof Day. (Poem.) 7 

In Our Day 7 

A Momentous Struggle Begun 10 

"Always for All Things." 11 

Bible Study: Joshua the Typical High Priest 13 

" " Zerubbabel the Typical Builder 14 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 15 

JANUARY 15. 

Special Items: Calendars, Memorial Supper, etc 18 

A Word to Methodists— from Bishop Foster 19 

The True Church. (Poem.) 23 

Some Congregationalists Waking Up 24 

Our Lord's Sermon on the Mount 25 

Fulness of Joy 27 

Bible Study: Dedicating the Temple 29 

" " Nehemiah's Prayer 29 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 30 

FEBRUARY 1-15. -Double Number. 

Special Items: The Spring Meeting. Christian Home-Schools 

Wanted 34 

What Saith the Scriptures about Hell. (An examination 

of every Bible expression on the subject.) 35 

Bible Study: Rebuilding the Wall of Jerusalem 62 

" " Reading the Law 63 

" " Keeping the Sabbath 63 



MARCH 1. 

Special Items: Our February Issue, Tracts in Swedish 

and Norwegian, etc 66 

From Glory to Glory 67 

Jesus in the Synagogue 69 

I am my Beloved's. (Poem.) 71 

The Desire of All Nations shall Come 71 

"Live Peaceably with all Men." (A Correction) 74 

Bible Study: Esther Before the King 77 

" " A Temperance Lesson 77 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 78 

MARCH 15. 

To TOWER Readers and Colporteurs (Letter by Brother 

Adamson) 82 

The Memorial Supper 83 

Christian Union vs. Unity 84 

Palestine. (Poem.) 85 

The Oneness of the Divine Family 86 

Bible Study: The Resurrection of Christ 89 

" The Book of Job 90 

" Afflictions Viewed Differently 94 

" Job's Confidence 94 

" Job's Confession and Restoration 94 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 94 

APRIL 1. 

The Memorial Celebration 98 

Protestant England 98 

The Resurrection of the Dead 99 

Through Favor of our God. (Poem.) 108 

Israel Returning to the Holy Land 109 

Treasures in Heaven 109 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light 110 

APRIL 15. 

Church Statistics of the U.S. The Outlook 114 

Jewish Riots in Russia 114 

"The Word was a God." 115 

Judge Not. (Poem.) 117 

The Race in Adam 117 

Self-Examination 118 

Romanist Designs on American Cities 119 

Bible Study: Solomon and His Writings— Proverbs, 

Ecclesiastes and Solomon's Song 121 

Bible Study: Wisdom's Warning of Present Danger 122 

" The Value of Wisdom 125 

" Fruits of Wisdom 126 

" Wisdom of Temperance 127 

" A Wise Woman 127 

Encouraging Words from Earnest Workers 1 27 



MAY 1. 

Interesting Items: Clippings, Address Wrappers, etc 130 

The Twelve Apostles 131 

Apostolic Inspiration 140 

" Fallibility 142 

The Growth of Ritualism 144 

MAY 15. 

A Valuable Manuscript Found 146 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, Special Lot 146 

Taking God's Name in Vain 147 

A Gracious Prince. (Poem.) 150 

Resurrection Without Commotion 150 

Practical Questions: Sanctification, Serving on Jury 153 

Grace and Peace Multiplied 155 

Are the Latter Days at Hand 156 

Bible Study: Reverence and Fidelity 157 

" " The Creator Remembered 159 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 160 

JUNE 1. 

Further Jewish Expulsion 162 

The Relative Claims of Love and Justice 163 

The Lord's Sheep 165 

Be Ye Wise as Serpents— Harmless as Doves 166 

The Remedy Co-Extensive with the Curse 169 

page 384 

Face to Face with Trouble. (Poem.) 171 

Bible Study: Messiah's Kingdom 172 

" " Quarterly Review 173 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 175 

JUNE 15. 

The Gospel of the Kingdom in Great Britain 178 

Colporteurs, Take Notice! 178 

Baptism and Its Import 179 

Bible Study: Paul called to Europe 191 

JULY l-15.~Double Number. 

Harvest Work Before the Storm 194 

View from the TOWER: Church Union 195 

The Next Religious Conference at Jerusalem 197 

"Religious Riots are Abroad." 198 

Rest in the Lord. (Poem.) 199 

Man and Woman in God's Order 200 

"Be Not Unequally Yoked." 212 

Our Convention at Chicago 216 

Bible Study: Paul at Philippi 218 

" Paul at Athens 218 



" " Paul at Corinth 220 

" " Paul at Ephesus 220 

" " Paul at Miletus 221 

" " Paul at Jerusalem 223 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 223 

AUGUST 1. 

Our Chicago Convention 226 

Brother Rabinowitch in Allegheny 226 

Prosperity in Jerusalem 226 

Special Divine Providence 227 

Keep thy Heart 233 

Lead Me. (Poem.) 234 

Questions about Politics, Voting, etc 235 

Bible Study: Paul before Felix 236 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 237 

AUGUST 15. 

Our Convention in Chicago 242 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., in German 242 

Christ in You, the Hope of Glory 243 

Sometime We'll Understand. (Poem.) 246 

The Office of Reason 247 

A Peculiar People 250 

Bible Study: Paul before Agrippa 253 

" " Paul Shipwrecked 254 

" " Paul at Rome 256 

SEPTEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Brother Rogers in Great Britain 258 

Missing Cylinders 258 

A Famine in the Land 258 

"The Church of the Living God." 259 

Our Chicago Convention 278 

The Embryo Kingdom of God 280 

"The Sea and the Waves Roaring." 281 

Bible Study: Personal Responsibility 282 

" " Quarterly Review 282 

" " The Power of the Gospel 283 

" " Redemption in Christ 284 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 285 

OCTOBER 1. 

Special Lot DAWNS, DAWNS in Quantities, Envelopes 290 

Blessed Assurances 290 

View from TOWER: The Drift of Religious Teachers 291 

Though Ye Be Established 294 

A Practical Suggestion 296 

"Who is Sufficient for these Things?" 297 

Bible Study: Justification by Faith 299 

" " Christian Living 300 

" " Abstinence for the Sake of Others 302 



Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 303 

OCTOBER 15. 

News from Foreign Fields 306 

Unequally Yoked 307 

The True Fold Not a Pen 310 

A Question Concerning the Ransom 312 

Opinions of Baptists Not Baptist Doctrine 313 

Bible Study: The Resurrection 316 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 318 

NOVEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Interest in Germany, Special Cloth DAWNS 322 

View from the TOWER: Echoes from the World's 

Great Parliament of Religions 323 

Nominal Church Peculiarities 349 

Bible Study: The Grace of Liberality 349 

" " Imitation of Christ 351 

" " The Christian Home 351 

" " Grateful Obedience 352 

DECEMBER 1. 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 354 

The TOWER for 1894 354 

MILLENNIAL DAWN in Swedish 354 

The Apostle Peter's Exhortation 355 

Disciples of Christ 357 

Healing for Broken Hearts. (Poem.) 359 

A Glimpse of Christianity in Japan 360 

True Christian Liberality 364 

Bible Study: The Heavenly Inheritance 365 

" " The Glorified Savior 366 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 367 

DECEMBER 15. 

Bibles and Bible-study Helps 370 

Christian Home Embellishments 370 

"Good Hopes" Supplement 370 

Renewals for 1894 370 

Mementoes of Jerusalem 370 

Representative or Substitute? 371 

Is Not the Doctrine Dangerous? 373 

The Coming Crash in Europe 374 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 375 

Annual Report Watch Tower Tract Society 378 

Bible Study: The Birth of Jesus 380 

The Angels' Song. (Poem.) 381 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers. (Letters.) 381 


