The Book of Proverbs​—Abundant Wisdom in Few Words
IS YOUR life free of problems and frustrations? Few would say theirs is. And efforts to solve problems often backfire, leaving people in difficulties even worse than their former circumstances. Is there a source of counsel on which people can rely to improve matters?
There is an especially fine source of such guidance in the Bible book of Proverbs. Though written in the Middle East more than 2,500 years ago, the brief maxims of Proverbs apply to all people and are still up-to-date.
The Bible indicates that most of the proverbs originated with King Solomon. (Prov. 1:1; 10:1; 25:1) Though the Scriptural record does not directly say that Solomon wrote them, it strongly implies that he did so. It says that he spoke thousands of proverbs and that “he pondered and made a thorough search, that he might arrange many proverbs in order.”​—1 Ki. 4:32; Eccl. 12:9.
The style of expression in this Bible book is Hebrew poetry that consists not of rhyming verses but of parallel thoughts. Very often the parallel lines form a contrast, as in the case of Proverbs 10:28, which says: “The expectation of the righteous ones is a rejoicing, but the very hope of the wicked ones will perish.” In other cases, the parallel expressions are synonymous, as noted in these words of Proverbs 18:15: “The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge, and the ear of wise ones seeks to find knowledge.”
A LOFTY PURPOSE
The purpose of the book of Proverbs is explained right at its beginning, where we read: “The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, the king of Israel, for one to know wisdom and discipline, to discern the sayings of understanding [“words of deep meaning,” The Jerusalem Bible], to receive the discipline that gives insight, righteousness and judgment and uprightness, to give to the inexperienced ones shrewdness, to a young man knowledge and thinking ability.”​—Prov. 1:1-4.
The book of Proverbs directs much counsel to young, “inexperienced” persons whose hearts are open to every type of influence and who are easily led astray. They must come to appreciate “wisdom,” which involves seeing things as they actually are and knowing how to put that knowledge to practical use. “Discipline,” too, is necessary, both as self-restraint and as chastisement imposed by others.​—Prov. 1:1-4; 2:7, 10-13; 4:1, 5-7, 13.
The proverbs afford special help for developing mental faculties in a right way. There is much encouragement to gain insight and “shrewdness,” that is, expertness and sound judgment in all areas of life. (Prov. 1:4; 8:5) This education is never completed. “A wise person will listen and take in more instruction, and a man of understanding is the one who acquires skillful direction, to understand a proverb and a puzzling saying, the words of wise persons and their riddles.” (Prov. 1:5, 6) Biblical proverbs often take the form of puzzling sayings and “riddles.” which are perplexing, knotty statements that require unraveling. Understanding them takes time and meditation. The abundant wisdom of Proverbs is accessible only to those who are willing to dig for it. This becomes clear from these words of Proverbs 2:1-5:
“My son, if you will receive my sayings and treasure up my own commandments with yourself, so as to pay attention to wisdom with your ear, that you may incline your heart to discernment; if, moreover, you call out for understanding itself and you give forth your voice for discernment itself, if you keep seeking for it as for silver, and as for hid treasures you keep searching for it, in that case you will understand the fear of Jehovah, and you will find the very knowledge of God.”
Let us consider some examples of the wise counsel available in the book of Proverbs.
THINGS GOD HATES
People who desire to know what is right and wrong face a bewildering mass of different opinions. Proverbs can help clear up the confusion. For example, in just the four brief verses that follow, we learn of certain mental attitudes and corresponding actions that God hates:
“There are six things that Jehovah does hate; yes, seven are things detestable to his soul: lofty eyes, a false tongue, and hands that are shedding innocent blood, a heart fabricating hurtful schemes, feet that are in a hurry to run to badness, a false witness that launches forth lies, and anyone sending forth contentions among brothers.”​—Prov. 6:16-19.
The intensification of a number by the next one higher is used many times by Bible writers. (Job 5:19; 33:29; Prov. 30:15, 16, 18, 19, 21-31; Isa. 17:6; Amos 1:3, 6, 9, 11, 13; 2:1, 4, 6) At Proverbs 6:16-19, the numbers are not to be understood literally, as if to say that God hates only six or seven things. The seven categories are basic and will cover all types of wrongful acts. The first six focus on three categories of wrongdoing​—in thought (“lofty eyes,” “a heart fabricating hurtful schemes”), in word (“a false tongue,” “a false witness that launches forth lies”) and in deed (“hands that are shedding innocent blood,” “feet that are in a hurry to run to badness”). Especially hateful is the seventh type of individual mentioned. He takes keen delight in kindling strife among persons who otherwise would dwell together peacefully. The increase from six to seven suggests that humans ever keep multiplying their evil deeds.
When a person comes to appreciate that the Creator views pride, scheming and lying on a level with bloodshed and other violent acts, he should be moved to make vital changes within himself. The consequence will be improved relationships with others and greater joy in everyday life.
COPING WITH ANGER
One of the most frequent causes of distress among people is uncontrolled anger. Some may feel that flying into a rage is an evidence of strength. But the Word of God states just the opposite, saying: “He that is slow to anger is better than a mighty man, and he that is controlling his spirit than one capturing a city.” (Prov. 16:32) Though warriors who capture a city display much fortitude, controlling one’s temper requires even greater strength and courage.
How can an individual progress in getting his temper under control? Proverbs offers these fine guidelines:
“Do not have companionship with anyone given to anger; and with a man having fits of rage you must not enter in, that you may not get familiar with his paths and certainly take a snare for your soul.”​—Prov. 22:24, 25.
“An answer, when mild, turns away rage, but a word causing pain makes anger to come up.”​—Prov. 15:1.
“The beginning of contention is as one letting out waters; so before the quarrel has burst forth, take your leave.”​—Prov. 17:14.
All these statements encourage fleeing anger-arousing situations right at the outset. The reason is well expressed in these further words: “If you have acted senselessly by lifting yourself up, and if you have fixed your thought upon it [“if you have hatched a scheme,” An American Translation], put the hand to the mouth. For the churning of milk is what brings forth butter, and the squeezing of the nose is what brings forth blood, and the squeezing out of anger is what brings forth quarreling.”​—Prov. 30:32, 33.
All people foolishly tend to exalt themselves on occasion. They may make undue demands upon others or perhaps say or do something insulting. At such times a person should “put the hand to the mouth,” restraining any additional words or actions that would provoke further the one who has become offended. Just as butter requires churning and a nosebleed usually the squeezing or striking of the nose, a full-fledged quarrel happens only when people give free rein to angry feelings and keep on inciting one another to rage.
AVOID LAZINESS
The book of Proverbs both commends hard work and discourages laziness. The inspired writer states: “The lazy one has said: ‘There is a lion outside! In the midst of the public squares I shall be murdered!’” (Prov. 22:13) To avoid working, the lazy person will invent fantastic excuses, such as claiming that a lion has gotten into the city and might kill him if he goes outside. Three additional proverbs highlight how an individual unwilling to work affects himself and others:
“The lazy one is showing himself desirous, but his soul has nothing. However, the very soul of the diligent ones will be made fat.”​—Prov. 13:4.
“Because of winter the lazy one will not plow; he will be begging in reaping time, but there will be nothing.”​—Prov. 20:4.
“As vinegar to the teeth and as smoke to the eyes, so the lazy man is to those sending him forth.”​—Prov. 10:26.
THE NEED FOR DISCIPLINE
Since humans are imperfect and incline toward the way of least resistance, most people balk at discipline. The book of Proverbs encourages a different attitude, saying: “Do bring your heart to discipline and your ear to the sayings of knowledge.” (Prov. 23:12) Discipline here means both self-restraint and correction administered by others. Often it is provided through “sayings of knowledge,” that is, statements that originate with a knowledgeable person and serve to inform others. At times, however, discipline must be firmer than mere words. “Bruising wounds are what scours away the bad; and strokes, the innermost parts of the belly.” (Prov. 20:30) When accepted in the right spirit, firm discipline not only restrains acts of wrongdoing but also motivates people to make internal changes for the better.
Concerning discipline of children by parents, we read: “Do not hold back discipline from the mere boy. In case you beat him with the rod, he will not die. With the rod you yourself should beat him, that you may deliver his very soul from Sheol itself.” (Prov. 23:13, 14) “The one holding back his rod is hating his son, but the one loving him is he that does look for him with discipline.”​—Prov. 13:24.
Of course, discipline must always be administered with self-control and not in a burst of anger. And it will not be necessary to use physical punishment at all times. In numerous instances, merely a few words of wise counsel are sufficient. “A rebuke works deeper in one having understanding than striking a stupid one a hundred times.”​—Prov. 17:10.
SHUN SEXUAL IMMORALITY
The book of Proverbs condemns sexual immorality. Consider, for instance, these words of warning:
“The commandment is a lamp, and a light the law is, and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life, to guard you against the bad woman, against the smoothness of the tongue of the foreign woman. Do not desire her prettiness in your heart, and may she not take you with her lustrous eyes, because in behalf of a woman prostitute one comes down to a round loaf of bread; but as regards another man’s wife, she hunts even for a precious soul.” (Prov. 6:23-26)
Those who engage in immoral sex acts often come to poverty. Persons who seek sexual pleasure with “a woman prostitute” or who otherwise practice fornication may pay also with loss of health as they succumb to painful and crippling venereal diseases. The danger is even greater when an individual seeks intimacies with someone else’s marriage mate. An adulteress endangers the “precious soul,” or life, of her illicit partner. Concerning this, the inspired Bible writer adds:
“Can a man rake together fire into his bosom and yet his very garments not be burned? Or can a man walk upon the coals and his feet themselves not be scorched? Likewise with anyone having relations with the wife of his fellowman, no one touching her will remain unpunishable. . . . Anyone committing adultery with a woman is in want of heart; he that does it is bringing his own soul to ruin. A plague and dishonor he will find, and his reproach itself will not be wiped out. For the rage of an able-bodied man is jealousy, and he will not show compassion in the day of vengeance [against the one committing adultery with his wife]. He will have no consideration for any sort of ransom, neither will he show willingness, no matter how large you make the present.” (Prov. 6:27-35)
Marital unfaithfulness can result in irreparable harm to the individuals and families concerned.
BEWARE OF ‘THE SWEET LIFE’
Throughout history the main pursuit in life for numerous individuals has been pleasure-seeking. While the Bible does not discourage having a good time, it stresses the need to get a more balanced view of pleasure activities. “Is it honey that you have found? Eat what is sufficient for you, that you may not take too much of it and have to vomit it up.” (Prov. 25:16) Just as the overeating of literal honey can make a person ill physically, so overindulgence in the pleasure-oriented ‘sweet life’ can lead to physical and also spiritual sickness. Furthermore, overemphasis on pleasure often leads to dire circumstances of poverty. “He that is loving merriment will be an individual in want; he that is loving wine and oil will not gain riches.”​—Prov. 21:17.
What about the determination to amass wealth? The book of Proverbs cautions that riches are not dependable and can disappear suddenly. We read: “Do not toil to gain riches. Cease from your own understanding. Have you caused your eyes to glance at it [wealth], when it is nothing? For without fail it makes wings for itself like those of an eagle and flies away toward the heavens.” (Prov. 23:4, 5) Because vast fortunes can be lost quickly due to poor management or unforeseen circumstances, the Scriptures admonish people to steer their efforts toward something more dependable than the pursuit of riches. Note carefully this counsel:
“You ought to know positively the appearance of your flock. Set your heart to your droves; for treasure will not be to time indefinite, nor a diadem for all generations. The green grass has departed, and the new grass has appeared, and the vegetation of the mountains has been gathered. The young rams are for your clothing, and the he-goats are the price of the field. And there is a sufficiency of goats’ milk for your food, for the food of your household, and the means of life for your girls.”​—Prov. 27:23-27.
Neither material wealth (“treasure”) nor a position of prominence (“a diadem”) guarantees real security. Time, effort and money invested in a business deal are often lost due to failure of the venture. Unexpected occurrences can cause both wealth and a respected position to disappear suddenly. On the other hand, efforts put forth to care for livestock do not result in decrease, but usually in increase for the owner. God provides freely “vegetation” for feeding domestic animals. Throughout human history diligent caring for livestock consistently has proved to be more dependable as a means of acquiring food, clothing and income than have riches or prominence. Hence, the wise counsel: “You ought to know positively the appearance of your flock.” The principle in these words can be applied to diligent labor in any dependable field of employment today.
The book of Proverbs, though committed to writing thousands of years ago, contains peerless guidance for people alive today. Read these inspired words regularly. Meditate on their lessons. Though each proverb has only a few words, their abundant wisdom can make your life lastingly secure and happy.

