Much Is Given​—Much Is Demanded
1 How favored we are to have the truth! Because of our dedication to Jehovah, we have been “entrusted with the good news.” (1 Thess. 2:4) This places us under greater responsibility. Jesus said: “Everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him.”​—Luke 12:48b.
2 How true those words are! Since all of us have been blessed with a knowledge of God’s Word, a wonderful association of brothers, and a marvelous hope, it can truthfully be said that much has been given to us. Reasonably, much is expected in return.
3 Maintain a Proper View of Requirements: Some have concluded that too much is expected of us. As Head of the Christian congregation, Jesus Christ determines “what is needed” to make it function properly. (Eph. 4:15, 16) He assures us that ‘his yoke is kindly and his load is light.’ (Matt. 11:28-30) He lovingly makes allowances for those who have limitations. (Luke 21:1-4) If we give our best, regardless of the amount, we will be blessed.​—Col. 3:23, 24.
4 Ask yourself, ‘Are Kingdom interests first in my life? Am I using my time and my assets in a way that results in praise to God’s name and benefit to others? Do I find that my greatest pleasure comes from serving Jehovah rather than from selfishly enjoying material things?’ Our honest answers to these questions reveal the motives within our hearts.​—Luke 6:45.
5 Avoid Being Tempted to Do What Is Bad: Never before have there been such temptations and pressures toward self-interest, greed, and love of sensual pleasure. Every day we are faced with moral challenges, with temptations to compromise. To meet these challenges successfully, we must ask Jehovah to help us. (Matt. 26:41) Through his spirit, he can make us strong. (Isa. 40:29) Reading God’s Word daily is a great help. (Ps. 1:2, 3) Self-discipline and self-control also play a major role.​—1 Cor. 9:27.
6 It is not enough to love what is good​—we must also hate what is bad. (Ps. 97:10) This means not cultivating a yearning for those things that are bad. Proverbs 6:16-19 lists seven things that Jehovah hates. Obviously, one who wants to please Jehovah must also hate such things. Having been blessed with an accurate knowledge of the truth, we should want to act in accord with that knowledge, keeping our minds fixed on good things.
7 It is proper to pray for circumstances that are favorable for “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Many have found that a busy schedule in Jehovah’s service is a protection because it allows little time for pursuing worthless things.
8 All things considered, what Jehovah requires of us is very reasonable. (Mic. 6:8) We have every cause to be grateful for each privilege of service. (Eph. 5:20) Therefore, we keep “working hard and exerting ourselves,” confident that our reward will be infinitely greater than anything required of us.​—1 Tim. 4:10.

