Service Meetings for March
Week Starting March 6
Song 25
13 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Discuss Question Box.
15 min: “Much Is Given​—Much Is Demanded.” Questions and answers. Encourage those who qualify to think about enrolling as auxiliary pioneers during April.
17 min: “Proclaiming ‘the Words of the Prophecy.’” Review highlights. Invite audience to relate experiences enjoyed using or placing the Revelation Climax book. Urge all to be positive in offering the book, since it deals with current events that concern everyone. Have one or two presentations demonstrated.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 13
Song 24
10 min: Local announcements. Make brief comment calling attention to box “Reminder for Secretary and Service Overseer.” Accounts report.
15 min: “Timely Kingdom News to Be Distributed Worldwide.” Talk by an elder. Emphasize importance of this upcoming special activity during April and May. Urge all, including new ones, to plan for a full share.
20 min: “Bethel Service​—More Volunteers Needed.” Question-and-answer coverage of paragraphs 1-13.
Song 36 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 20
Song 40
15 min: Local announcements. Demonstrate family use of the 1995 Yearbook. Family group expresses appreciation for the book; father briefly reviews highlights of introductory material on pages 3-11. They discuss how they will try to read a few pages of the Yearbook together each week and make sure that each day they give consideration to the designated Bible text in Examining the Scriptures Daily.
15 min: Local needs. Or talk on the article “If You Owe Taxes, Pay Taxes,” in The Watchtower of November 15, 1994, pages 26-8.
15 min: “Help Others ‘Observe the Things Written.’” Review the main points, and then have one or two return visits demonstrated.
Song 52 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 27
Song 205
 5 min: Local announcements.
12 min: “The Most Important Event in Human History.” Discuss with audience. Review local arrangements for the Memorial. Explain why we need to invite interested ones and help them to attend.
18 min: “Bethel Service​—More Volunteers Needed.” In covering paragraphs 14-18, arrange for a demonstration in which a father is talking to his teenage son about the goal of Bethel service and what the son can do to prepare for it in harmony with the suggestions offered. If there are former or current members of the Bethel family in the congregation, the father may include one or two of these brothers in the discussion with his son. After the demonstration paragraphs 19-23 should be discussed with questions and answers.
10 min: Offering The Watchtower and Awake! during April. In frequently worked territory, we may also offer any brochure (except the School brochure). Where interest is found on return visits, subscriptions may be offered. Review the following suggestions for offering magazines from house to house: Have a friendly smile. Be enthusiastic. Speak slowly. Discuss only one article in one magazine. Hand the magazines to the householder. Let it be known that you will return with the next issues. Have a positive conclusion if magazines are refused. Keep a record of all interest and placements. In conclusion, demonstrate one or two brief presentations offering current issues of the magazines.
Song 176 and concluding prayer.

