The Most Important Event in Human History
1 Jesus came to the earth at the direction of his Father to bear witness to the truth that would lead us to everlasting life. (John 18:37) His faithfulness until death brought honor to Jehovah, sanctified God’s name, and provided a ransom. (John 17:4, 6) This is what made Jesus’ death the most important event in all human history.
2 Since the creation of Adam, there have been only two perfect men who have lived upon this earth. Adam was in a position to bring marvelous blessings to his unborn offspring. Instead, he selfishly rebelled, condemning them to a miserable existence that would end in death. When Jesus came, he displayed perfect loyalty and obedience, opening up the opportunity for everlasting life to all who exercise faith.​—John 3:16; Rom. 5:12.
3 No other event can compare with Jesus’ sacrificial death. It changed the course of human history. It provided the basis for resurrecting billions of people from the dead. It laid the foundation for an everlasting Kingdom that would bring an end to wickedness and make the earth a paradise. It will ultimately free all mankind from every form of oppression and enslavement.​—Ps. 37:11; Acts 24:15; Rom. 8:21, 22.
4 All of this helps us to appreciate why Jesus instructed his disciples to commemorate his death with the Memorial observance each year. (Luke 22:19) Appreciating its significance, we look forward to assembling with congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide after sundown on Friday, April 14. Before that time, it would be good to read together as a family the Bible accounts of Jesus’ last days on earth and his courageous stand for the truth. (Recommended passages are noted on our 1995 Calendar, April 9-14.) He set a pattern for us in devotion to our Creator. (1 Pet. 2:21) Let us do our utmost to invite our friends and family, as well as Bible students and other interested persons, to this important gathering. Explain beforehand what will take place and the significance of the emblems.​—1 Cor. 11:23-26.
5 The elders should plan well in advance to be sure that the Kingdom Hall is neat and clean. Arrangements should be made for someone to obtain the emblems. The serving of the emblems should be well organized. Helpful suggestions on how we can show respect for the Lord’s Evening Meal were given in The Watchtower of February 15, 1985, page 19. It would be quite fitting for the congregation to arrange for expanded field service activities during several days before the observance as well as a few days following it.
6 Last year, a total of 12,288,917 were in attendance worldwide for the commemoration of this important event. Since it is the most important day on our calendar, all of us should be present.

