Timely Kingdom News to Be Distributed Worldwide
1 On Sunday, April 23, a special public talk will be delivered on the arresting subject “False Religion’s End Is Near.” At the conclusion of the meeting that day, a thought-provoking four-page Kingdom News will be released. The timely message it contains will be given worldwide distribution during the three-week period from April 24 to May 14.
2 In all parts of the world, people are perplexed. No matter where they live, they are plagued by problems. The Kingdom News will be of real interest to those who are sincerely concerned about what is happening, since it will direct them to God’s Word as the infallible source of guidance for man. (Ps. 119:105) All of us look forward to getting a copy of the Kingdom News when it is released on April 23. In the meantime, there is much to do in preparation for this intensive three-week campaign.
3 Encourage All to Have a Zealous Share: Who may have a share in the work? Certainly everyone who is already a publisher will be eager to do so! What about Bible students who are regularly attending congregation meetings? Some have associated with us for quite a while and are making steady progress. If they have brought their lives into harmony with Scriptural principles, are they qualified to be counted as Kingdom proclaimers? The publisher conducting the Bible study may discuss the matter with the student, and if the student is desirous of sharing in the field service, two elders will review with him the material on pages 98 and 99 of the book Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. This should be done as soon as possible so that those who qualify as unbaptized publishers may have a full share in the campaign. Bible students who are not yet qualified to be counted as unbaptized publishers may still be encouraged to share this timely Kingdom News with acquaintances or family members.​—See The Watchtower, November 15, 1988, page 17, paragraph 8.
4 This work is not difficult; everyone can have a share. Parents may include practice sessions with the Kingdom News as part of the weekly family Bible study so that all family members will be well prepared to present it from house to house. A simple presentation is usually best. After a brief introduction, offer the Kingdom News to the householder, and encourage him to read it. When householders manifest interest, make a record so that you can return to cultivate the interest. (1 Cor. 3:6, 7) The key to success is to have a simple, well-prepared presentation.
5 There will be “plenty to do” during April and May. In next month’s issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, further information will be provided in the insert entitled “Plenty to Do in the Work of the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 15:58.

