Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
Here at Bethel we are still thinking and talking about the delightful “Men of Goodwill” District Assembly that we attended this summer. And there is so much to talk about!
None of us has forgotten the thrilling drama of Mordecai and Esther. It was not just the story that was impressive but what it means to us. How forcefully it was shown that we need to be sure that personal differences never weaken the bond of love that unites us! So deep should be our concern for every one of our brothers and sisters that we would risk our lives to help them. That is something to think about, isn’t it?
What was said about the heart was also impressive. Did you get the new thought? It was interesting to learn that Bible references to the human heart have to do with the fleshly heart itself, not something that is merely figurative. But what we here at Bethel have been talking about even more is the admonition that was given to examine our hearts regularly and to be honest with ourselves as to why we do things, to search out our weaknesses and work on remedying them. In this way our hearts will be found acceptable to Jehovah.
As we think back on the highlights of the program, we also remember the identification of the “disgusting thing” with the scarlet-colored beast of Revelation chapter 17, the United Nations. That is something that folks had been asking about ever since the assemblies last year. It was also faith-strengthening to hear the talk “We Worship What We Know” and to see how true that is in our case, in contrast with practicers of false religion. And do you recall the note of urgency in the talk “Taking Final Advantage of the ‘Year of Goodwill’”? Talks such as those make us want to do all we can in Jehovah’s service, don’t they?
Then there was the Saturday-night program “Who Needs Your Help?” When we left the assembly grounds that evening, the points made were vivid in our minds. But they soon fade if we don’t review them. Don’t you agree that it would be beneficial to review frankly within each family circle the helpful counsel that was given to safeguard both young folks and older ones? When the apostle Peter wrote to his brothers, he said that by reminding them of things that they had heard he wanted to ‘rouse them up.’ (2 Pet. 1:12, 13) That is something that we need to do for one another today too.
We have heard that the total attendance at the public talk at the assemblies was over half a million​—actually 523,799. That is just for the United States. And at these assemblies from late June till early August, 10,527 were baptized. Isn’t that grand?
The assembly did so much to help all of us as God’s “men of goodwill” to prepare for the approaching millennial peace. Now, during September and the months to come, there is work for each one of us to do in helping others to make such preparation too. May Jehovah bless you as you share to the full in this grand privilege of service.
Be assured of our warm love for each one of you.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE
[Blurb on page 1]
Preparing for the approaching millennial peace.

