Evolution or Creation?
1 Many do not take time to read the Bible or show serious concern about its direction because of the widespread belief that evolution accounts for the universe and man’s​—presence not creation, as outlined in the Bible. But did man get here by evolution or by creation? Thinking people do well to examine the facts. The publication Did Man Get Here by Evolution or by Creation? sets forth ‘the other side of the picture’ in a well-documented presentation. We will be offering it to everyone we can during September on a contribution of 25 cents.
2 It would be a fine thing if all of your congregation’s territory could be covered with this offer. Why not make this a goal in your congregation and see what you can do along this line. It may be that, with increased effort by all in the house-to-house work, and with the good weather we usually enjoy in September during the day and in the evening, you can succeed in covering most, if not all, of your territory.
3 Many of you have new territory to work, virtually untouched, and that is in the schools. We previously put forth an effort to contact educators with the Evolution book, but that was two years ago. Many teachers and school officials have changed since then. People have changed their minds on many subjects too. If you are a student, a new year at school will put you with new teachers, and often new students.
4 During September, when the school year starts, many of you parents have opportunity to get acquainted with the teachers, counselors and principals where your children attend. Tell them of your pleasure in reading the Evolution book and suggest that they might like to read it too.
5 And you publishers who are attending school, will you offer the book to your teachers? How? you may ask. After class, or after school, you could approach your science teacher and tell him that you and your parents are interested in scientific subjects and enjoyed reading the Evolution book. Suggest that he might enjoy reading it too. And in your history class, does not the discussion usually begin with the consideration of evolution? You might choose to raise your hand during class and comment that you read a publication that said man got here by creation, not evolution. Or, you may wish to approach your teacher after class and tell him what you read and ask him if he would like to read the Evolution book too. Tell other children about it; talk freely about what you have read. Adults usually cannot go into the school and witness to the children. But you are there every day. As you talk you can accomplish much good, and may stir up fine interest among the 44 million young people in school in this country who often do not hear the message we bring when we go from house to house.
6 It may be that some congregations can make arrangements for a talk to be given in the schools when the subject of evolution is being discussed. There are no doubt many teachers who would be very pleased to know that there is someone in their community who has enough interest in the children and their education to be willing to take time to come in and talk to them.
7 We suggest that the overseer and school servant determine whether or not anyone in the congregation might do well in making such a presentation. Then it would be well to check with the brother to see if he is willing and can arrange his affairs to give such a talk during school hours, if something can be arranged with the school.
8 Speakers should arrange their own presentations. It is suggested that, while mention may be made of a few of the more glaring weaknesses in the evolution theory, emphasis in the presentation be placed on the evidence in favor of creation. The speaker can decide if he wishes to open the discussion for questions or not. In conclusion the class and teachers can be told that, if more information of a scientific nature is desired, it is available in the Evolution book at a cost of 25 cents each.
9 Where speakers are available, the overseer can arrange for a qualified publisher to contact the teachers. The one who will be doing this can inform the teachers that, when evolution is discussed in school, he will be glad to arrange for a qualified speaker to come and give a talk to the class presenting ‘the other side’ of the picture, thus giving the class a broader view of the subject. The speaker will be glad to present some of the facts in favor of creation for the purpose of informing the class, if this is desired. The teacher may wish to check with the principal and make arrangements for such a presentation later in the school year, and this, of course, would be just fine.
10 As we give the Evolution book a good distribution from house to house in September, and as we follow through on the other suggestions above, surely Jehovah will direct things so that a fine witness is given.

