Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 6
Theme: Happy to Be Jehovah’s Servants. (Ps. 144:15) Song 29.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
 3 min: Accounts report. Commend brothers for good support of congregation expenses.
15 min: Prospects for New Service Year. (Congregation servant may choose to handle this.) What was accomplished last service year? New publishers; number baptized; progress of congregation; meeting attendance; territory coverage. Emphasize meaning of figures in terms of spiritual growth, praise to Jehovah and accomplishing his work. Total literature placements show potential for back-calls and Bible studies. Commend congregation and highlight reason we keep busy in Jehovah’s service: We delight to do God’s will, for his honor, etc.
Theocratic activities needing attention during the service year. (Suggestions in recent report of circuit servant may be used.) Give practical suggestions to aid the brothers to make progress. Include demonstration if desired.
20 min: “Evolution or Creation?”
(8 min.) Questions and answers.
(4 min.) Demonstration. Simple, effective presentation of offer by mature publisher. Illustrations on pages 4, 18, 19, 53, 64, 74 and 75 may be used if you wish.
(2 min.) Invite comments from audience on why they believe presentation is effective.
(4 min.) Discussion between school-age children on offering “Evolution” book at school. Let them discuss together frankly to whom they could present the book and how they would do it. One might say, “I don’t know what to do. I have never done anything like this before.” Another could suggest talking to history teacher as outlined in article that starts on page 1. Let children discuss together HOW they might do it, TO WHOM they might offer the book and WHEN. They can help one another figure it out. (If no school-age children in congregation, adults could discuss different opportunities to offer the book.)
(2 min.) Brief encouragement by chairman to give the “Evolution” book a good distribution.
17 min: Invite congregation to relate gratifying experiences and/​or some of their happy theocratic memories from the past service year. Let this be a spontaneous expression. Hear from as many as time will permit. Concluding comments. Include a few points from Theocratic News. Song 6.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 13
Theme: Do Good Toward Those Related to You in the Faith. (Gal. 6:10) Song 5.
10 min: Introduction, text, comments and Branch Letter. Setting: Father enjoying a discussion of spiritual things with his family. Chairman: In conclusion, encourage families to set aside time to study together and to discuss spiritual things.
12 min: Talk, discussion and/​or demonstration on “Watchtower” article “Putting Others Ahead of Oneself.” See the June 1, 1970, issue.
20 min: “How Are They Doing? Can You Help?” Questions and answers. Read the paragraphs.
 8 min: Demonstration by two or three young publishers of presentation of “Evolution” book in territory.
10 min: Concluding comments. Include appropriate “Announcements,” “How Did We Do in July?” and local report for August. Song 15.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 20
Theme: Pursuit of Maturity. Song 51.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: Talk on Humility. See August 15, 1970, “Watchtower.”
10 min: Older Publications. Chairman announces older publications available in local congregation. Considers points in Question Box. Invites congregation to watch publisher encouraging interested person to obtain and read some of these.
Demonstration (3 min.): Student expresses appreciation for study, learns so much, and yet says: “I still have so many questions I would like to have answered!” Publisher tells of publications available in local congregation and of contents of some of them. Encourages interested one to continue to read in order to get her questions answered and grow in accurate knowledge. Arrangements made to bring some of these books on next call or for interested one to pick them up at Kingdom Hall when attending meetings.
Chairman: How many in local congregation have read some of these older publications? Encourage brothers to do so and to continue to grow in knowledge and depth of appreciation.
15 min: Presenting the Good News​—“Pursuit of Maturity.’’
(8 min.) Questions and answers.
(5 min.) Discussion between three sisters outlining briefly how each would start a study in “Evolution” book. They can consider HOW they would start study, WHAT PAGE they would start on, and WHY.
(2 min.) Chairman encourages all to apply suggestions.
10 min: Experiences regarding success in offering “Evolution” book in local territory. Concluding comments. Song 62.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 27
Theme: Fulfilling Our Declaration as Peacemakers. (Rom. 10:10) Song 30.
10 min: Introduction, text and comments. Also, theme for the month, “Fulfilling Our Declaration as Peacemakers.” Group of publishers briefly discuss text for day. Then consider what theme for month means in practical terms in their own lives. For example: Not only talking about peace in the ministry, but being peaceable with members of own family. Promoting peace when faced with unruly people at school, at work, in the service, etc. See 1970 “Yearbook,” page 88, paragraph 1, and page 186, paragraph 1. Also, October 1, 1970, “Watchtower.”
10 min: The Special “Awake!” Lively discussion of interesting points in special “Awake!” that will appeal to people in local territory.
10 min: Can You Live Forever? Discussion and demonstration of sermon for “Awake!” campaign. You may find it beneficial to feature John 17:3 in your presentation. After appropriate opening remarks about concern over dangers to human life, what makes life precious to us, etc., you might say: ‘The Bible assures that everlasting life on earth under righteous conditions is possible and will be enjoyed by man. This only God can bring about, but there is something we must do in order to benefit. (Read John 17:3.) Of course, knowledge of the subject is needed.’ Then turn attention of householder to appropriate material in “Awake!” You may feel free to use any presentation that works well for you.
20 min: Talk and audience participation on subject ‘Act with Caution and Return Evil for Evil to No One.’ Chairman will direct discussion. Let audience do most of the talking. See September 15, 1969, “Watchtower,” on pages 553-558. Include audience in discussion by asking questions on paragraphs 4, 5, 8, 9 and 10. Before asking questions it might be well to read pointed portions from these paragraphs or have key scriptures read to center minds of audience on main points. See also the “Awake!” of September 22, 1969, pages 3 and 4; “The Watchtower” of June 1, 1968, pages 346, 347. Include audience in discussing practical application of material. Stress the need for neutrality as to world’s conflicts and endurance, also keeping separate from crowds and individuals bent on trouble.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 9.

