From Our Readers
Animal Research  I hesitated to read the issue on animal research (July 8, 1990) because I knew it was an emotional subject. But you handled it in a tactful and balanced way.
N. V., United States
Since research is my line of work, I was more than eager to read what Awake! had to say. It is clear that the Bible does not condemn animal research, yet it does not justify cruelty to animals. If my work requires the use of animals in the future, I will be careful not to waste them or be cruel to them.
O. O., United States
Your article was disappointing. You devote five paragraphs to violence by activists (which is not widespread). The “horror stories,” however, were summed up in one subheading. How can a person maintain a balanced attitude in view of such base cruelty? Yes, animal research has contributed to medical progress. But couldn’t we call a halt to it now?
S. F., Federal Republic of Germany
Your article appeared to favor animal research if it doesn’t involve intense suffering. Of what value is it when something is achieved through the suffering and death of innocent animals?
M. B., United States
Animal research is an emotion-charged issue, and our articles drew an unusually heavy response from readers. The Bible makes no blanket condemnation of using animals to benefit humans. But, understandably, many are repulsed by any sort of animal suffering, and we certainly respect their feelings in this regard.​—ED.
Crack Addiction  I had to write to let you know that your articles on crack addiction (July 22, 1990) were very informative. As a former crack addict, I was able to break free from crack only when I began to study the Bible and associate with Jehovah’s Witnesses. I used to use my rent money, car-payment money, and stolen money to get crack. I became so thin I looked like a skeleton. But with the support and guidance of Jehovah’s Witnesses, I found the cure.
C. H., United States
Movies  The article “Young People Ask . . . Does It Matter Which Movies I See?” (July 22, 1990) helped me realize the power that movies have over people. I will not see any more R-rated movies.
W. R., United States
I don’t often go to movies, so I’ve started reading books about animals, crafts, and history. There are many wonderful books that are good and educational and that do not use profanity.
L. H., United States
I really liked your article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Pick a Decent Movie?” (August 8, 1990) One thing still puzzles me. Would it be OK for a Christian to see a movie rated PG-13?
R. J., United States
In the United States, a movie rated PG-13 is open for admittance to all ages, “but parents are strongly cautioned to give special guidance for attendance by children under 13.” (“World Book Encyclopedia”) A Christian would naturally be cautious if a film carried such a rating. However, movie ratings reflect worldly standards, not Bible principles, and such standards are often inconsistent. So in lands where a movie-rating system exists, individuals must decide to what extent they will be guided by it. Youths should follow the direction of their parents. If, despite a seemingly favorable rating, a film turns out to be unwholesome, one can leave the theater or turn off one’s television set.​—ED.

