From Our Readers
Children Under Stress  Thank you so much for the series of articles “Children Under Stress​—How Can They Be Helped?” (July 22, 1993) When I read them, I cried out of both joy and pain. At about the age of four, I experienced sexual violence at the hand of my father. I grew up in constant pain and terror. I have been a Christian now for 20 years, and with Jehovah’s help​—and articles like these—​I have begun to find relief. The information also enables me to protect my daughter.
S. S., Italy
I am 17 years old and under extreme emotional stress. There is a lot of verbal abuse in my home. Even though my father has not read these articles, there is no way that every abusive parent can ignore them. I hope the articles will open the eyes of such parents.
T. B., United States
My three-year-old daughter was sexually abused. She was deeply troubled by this experience; a child is never too young to hurt. I was so angry and sad that I wanted you to write an article to help parents see how bad things can be for our little ones. Words cannot express my joy at reading these articles. Never have I read something so beautiful. It shows others that we serve a God who understands the tremendous pain some are in.
M. G., United States
Thanks especially for the article “Abusive Parents​—The Ultimate Stressors.” I came from such an upbringing, with emotional and sexual abuse. The article showed how hard this can make the rest of one’s life. It’s nice to know someone really understands.
B. S., United States
As a survivor of childhood sexual and emotional abuse, I can really identify with the damage that unwarranted childhood stress causes. Unless you have experienced it, you cannot begin to understand the devastation it wreaks on a person’s life. The self-hatred, guilt, dread, and overwhelming feelings of worthlessness are unbearable at times. It is my prayer that parents who read this information will take a good hard look at themselves and treat their children with empathy and fellow feeling.
D. I., United States
As soon as I saw the cover, I gave way to tears. My seven-year-old had been so hard to deal with, and we didn’t know what to do. We finally sent her to a hospital specializing in mental and emotional disorders. The day after she returned home, we received the issue on children under stress. We still have many unanswered questions, but through articles like these, prayer, and the support of friends, we are at least getting most of our questions answered.
D. G., United States
I am 13 years old, and two years ago I got very sick. I also had seasonal depression. I wish I’d had these articles back then. My mother took me to a special hospital for children because the doctors in our town couldn’t figure out what was wrong with me. The doctors at the hospital figured out that I have what your articles called “psychosomatic reactions.” The elders in my congregation, along with my parents, helped me to overcome my stress. I hope that your articles will help other young people to overcome their stress.
J. B., United States
I’m a youngster under stress too. I’m seven years old, and my mom and dad are split up. That’s what makes it stressful. I have stomach problems just like what you wrote about. Thank you for caring.
J. H., United States

