How the World Will Be United
EFFORTS of humans to rule themselves successfully have invariably failed. You will no doubt agree with the inspired assessment: “Man has dominated man to his injury.” (Ecclesiastes 8:9) Why have humans failed so miserably at self-rule?
The Bible gives the reason, explaining: “It does not belong to man who is walking even to direct his step.” (Jeremiah 10:23) No, it is not man’s prerogative, or right, to govern either himself or his fellow humans. It is the special right of Jehovah God, our Creator, of whom we are told: “Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Statute-giver, Jehovah is our King.”​—Isaiah 33:22.
Only when all humans accept Jehovah God as Ruler will the world be united. But will that ever happen? Long ago a prophet of God spoke of “the final part of the days,” when many peoples would begin looking to Jehovah for instruction.
A Foretold Worldwide Peace
“It must occur in the final part of the days,” the prophet Isaiah wrote, that “the house of Jehovah will become firmly established above the top of the mountains . . . and to it all the nations must stream. And many peoples will certainly go and say: ‘Come, you people, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will instruct us about his ways.’” When we read further, we see the result of looking to Jehovah for instruction. “They will have to beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears,” the prophecy continues. “Nation will not lift up sword against nation, neither will they learn war anymore.”​—Isaiah 2:2-4.
Yes, the result of heeding this divine teaching would be no more fighting, no more ethnic violence, no more war. Human rulers assumed that they could fulfill this Bible prophecy and even inscribed the last portion of it on a wall of the United Nations Plaza in New York City. Yet, war and hatred among national and ethnic groups has only increased right up to the end of 1993. So would you say God’s prophecy has failed?
No, it has not​—for people from among all the nations are right now streaming to Jehovah’s house to receive divine teaching. Indeed, what a grand testimony this summer’s “Divine Teaching” Conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses have been in fulfillment of this prophecy! The worldwide brotherhood of Jehovah’s Witnesses allow nothing​—neither race, nationality, nor ethnic background—​to cause them to hate or kill one another. They have figuratively beaten their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning shears.
‘But,’ someone may object, ‘you can’t expect everyone to heed God’s instruction to love one another.’ Although this is true, God has the power to remove all opposers of his divine will.
What God Will Do
Do you pray as Jesus taught his followers, namely: “Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven”? (Matthew 6:9, 10, King James Version) If you do, you can be confident that our loving heavenly Father will answer that prayer. How will he do that?
God has already appointed his Son, “The Prince of Peace,” as the chosen ruler of his “government,” the Kingdom for which we were taught to pray. (Isaiah 9:6, KJ) We need such a superhuman spirit ruler, for only he can rid humankind of the evil influence of Satan and his demons. Human rulers, no matter how well-meaning, cannot do so.​—1 John 3:8; Revelation 12:7-12.
Yet, what will happen to present-day governments that fail to submit to divine rulership? Another Bible prophecy that describes the Kingdom for which Jesus taught us to pray says: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin. . . . [God’s heavenly Kingdom] will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.” Thus, praying for God’s Kingdom to come means that we are praying for one worldwide government under the rule of the “Prince of Peace.”​—Daniel 2:44; Isaiah 9:6.
Then, when the human family is united in peace under God’s Kingdom, all will love one another regardless of race or ethnic background. What a glorious time that will be! (Revelation 21:3, 4) We invite you to enjoy a preview of that peaceful situation even now among Jehovah’s Witnesses and then to look forward with them to the time when the whole world will be united in peace.
[Picture on page 15]
God’s Kingdom will unite all people in peace

