From Our Readers
Down’s Syndrome  Thank you for the article “Living With Down’s Syndrome.” (August 8, 1989) We too have a handicapped member in our family, and we have seen how love has made her progress more rapid. At Christian meetings, she proudly sits there with her own Bible and Bible literature. We received much encouragement by reading about Suzy and the unfailing love of her family.
L. S. B., South Africa
Outstanding, Caring  I have just finished reading the October 8, 1989, Awake! This issue was especially outstanding. Other magazines can be very informative but often leave me feeling sad or helpless. Awake! tells of God’s purpose to remedy the problems. It is written in a very understanding, honest, straightforward but caring way. I can hardly hold back from going out immediately and offering it to the people in this community. Thank you so much!
S. D., United States
Steroids  Lately I have been thinking a lot about your article on steroids. (March 22, 1989) My stepbrother took a couple of medals at the Winter Olympics. He was not satisfied with being the best, however; he had to be better. In two years of steroid use, he increased his body weight by half again what it used to be. All those pounds were solid muscle. But he became increasingly angry and aggressive. He was going to go to Lake Placid in 1990 for a sports competition. Instead, he will be spending the winter in the cemetery. Steroids killed him.
A. N., United States
Religious History  I have just finished reading Part 12 of the series “Religion’s Future in View of Its Past.” I find these articles very interesting and informative. Please put me on your mailing list.
M. K., United States
Gossip  When I read the “Young People Ask . . .” articles on gossip (July 8 and July 22, 1989), I just started to cry because everything they said related to me. I helped spread a rumor, and it really hurt a lot of people, even me. I lost a lot of respect from people and even had rumors spread about me. The articles helped me. I just don’t know how to thank you.
J. P., United States
Love Songs  I have just read the article “Young People Ask . . . Is Love as It Is in Love Songs?” (June 22, 1989) The article was skillfully written and full of insight. I understand that all love songs are harmful to those not in a position to be married. But does this mean that married individuals should also discontinue listening to love songs?
D. K., United States
The article served, not categorically to condemn love songs, but to show that many of such songs teach an unrealistic and unwholesome view of love and marriage. However, the mere fact that a song expresses romantic sentiments does not automatically make it objectionable to Christians. Encouragement was thus given to youths to be selective in their choice of music. Married Christians should be similarly guided.​—ED.
I thought love songs really expressed how love is supposed to be shown and how it is given. This article made me finally realize that you have to work with a relationship and stay with it through the good and the bad times.
M. Z., United States

