Jeepney​—The Philippines’ People Mover
By Awake! correspondent in the Philippines
ON THE streets of Manila in the Philippines, the jeepney, with its bold colors, flying streamers, and host of other eye-catching ornaments, is a familiar sight. It is a uniquely Filipino solution to a problem that nations around the world are grappling with​—mass transportation. To anyone who has never been to the Philippines, however, even the word “jeepney” is strange. Authorities suggest that it is a combination of the words “jeep” and “jitney” (small bus). Allow us to introduce you to this fascinating vehicle.
In his book Urban Mass Transportation, George M. Smerk spotlights a common problem with mass-transport systems: “It has often been charged that mass transportation is inflexible, meaning usually that a transport line cannot be altered to meet changing needs of the population over time.” This is not true of the jeepney, however. The jeepney has shown itself flexible, economical, and easy to operate. Let’s take a ride on one and see why.
A Ride on a Jeepney
As you stand in the tropical heat along one of the main thoroughfares of Manila, you may feel overwhelmed by what seems to be a river of jeepneys flowing noisily in both directions. Similar to a military-style jeep, only much elongated to accommodate more passengers, each one sports rainbow colors, with pictures, designs, and slogans painted on all sides. Mud flaps hanging off the back and sides may flaunt slogans such as “Master Mariner” or “Jeepney King.”
Most jeepneys are also bedecked with other glittering paraphernalia​—pinwheels, chrome-plated horses, streamers, and long whip antennas (even though the jeep may have no radio)—​all designed to attract riders. You may see a jeepney with 12, 14, or even more mirrors on its hood (also for no apparent practical purpose) and may wonder if the driver can see where he is going through that maze of ornamentation. But he seems to manage.
How do you know which jeepney will take you to your destination? On the front and sides, they all carry signboards showing their routes. But how do you get one of those speeding jeepneys to stop for you? That is not difficult. If you look the least bit interested in riding his jeepney, the average driver is more than happy to stop and pick you up. You may signal him with your hand. Or he may attract your attention by beeping his horn at you, not just a honk-honk horn but one that plays a catchy musical tune.
Now let’s get on the jeepney. As you enter from the rear, you notice that there is one padded bench on either side of the jeep. The passengers sit close together, facing one another across the small center aisle, their knees almost touching. You stoop to get on (the roof is very low), maneuver yourself to a vacant spot, and ease into it. As people with loads get on, the narrow aisle in front of you may fill up with boxes, chickens, children, or sacks of vegetables. A long mirror over the windshield allows the driver to watch traffic behind him and also to see who is getting on or off, as well as who has or has not yet paid his fare.
How much is your fare? Well, we said it was cheap. You can ride up to two and a half miles [4 km] in Manila for only 75 centavos (4¢, U.S.). The fare gradually increases for longer rides. By prominently displaying a sign “God Knows Judas Not Pay,” many drivers encourage passengers to pay.a Mounted on or near the mirror may also be the driver’s personal altar and/​or a pinup girl.
Now you can sit back and enjoy your ride, all the while keeping an eye on where you are so that you can tell the driver when you want to get off. You may be surprised at how rapidly the vehicle moves along as the driver zigzags through the thick traffic, seemingly oblivious to the fact that he just missed another jeepney by only a few inches.
Where Did the Jeepney Come From?
Saul Lockhart answers this in The Complete Guide to the Philippines: “The jeepney owes its birth to surplus jeeps, left over from the World War II, which were converted into passenger carrying vehicles.” The first jeeps were quite small. Since then, jeepneys have been made longer and with greater capacity​—up to 17 passengers now.
Mauricio De Guia began driving jeepneys in 1948. But in 1979 he changed his schedule to work only half a day. In this way he supported the seven in his household and also spent afternoons and Sundays in work as a full-time minister. Many other drivers hang pictures of rock or movie stars in their jeepneys, but Mauricio says: “I pasted Bible texts to the ceiling inside my jeepney that the passengers can read.”
How did the passengers react? He says: “Some asked what my religion is. Because of this I was able to preach to people, and they benefited. Many passengers in my jeep were happy about what they read, and they said, ‘Your jeepney is really nice. It would be good if all jeepneys were like this. Instead of having any silly old thing pasted up, they would have the words of God there to have something to think about.’”
Can you see what makes the jeepney an efficient and practical system for moving people? Some, though, disagree, blaming the jeepney for causing unnecessary congestion and pollution, especially in Manila. Some would even like to see it replaced by other forms of public transportation. Thus, an article appeared in Manila’s Bulletin Today entitled: “Jeep phaseout under study.” However, it is unlikely that such a thing will happen in the near future. Millions of people rely on the jeepney not only for their daily transportation but also for their livelihood.
[Footnotes]
This is an English/​Tagalog play on words. In the local language, Tagalog, “Judas” is pronounced much as the English words “who does.”
[Picture Credit Line on page 26]
Courtesy of Sarao Motors, Inc.

