VOL. XXVI. NOVEMBER 1, 1905. No. 21 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Watch Tower Views of Socialism 323 

A Great Conference for Religious Co-operation. 323 

The Pope on the Bible 323 

High Churchmen Favor "Higher Criticism" 324 

Anent the "Withdrawal Letters" 324 

The Editor's Western Tour 325 

The Kingston, Jamaica, Convention 326 

Bible Study for November 327 

The Remedy Co-Extensive with the Curse 327 

His Veiled Angels Guard Thee (Poem) 328 

From Glory to Glory 328 

Jews Providentially Delivered 330 

Gathering and Winnowing 333 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



A collection of sixty hymns, with music, for social and 
testimony meetings, and semi-private gatherings. Price, 5c 
each, postpaid. English and German editions. 



R3652 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
WATCH TOWER VIEWS OF SOCIALISM. 



SOME of the dear friends have quite mistaken our 

recent publication of items on the progress of 

Socialism. In the volumes of the MILLENNIAL 

DAWN series (especially in VOL. IV) we have endeavored 

to show that we have great sympathy with every movement 

designed to benefit mankind— including Socialism— but 

that from the Bible view-point the hope of the world lies in 

none of these human devices, but only in the second coming 

of Christ and in the Kingdom of the heavens then to 

be established. We do point out, however, that God purposes 



to allow mankind to try various projects for its own 

relief, only to learn their futility, and that the end of all 

these failures will be discouragement and anarchy; but 

that the Lord's people, better informed than others 

through the Scriptures, will not only not be led to discouragement 

and anarchy, but can by faith rejoice in the 

troubles, knowing of the glorious outcome of peace and 

blessing these will usher in— the Millennium. 

THE FRENCH DISESTABLISHMENT. 



The Church and its supreme Pontiff are blamed by 
Emile Combes, ex-Premier of France, for the disruption of 
the Concordat. As Mr. Combes was the leading spirit in 
the severance of this bond between Church and State, his 
utterance, which appears in the Deutsche Revue (Stuttgart), 
is probably the most authoritative that has been given out 
on the Government's side of the dispute. He says in a 
recent article:— 

"It is time that in France an administrative organization 
of clergy be suppressed, which transforms the pulpit 
into a political tribune, where with unrestrained liberty 
all the political and social reforms, all the measures taken 
in the interests of liberty and progress are controverted 
and pointed out to the faithful as so many crimes against 
religion. Separated from the State the Church can utter 
what opinions it likes about statesmen and their acts, but 
this can not be permitted in a Church allied to the State 
by a treaty which accords to ecclesiastics a legally recognized 
authority and all the privileges of State 
functionaries." 

A GREAT CONFERENCE FOR RELIGIOUS CO-OPERATION. 



The Literary Digest says:— 

More than seventeen million church members, belonging 
to twenty-six different communions, we are told, 
will be represented at the great gathering in New York 
city, beginning November 15, to discuss and plan for 
church federation. Cooperation in service is said to be 
the goal the conference will have in view, and no organic 
union of denominations will be attempted. The idea of 
federation, represented by this conference, believes the 
Chicago Tribune is practicable "because it makes possible 
union without fusion" and the Rochester Democrat and 
Chronicle surmises that its resulting organization "may become 
one of the great moral social and religious factors of 
the coming age." The coming conference has been planned 
and promoted by the National Federation of Churches 
and Christian Organizations, which came into being in 
1900. 

Dr. F. M. North, writing of the approaching Inter-church 



Conference on Federation, says:— 

"Should the present promise of its import be realized, 
there should be an influence in its utterance and its action 
so powerful as to create a new epoch in the progress of 
Christ's Kingdom. ...It is, however, in the Evangelical 
Alliance of the United States of America that the historian 
will find the organized influence which has most 
strongly emphasized the principles underlying federation." 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., chap. 6. 

THE POPE ON THE BIBLE. 



It betokens a marked change in the attitude of the 
Church of Rome toward the Bible for the laity, when 
the Pope gives his blessing to an association engaged in 
sending it forth in the language of the people. The 
St. Jerome Association is engaged in this for Italy, and 
when requested to bestow his blessing on the new work 
and the spread of the Gospel, the Pope answered:— 

"Gladly do I give my blessing, and that with both 
hands and with full heart, for I do not doubt that this 

R3652 : page 324 

work will produce the richest fruit and is already blessed 
by God. The more we read the Gospel the stronger 
our faith becomes. The Gospels are writings that are 
valuable for everybody and under all circumstances. 
I have lived among the common people and know what 
they want and what pleases them. Tell them the simplest 
Bible stories and you will have attentive listeners 
and effect blessed results. 

"Your purpose is to spread the Gospels. You are 
doing a noble work. Some people think that the peasants, 
with their plain, everyday way of thinking, would 
not profit by the reading of the Scriptures. This is 
incorrect. The average peasant is a shrewder thinker 
than we may suspect, and knows how to draw the correct 
lessons from the Scriptures, often even better than 
many of the preachers. But it is not only the common 
people and the lower classes who will profit by the reading 
of the Scriptures. 

"No matter how many prayer books and books of 
devotion there may be for the priests, none is better 
than the Gospels. This is an unsurpassed book of devotion, 
the true bread of life. I grant an especial apostolic 
blessing on all those who preach the Gospel, who 
hear and read it, whether on a Sunday or a week day. 
I bestow my blessing on all members of the St. Jerome 
Society and all who cooperate in the sacred work of 
spreading the Gospel."— Christian Intelligencer. 

HIGH ENGLISH CHURCHMEN FAVOR HIGHER CRITICISM. 



London.— A committee of 101 clergymen sent out 
a request some time ago for petitions on the subject of 
Biblical criticism, or the so-called "higher criticism." 
Over 1700 clergymen of the Church of England having 
signed the declaration, the widespread and far-reaching 
character of the petition has aroused comment and 
caused criticism. That 1700 clergymen should have 
signed a document of that kind is regarded as an amazing 
thing. The document itself calls attention to the 
momentous intellectual character of "higher criticism" 
or Biblical criticism.— Globe-Democrat. 

FIFTEEN PER CENT. OF NEBRASKA CHURCHES ARE 
PASTORLESS. 



Lincoln, Neb.— Fifteen per cent, of the Protestant 
churches of Nebraska are without pastors, and it is impossible 
to secure ministers to fill the vacant pulpits. 
According to reports received at the headquarters of the 
Congregational, Methodist and Lutheran churches here 
scarcely a week passes but some minister breaks away 
from the calling to engage in another line of work. The 
prosperity of the farming industry has called away the 
greater number, but many have also gone into business 
and other professions. 

DISPROOFS OF THE EVOLUTION THEORY. 



"To the student of architecture it may be surprising 
to learn that the arch, until recently supposed to 
have been unknown to the ancients, was frequently employed 
by the pre-Babylonians. Such an arch, in a poor 
state of preservation, was, a few years ago, discovered 
in the lowest stratum, beneath the Babylonian city of 
Nippur. More recently an arched drain was found beneath 
the old city of Fara, which the Germans have 
excavated in Central Babylonia. The city, although 
one of the earliest known, was built upon an earlier 
ruin, and provided with an arched drain constructed of 
small plano-convex bricks. It measures about one meter 
in height and has an equal width. 

"While delving among the ruined cities of the 
world, we are thus finding that at the time when we 
supposed that man was primitive and savage, he provided 
his home and city with 'improvements' which we 
are inclined to call modern, but which we are only reinventing. 
—Prof. E. J. Banks. 

UNTIL HE COME! 



When we celebrate the Lord's Memorial supper we 
show forth his death, until he come— until at his coming 
he changes, glorifies us, setting us up as his Kingdom. 
-1 Cor. 11:26. 

We are using our talents, until he come. 
-Luke 19:13. 

We are fighting the good fight of faith, until he 
come.— 1 Tim. 6:12-14. 

We are enduring tribulation, until he come.— 
2 Thess. 1:7. 

We are to be patient until he come.— James 5:8. 

We wait for the crown of righteousness, until he 
come.— 2 Tim. 4:8. 

We wait for the crown of glory, until he come.— 
1 Pet. 5:4. 

We wait for re-union with departed friends, until 
he come.— 1 Thess. 4:13-18. 

We wait for Satan to be bound until he come. 
-Rev. 20:3. 



Until he come, then, does not point to a special 
moment, hour or day, but to the period of his presence 
(parousia), during which his "harvest" work will gather 
and glorify his saints and establish his promised 
Kingdom. 



R3653 : page 324 

ANENT THE WITHDRAWAL LETTERS. 

WE urge none to withdraw from "Babylon." We 

point out to the truth-hungry the "meat in due 

season," and encourage them to eat thereof freely, 

heartily, and to grow spiritually strong in the Lord. As 

each develops in knowledge and in grace it must be by 

confessing with his mouth as well as by his conduct his 

relationship to the Head and to all whom He recognizes as 

his "members." He cannot suppress the Truth and continue 

his spiritual progress; and to confess it will bring 

opposition from the Adversary and from all in darkness 

under his blinding influences— social, financial and Babylonish. 

It is only a question of time when such will realize 

that loyalty to God, to His Truth and to the brethren 

will call him out of Babylon and into fuller fellowship with 

the Lord and all the brethren and all the Truth.— 

Rev. 18:4. 

When such are ready to act they need assistance, advice. 
They are liable to one of two extremes, according 

R3653 : page 325 



to their natural temperament: either (1) with too much 
combativeness they are liable to act and speak too harshly 
of those who are still asleep, as they once were, or (2) 
with too little positiveness they are likely to miss a glorious 
opportunity for declaring meekly but firmly for the 
Lord and his Word. Thereby they not only lose a blessed 
reward at the time, but they unwittingly place in the hands 
of the Adversary a lash for their future chastisement, a 
cord for the restraint of their influence. 

Alas! how often we witness this last experience. 
Some dear brother or sister purposes a quiet withdrawal 
from one of the sects, and sends his letter of withdrawal to 
the pastor or other prominent official. The matter is kept 
quiet, his name remains on the rolls, and his associates consider 
his absence an evidence of unfaithfulness to his covenants. 
Gradually they come to regard him as a backslider 
and his influence is forever damaged. Worse than 
this: sometimes the pastor or official, seeking to serve his 
sect, will falsely and maliciously and slanderously circulate 
rumors that he has become an infidel, or that he is mentally 
unbalanced. This is done in order to offset the influence 
of the Truth upon other members of the sect, which 
they feel must be upheld at any cost. 

THE PROPER COURSE FOR ALL. 

To meet these conditions we have prepared a "Withdrawal 
Letter" suitable to all cases, which we advise should 
be sent to every member of the congregation withdrawn 
from. You did not join the minister, but the congregation, 
and you should address to the latter your withdrawal. 
We print these "Withdrawal Letters" in large quantities 
and supply them with tracts and envelopes free. You 
merely need to sign and date them, and put on postage and 
mail them. 

These letters are carefully and moderately worded so 
as to prevent your friends in "Babylon" from misunderstanding 
the step you are taking, and extends to them your 
Christian greetings and a helping hand out of a darkness, 
which to some extent they realize, into God's marvelous 
light, which, if true disciples, they are longing and seeking 
for. It is a most kind and effective way of giving 
your witness for the Truth. And the sooner done the better, 
though better late than never. 

Order a sample of these letters, and if you decide to 
use it order the quantity necessary for the congregation 
and get out your testimony, your witness for the Truth, as 
speedily as possible. We now have a fresh supply. 



R3653 : page 325 

THE EDITOR'S WESTERN TOUR. 



--(CONCLUDED FROM LAST ISSUE.)- 

AT SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS. 

ALTHOUGH our train was considerably late, about 

a dozen of the friends of the Truth awaited 

us at the depot with greetings in the Lord. 

After a bountiful supper and a good night's rest we enjoyed 

a day of glorious fellowship in spiritual things. 

In the morning a service of praise and testimony was 

followed by a discourse from the Chart of the Ages by 

Brother MacMillan. In the afternoon about 160 were 

present— interested ones from the city and surroundings, 

with their friends. The discourse was, we trust, 

encouraging and helpful for those already acquainted 

with Present Truth. Following it seven were baptized 

in symbol of their consecration unto death with Christ. 

The evening service for the public was attended by 
about 600, who gave closest attention to our discourse 
on "The Oath-bound Covenant." We considered it an 
excellent hearing, considering that it was a Saturday 
night— the busiest of the week. The dear friends of 
the cause brimmed over with the joy of the Lord and 
shook our hand time and again, some telling that they 
had come over ten, others over twenty, others fifty, and 
others over a hundred miles to enjoy the blessed associations 
of those few hours. Many, with tears, told how 
they longed for the "General Assembly of the Church of 
the First-born." We encouraged them to wait patiently 
for the Lord's time, meantime remembering that all 
the trials of faith and patient endurance and brotherly 
kindness and, in general, of our love for the Lord and 
for all— even our enemies— are necessary for us, that we 
may be approved and make our calling and election sure. 

AT HOUSTON, TEXAS. 

Here the experiences were almost an exact duplication 
of those at San Antonio, except that the interested 
numbered 250 to 300 at the morning and evening sessions, 
while the service for the public brought out 750. 
The difference in numbers was due in part, no doubt, 
to the fact that these sessions were on Sunday. The 
afternoon topic was "To Hell and Back. Who are 
there? Hope for many of them." The close attention 
given and the subsequent greetings from strangers as 
well as friends, encourage us to hope that a work was 
accomplished in some hearts at least, and that some 
heads were assisted to clearer views of the divine character 
and plan. 

GALVESTON'S ONE DAY. 

We had but one session here. We arrived too late 
for a morning meeting and left too early for an evening 
one. About seventy-five of the interested (fifty whites 



and twenty-five blacks) assembled for an afternoon session 
which lasted two hours. We received the closest 
attention while we discussed "The Very Elect," and 
how we must make our calling and election sure by 
faithfulness to our covenant. We recalled the Lord's 
words, "Gather my saints together unto me, they that 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." "They 
shall be mine in that day when I make up my jewels." 
The colored friends gave every evidence of being as 
deeply interested and as fully consecrated as their white 
brethren and sisters— which is saying a great deal for 
them. 

R3653 : page 326 

DALLAS, TEXAS, OUR NEXT STOP. 

The Dallas friends had arranged for excursion rates 
on the railroad, and nearly a hundred came from nearby 
points. The morning rally numbered 150. The afternoon 
session for the interested showed about 250. 
The evening session for the public was attended by 550. 
Six symbolized their consecration by water baptism. 
The attendance and interest were excellent for a week-day. 
Indeed all of our experiences in Texas, as well 
as along the entire route, tended to show that the religiously 
inclined public is becoming more and more 
awake along the lines of Present Truth. And this is just 
what we should expect at this the zenith of the "harvest" 
time. 

The Dallas meetings were very enjoyable to us and 
we trust also to all in attendance. Our afternoon topic 
was "Consecration unto death" and the glorious rewards 
—present and future. The topic for the public 
was, "To Hell and Back." 

AT SHERMAN, TEXAS. 

Our last appointment of the trip was at Sherman, 
where we had time for a morning session only. About 100 
were present, of whom forty were previously interested. 
During an hour and a half we discoursed to them of 
the great "Oath-bound Covenant," showing its import 
to the Church and also to the world. Our words received 
the closest of attention from thoughtful-looking 
people, five of whom, we were advised, were preachers 
of various denominations. A three hours' ride brought 
us back to Dallas for supper and for our night train 
homeward. 

HOME AGAIN AT ALLEGHENY. 

A ride of two days and two nights brought us to 
Allegheny and the Bible House, as pleased to be back 
to the labors of the office as we were pleased just a 
month before to depart to visit and address the far 



distant brethren. Our journey covered 8,650 miles 
and included thirty-three addresses of an average of 
an hour and a half each, besides numerous semi-private 
talks. We thanked God for the privileges enjoyed, 
and felt refreshed in spirit, though weary in flesh by 
reason of the rapid going necessary in the interest of 
the work demanding our speedy return. 

We were met by a reception committee at the depot 
and on arrival at the Bible House found the office 
force (30) gathered to greet us and welcome us back 
with outstretched hands and kindly words and with a 
hymn and prayer of thanksgiving for our home-coming. 
In the evening (Saturday) about two hundred of the 

R3654 : page 326 

Allegheny congregation met us in the Chapel and extended 

their welcome similarly through a chairman and 

by praise and prayer. We thanked these dear ones, as 

well as the morning gathering, for their many manifestations 

of love, and assured them that, although we had 

met many dear ones residing afar off, and although we 

love all and enjoyed the fellowship of all, yet none could 

be more precious to our heart than the tried and true 

of the home congregation. 

Then we detailed some of the incidents of our tour 
and assured the friends that we brought love and best 
wishes and heart greetings to them from all along the 
route. We concluded with a little dissertation on Christian 
love— its breadth and depth— chiefly toward God 
and the brethren who have his heart-likeness, but also 
sympathetically toward all men, yea, even toward our 
enemies who despitefully misrepresent us and our endeavors, 
even as they have long misrepresented the 
Father and his plan. 



R3654 : page 326 

THE KINGSTON, JAMAICA, CONVENTION. 

THE second annual "Convention of Believers in the 
Atonement through the death of the Man Christ 
Jesus, a ransom for all, and in his Millennial 
Kingdom," will long be remembered by the Jamaica 
brethren who assembled in Kingston from various parts 
of the Island to receive that blessed refreshment which 
accompanies the communion of saints. 

Theatre Royal was the scene of such a "holy convocation" 
as it had never before witnessed, while the 
joys of the brethren were two-fold increased as we remembered 
daily that our loved ones in Portland were 
enjoying a similar blessing at the same time; and some 
one even suggested that perhaps our brethren in the 
Most Holy were holding a sympathetic convention during 



those very hours. Thrilling thought! 

A rich program awaited the longing appetites of 
those who came, and none were turned away empty. 
Two subjects were calculated to draw the public, and 
they did not fail. About 400 were present on Friday 
night, Sept. 8th, to hear "Which is the True Church?" 
and more than 600 on Sunday night to listen to a discourse 
on "The Day of Judgment." 

The closing session was a question meeting which 
became extremely interesting because of the presence of 
a reverend opposer of the Truth, whose violent speeches 
and scurrilous writings were well known throughout the 
Island. Because of his previous threat we were at first 
fearful that the assistance of the police authorities would 
have been needed, but the Sword of the Lord and of 
Gideon was sufficient, and the gentleman who wrote 
"Millennial Dawnism Condemned" has been trying ever 
since to re-gild his tinsel by nightly harangues at the 
public square in the presence of the unintelligent populace. 
We are glad to believe that his questions were 
providentially permitted for the enlightenment of our 
visitors, many of whom, as a result, have become friends 
to the cause of Truth. 

Reported by the Society's representative, 
BROTHER BROWNE. 



R3654 : page 327 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR NOVEMBER. 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

31. How does brotherly kindness apply "the Golden 
Rule"? F.376, par. 1,2; F.406, par. 1, to 409; Z/00-218 
(2nd col. par. 1 to 4) and 219 (2nd col. par. 

1,2). 

32. How should brotherly love exercise itself toward 
the special servants of the Church? Z. '00-80 

(2nd col. last par.); Z/05-173 (1st col. par. 2,3,4); 
Z.'96-305,306. 

33. How should we exercise brotherly love toward our 
brethren still "in Babylon"? Z/05-116 (2nd 

col. par. 3,4,5); Z/05-164 (2nd col. par. 4 to 7); F.150, 
par. 4 to 7); F.150, par. 2. 

34. How should brotherly kindness consider "social obligations"? 
F.588 to 590. 

35. What course will brotherly love dictate in the matter 
of "borrowing and lending"? Rom. 13:8; F.564, 

par. 1,2; F.569, par. 1,2; Luke 6:35; F.567, 
par. 2; F.568, par. 1,2. 

36. How should brotherly love regard visiting, "borrowing 



a neighbor's time"? F.570, par. 1, to 572. 

37. What is the relation between brotherly love and 
communism? D.474 to 481. 

38. Do those who have reached "the mark" still have 
trials along the line of brotherly love? F.190, 

par. 1,2. 

39. Why is brotherly love "one of the final and most 
searching tests" of the brethren and how may we 
prepare to meet it? 1 Pet. 3:8; Z/99-88 (1st 

col. par. 3,4; 2nd col. par. 1,2); Z/98-201 (1st 
col. par. 1). 

40. What should be "the main-spring back of brotherly 
kindness"? 1 Jno. 4:7,8; F.137, par. 1. 



R3654 : page 327 

THE REMEDY CO-EXTENSIVE WITH THE CURSE. 

-ROM. 5:12-21.- 

IN READING this scripture, some who are unable 
to follow the Apostle's argument have become 
somewhat confused and therefore request 
assistance. 

The difficulty with such probably arises from the 
fact that they have failed to notice that verses 13-17 
are parenthetic, and that the main line of the Apostle's 
argument passes from verse 12 to verse 18, irrespective 
of the parenthesis, which is merely incidental, being introduced 
to offset a misapprehension on the part of the 
Jews to the effect that their Law Covenant conflicted 
with the New Covenant in Christ, of which Paul was a 
minister. It was difficult for the Jews to accept the fact 
that under the New Covenant there was no difference 
made between Jew and Gentile, but that "the same 
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him."— 
Rom. 10:12. 

In verses 12,18-21, the Apostle is showing that by 
one man sin entered into the world, and death as the 
penalty for sin; and that this sentence of death passed 
upon all men because all had sinned— not all individually, 
but as represented in Adam, in whose loins we all 
were. "Therefore," he adds, verse 18, "as by the offense 
of one [Adam] sentence came upon all men to condemnation; 
even so [by the same law of heredity] by the 
righteousness of one [of the one who gave his life a ransom] 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life: for as by one man's disobedience many were made 
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many [all of the 
race who will accept it] be made righteous." In other 
words, Adam, the head or progenitor of the entire human 
race, could only bequeath to his posterity the remainder 
of the ever-declining inheritance which he himself 
possessed, viz., a spark of life under condemnation 



to death; but our Lord Jesus, by the payment of the 
penalty upon Adam, thereby gained the legal right to 
restore him to life, and in so doing gained the right also 
to restore all his posterity. And when the "appointed 
time" for thus restoring life to all the race has come, he 
instead of Adam, will be the father, life-giver, or head 
of the new race, as it is written, "He shall be called... 
the everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) And the birthright 
of the race under this head, Christ, unlike that under 
the first head, Adam, will be life instead of death. And 
that birthright can never be taken away unless forfeited 
by individual wilful transgression against the known 
righteous law of God, with full ability to keep it. 

Thus we see that the gist of the Apostle's argument 
is to prove that by the law of legal heredity the race 
which, by the working of this law, inherited death from 
its first head, Adam, will, by the same law inherit life 
from its second head or re-generator, Christ, and that the 
remedy is co-extensive with the curse. This being the 
substance of his argument, it is, of course, presumable 
that his parenthetic remarks are not in opposition to, 
but in harmony with it. Thus we read- 
Verse 13— "For until [previous to] the law [of 
Moses and the Law Covenant with Israel] sin was in the 
world; but sin is not imputed when there is no law." 
Consequently there must have been a law, and a covenant 
based upon that law, previous to the law of 
Moses. What law was that? It was the Law of God 
originally inscribed, not upon tables of stone, but upon 
the heart of the first perfect man, and which was gradually 
more or less effaced in his posterity, because they 
did not like to retain a knowledge of it. (Rom. 1:28.) 
That law, whether ignored or recognized, has always 
been in the world, and sin against that law has always 
been imputed to men. 

Verse 14. "Nevertheless [although the Mosaic law 
had not yet come, to revive in the Jews the knowledge 
of God], death reigned from Adam to Moses [just the 
same], even over them that had not sinned after the 
similitude of Adam's transgression [i.e., wilfully; for it 
reigned over infants as well as over those capable of 
personal sin], who is the figure [type] of him that was to 
come [of Christ, the second head of the race]." Thus 
it is manifest that all mankind were born under the 
original law, the authority of which was never annulled, 
and under which all were condemned representatively 
in Adam, the first head of the race, but who, 
thank God, in this office of headship was a type of a 

R3655 : page 328 

second head, through which our deliverance should come. 

Verse 15. "But not as the offense, so also is the 
free gift. [The results of the offense and the free gift are 
entirely different.] For if through the offense of one 
[Adam, the] many be dead [under the condemnation to 



death], much more the grace [favor] of God, and the 
gift [of life] by grace [by the divine favor], hath abounded 
unto many." From the one head we inherit death: from 
the other, the re-generator, we shall inherit life. 

Verse 16. "And not as it was by one that sinned, 
so is the gift: for the sentence was by one [offense] to 
condemnation, but the free gift is [the forgiveness] of 
many offenses unto justification." Note the contrast of 
the one and the many here, the object of which is to increase 
our estimation of the value of the free gift. 

Verse 17. "For if by one man's offense death 
reigned by [that] one [Adam], much more they which 
receive abundance of grace [of divine favor] and of the 
gift of [imputed] righteousness [the righteousness of 
Christ imputed to us by faith] shall reign in life by one, 
Jesus Christ [who has not only purchased us and covered 
us with the robe of his own imputed righteousness, but 
who will also completely eliminate sin from our nature 
so that men shall have an actual righteousness of their 
own, entitling them to reign in life as kings of the earthly 
dominion which God at first gave to Adam]." 

Thus by these parenthetic remarks, which are seen 
to be in perfect harmony with the main argument, the 
Jews were shown that their Law Covenant did not in 
the least interfere with the original sentence to death 
of the entire race (all in Adam), nor with the consequent 
gracious provision of life for all mankind, through Christ, 
and not for the Jews alone. 

Verse 20. After clearly announcing that the 
remedy for sin was co-extensive with the penalty (verses 18,19), 
the Apostle— reading the inquiry in the Jewish 
mind as to the object of the Mosaic law, if it were not 
intended to give life— further adds, "Moreover the law 
[the Mosaic law] entered that the offense might abound. 
[It brought with it a clearer knowledge of the will of 
God, and therefore an increased sense of sin, and an increased 
responsibility which made transgressions even 
more blameworthy. But what of it? Did God mean 
only to afflict Israel more heavily than the rest of the 
world? By no means.] But where sin abounded [where 
the clearer knowledge of the Law of God was given, 
which enabled them also the more fully to see their 
short-comings and brought upon them the greater responsibility], 
grace did much more abound [Israel had 
many special favors, as well as chastisements, from 
God]: that as sin hath reigned unto death [both in Israel 
and in the world], even so [both in Israel and in the 
world] might grace reign through righteousness unto 
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord." 



HIS VEILED ANGELS GUARD THEE. 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear 
him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. "He shall give his 



angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways."— 
Psa. 91:11. "Are they not all ministering spirits sent 

forth to minister unto them that shall 

be heirs of salvation?"— Heb. 1:14. 

Often when thou'rt faint and weary in the struggle and the 

strife, 
And thy heart nigh sinks within thee, 'neath the strain and 

stress of life: 
When thou'rt tempted, tried and fearful, and thou can'st 

not see the way, 
And each night looms black with shadows from thy sorrows 

in the day; 
I would ask thee still to trust Him, He who sees all in the 

light, 
For he guards thee by his angels, though they're veiled 

from thy sight, 
Yea, he guards thee by his angels though they're veiled 

from thy sight. 

Oh, be watchful, oh, be sober, for the Adversary tries, 
To allure us to destruction by his subtly fashioned lies. 
He would sift us, he would tempt us, he would claim us for 

his prey, 
And his legions ever watch us as we tread the Narrow Way: 
But we know of his devices, and we trust Jehovah's Might, 
For he guards us by his angels, though they're veiled from 

our sight, 
Yea, he guards us by his angels though they're veiled from 

our sight. 

There is One who knows thy weakness, and thy failings, 

and thy tears, 
Thy burdens and thy sorrows, and thy tremblings and thy 

fears, 
And thy heart-cries always reach him, and are answered 

in his way, 
Though thou can'st not see his workings as they shape thy 

path each day. 
Sad disaster had o'erwhelmed thee had he not put forth 

his might, 
Through his angels that surround thee, but are veiled from 

thy sight, 
Guardian angels that surround thee, but are veiled from thy 

sight. 

Ah, believe me, when the Day breaks, and we know as we 

are known, 
In the sunlight of the glory that surrounds our Father's 

Throne, 
He will tell us how he led us: we shall see the pathway clear, 
The way we trod that led to God through failing, fault and 

fear. 
And we'll see those guardian angels who were veiled from 

our sight, 
We shall understand the workings of the Power put forth 



in might: 
Yea, and with those guardian angels who were veiled from 

our sight, 
We shall see our Saviour, and our God, in Heaven's Eternal 

Light. —Sidney Smith. 



R3655 : page 328 

FROM GLORY TO GLORY. 

"But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the 
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image 

from glory to glory, even as by the 

spirit of the Lord."— 2 Cor. 3:18. 

A FULL transformation into a likeness of character 
to our heavenly Father should be the 
constant effort of every true child of God. It 
is not enough that we gain a knowledge of his plan and 
a pleasurable realization of his mercy and grace toward 
our unworthy race, and that we joyfully tell the good 
news to others; and it is not enough that we exert ourselves 
with uncommon zeal to bless others with those 

R3655 : page 329 

good tidings of great joy for all people; for we may do 
all of these things and more, and yet, if we do not let 
our Heavenly Father's goodness and grace have its 
due effect upon our own hearts, our knowledge, and even 
our good works, will profit us but little. 

Our main object, therefore, in studying God's Word 
and his character as therein revealed, should always be 
to bring our own hearts and minds into closer sympathy 
and likeness and co-operation with his. As the Apostle 
says (1 Thes. 4:3), "This is the will of God, even your 
sanctification"— our full setting apart, or consecration 
of mind and heart entirely to the Lord, that he may 
complete the good work of transforming us into his own 
glorious likeness, by the operations of his Spirit through 
his Word, and thus fit us for the enjoyment of his abounding 
grace in the ages to come. 

In the above words of the Apostle we notice particularly 
that the statement is made of all the Church— 
we all are being changed from glory to glory. And the 
inference is consequently a strong one, that those who 
are not being so changed are not of the class addressed. 
This is a solemn thought, and one that claims the most 
careful consideration of all the consecrated. The question 

R3656 : page 329 

with us is not, Have we made a full consecration 

of ourselves to the Lord? but, having made such consecration, 



are we, in accordance with that consecration, 
fully submitting ourselves to the transforming influences 
of the Spirit of God to be changed daily more and more 
fully to the glorious likeness of our God? 

Like the Apostle, then, addressing all the consecrated 
and faithful, we also of today may say, We all 
are being changed from glory to glory under the molding, 
fashioning influences of the Spirit of God. We can see it 
in each other, thank God! and we glory in it. Yesterday 
the mallet of divine providence struck a blow upon 
that member of the body of Christ, and an unsightly 
excrescence of pride fell off, and he looks so much more 
beautiful today, because he did not resist the blow, but 
gracefully submitted to it. The day before, we saw 
another under the wearing, painful, polishing process, 
to which he patiently submitted, and oh, how he shines 
today! And from day to day we see each other studiously 
contemplating the divine pattern and striving to copy 
it; and how we can note the softening, refining and 
beautifying effect upon all such! So the Spirit of God 
is at work upon all who fully submit themselves to his 
will. 

But while the mallet and chisel and the polishing 
sand of divine providence do a very necessary part of 
the transforming work, by way of relieving us of many 
of the old and stubborn infirmities of the flesh, which 
cannot be so promptly and so fully eradicated by the 
gentler influences of the Spirit, the Apostle points us to 
the specially appointed means for our transformation 
in the careful and constant contemplation of the glory 
of God as revealed in his Word, and also in his blessed 
Ambassador, Jesus Christ, saying, "We all, with open 
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same image from glory to glory." 

"With open face" would signify without any intervening 
vail of prejudice or fear or superstition, but 
with simplicity of heart and mind. So we behold the 
glory (the glorious character) of the Lord— not with 
actual vision, but as in a glass, as reflected in the mirror 
of his Word and as exemplified also in his living Word, 
Jesus Christ. And to aid us in this study we are promised 
the blessed influences of the Spirit of the Lord, who 
will guide us into all truth and show us things to come. 

As we look into the mirror what a glorious vision 
we have of the divine justice, which we promptly recognize 
as the very foundation of God's throne (Psa. 97:2), 
as well as the foundation of all our present and future 
security. If we could not recognize the justice of God 
we could have no assurance that his gracious promises 
would ever be fulfilled; for we would say, Perhaps he 
will change his mind. But, on the contrary, we can say, 
He changeth not, and whatsoever he saith shall surely 
come to pass. See with what inflexible justice the 
sentence upon our sinful race has been executed! Generation 
after generation, for over sixty centuries, has 
witnessed it; and no power in heaven or earth could 



revoke that sentence until the claims of justice had 
been fully met by the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Justice, 
says the Word of God, must be maintained inviolate at 
any cost. And herein we read not only our rightful 
condemnation as a race of sinners, but also our final, 
complete and glorious deliverance, because "God is 
just to forgive us our sins" (1 John 1:9), since the precious 
blood of Christ redeemed us from the curse of death. 

And while we thus read justice in the character of 
God, and mark with what scrupulous care he regards 
and respects this principle in all his dealings with his 
creatures, we see how he would have us respect the same 
principle in all our dealings. Thus we are led to consider 
what is the exact line of justice in this and that and 
the other transaction; and to remember also that this 
must be the underlying principle in all our conduct: 
or, in other words, that we must be just before we can 
be generous. This principle should, therefore, be very 
marked in the character of every Christian. 

Next we mark the love and mercy of God. The 
death sentence upon our fallen race was a most merciful 
sentence. It was equivalent to saying: See, I have of 
my own free favor granted you life and all its blessings 
to be enjoyed forever on condition of its proper use; 
but now, since you have abused my favor, I take it 
away and you shall return to the dust from whence you 
came. 

True, in the process of dying and of bringing forth 
a dying race to share the penalty, the mercy of God is 
not so manifest to the unthinking; but those who see 
the plan of God, discover in all this, not the decree of a 
merciless tyrant, but a merciful wisdom, but faintly 
disclosed in the promise that the seed of the woman 
shall in due time crush evil effectually— bruise the serpent's 
head— and deliver the entire race once generated 
in sin, by afterward regenerating all who will to life and 
all its blessed privileges. And in this mercy, in all its 
multiplied forms, we see the verification of the statement 
that "God is love." Thus we learn to be loving 
and merciful and kind both to the thankful and also to 
the unthankful. 

We mark also our Heavenly Father's bountiful 
providence and his tender care for all his creatures; for 
even the sparrows are clothed and fed, and the unconscious 
lilies are arrayed in glory. Here we learn precious 
lessons of divine benevolence and grace. And thus, 
through all the catalogue of the moral and intellectual 
graces which go to make up a glorious character, we 
see in the mirror of the divine Word the model for our 

R3656 : page 330 

imitation; and in contemplation of all that is lovely, as 
embodied in him, and of all that is pure and holy and 
beautiful, we are changed little by little in the course 
of years to the same blessed likeness— from glory to glory. 



So be it: let the good work go on until every grace adorns 
the spotless robe of our imputed righteousness, received 
by faith in the blessed Son of God, whose earthly life 
was a perfect illustration of the Father's character, so 
that he could say— "He that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father." Let us, therefore, mark well the love of 
Christ, the gentleness, the patience, the faithfulness, 
the zeal, the personal integrity and the self-sacrificing 
spirit. Mark well, then imitate his example and shine 
in his likeness. 

The Apostle adds (2 Cor. 4:7) that the fact that we 
thus hold this treasure of a transformed mind in these 
defective earthen vessels proves the excellency of the 
power of God, and not of us. And so, by constant yielding 
to the influences of the Spirit of God, we may show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. (1 Pet. 2:9.) Oh, let our 
efforts and prayers continually be that these poor earthen 
vessels may more and more show forth the praises of our 
God! Let them be clean in body and mind; let no evil 
communications proceed out of the mouth; and let no 
actions unworthy of the sons of God dishonor these 
living temples of the holy Spirit. True, on account of our 
deformities we may very imperfectly perform good 
works; but, by the grace of God, let us at least refrain 
from known evil. 



R3656 : page 330 

JEWS PROVIDENTIALLY DELIVERED. 

-ESTHER 4:10-5:3.-NOVEMBER 5.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord preserveth all 
them that love him."— Psalm 145:20. 

WHILE the more faithful of the Jews had gone 
back to Palestine to repair its wastes and, as 
seen in our last lesson, were rebuilding the 
Temple, the Lord was not negligent of the remainder of 
the people who had not been sufficiently zealous to 
return to "the land of promise" under the decree of 
Cyrus granting them the privilege. Hundreds of thousands 
of Jews resided in all parts of the Persian empire, 
which then included Babylonia and Persia and nearly 
all Asia, including India. While special lessons and 
peculiar trials were given to those rebuilding the Temple, 
the Lord's favor was upon the remainder of the chosen 
people to the extent that he permitted to come upon them 
a great trial, severe testing, which undoubtedly taught 
them a valuable lesson in their far-off homes. 

A record of this great testing is furnished us in the 
Book of Esther. The king of Persia at this time, about 
forty years after the completion of the Temple, was 



Ahasuerus, otherwise known as Xerxes, who chose for 
his queen the beautiful and accomplished Esther, a 
Jewess— apparently without particular thought or knowledge 
respecting her nationality, and without knowing 
that Mordecai, one of his faithful attendants, a keeper 
of the palace gate, was her uncle. The story of Esther is 
a most remarkable one, and confirms the proverb that 
"Truth is stranger than fiction." 

Haman, one of the nobles of the land and a favorite 
with the king, became incensed against Mordecai because 
the latter would not show him as much respect as others 
of the people. His pride excited his animosity to such 
an extent that he secured the king's decree against all 
Jews everywhere throughout the civilized world under the 
control of the Persian government. The edict was 
sweepingly broad, and directed the people in every 
quarter of the Persian empire to destroy, to kill, to cause 
to perish, all Jews both young and old, both little children 

R3657 : page 330 

and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth 
day of the twelfth month. This commandment of the 
king was written out in various languages of the various 
peoples of the realm, signed with the king's seal and sent 
out by special messengers, a year being allowed to give 
ample time for the information to reach even the most 
distant quarters of the realm; and as an incitement to 
the doing of the work thoroughly, those who killed the 
Jews were given the privilege of taking all their possessions. 
Haman felt that he now had accomplished a 
great revenge against the Jew who stood at the gate. 
Mordecai and all the Jews, on learning of the edict, were 
of course greatly troubled. They had but a year to 
live. We may safely assume that such an experience as 
this would do more to draw the hearts of the Jews to 
the Lord in reverence and supplication than anything 
else that could have occurred to them. They fasted and 
prayed, in sackcloth and ashes. 

Our lesson touches upon the matter at this point. 
The proclamation and edict had been in force for more 
than a month. Queen Esther had heard of her uncle's 
mourning in sackcloth, and its cause, and felt a special 
interest in him, as she had been an orphan and had been 
his special protege. Mordecai assured her that it was 
not only for him she should mourn, but that this edict 
included herself as well as all Jews, and that she should 
bestir herself to bring the matter before the king, and if 
possible, to have another edict issued which would 
counteract this in some measure. But there lay the 
difficulty: the laws of the Medes and Persians altered 
not, could not be changed, must stand as though they 
were unalterable. Nevertheless, something must be 
done, and the queen was the only one in position to 
make any approach to the king. For others to have 
done so would have cost their own lives. 



NOTING OPPORTUNITIES AS DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

Mordecai, evidently trusting in the Lord that the 
decree could never be accomplished, called the queen's 
attention to the fact that quite possibly she had come 
into her present position of honor and privilege for the 
very purpose of staying this evil against her people. 
His suggestion was that quite likely God's providence 
had brought her to that place to be the divine agency for 
preserving the Jews from the evil malignity of their 
enemies in power. But he added that if she failed to 
respond to these opportunities, to manifest loyalty to 
the Lord's people, failed to risk something on their 
behalf, it would mean her own loss anyway shortly; 
and that he believed that God would provide some means 
for the deliverance of the people in general. It was her 
opportunity, it was her duty to act, and the responsibility 
he cast upon her. 

R3657 : page 331 

There is a beautiful lesson of faith here that should 
appeal to all of the Spiritual Israelites. Whatever we 
have, whatever positions we occupy of influence or 
power or wealth or confidence in the esteem of others, 
is so much of a stewardship granted to us by the Lord 
and respecting which we should expect to give an 
account; and if the account would be rendered with 
joy, we must be faithful even to the risking of our lives 
in the interests of the Lord's people, the Lord's cause. 
Let us lay this feature of Esther's experience to heart, 
that we may draw valuable lessons therefrom, helpful 
to us in the spiritual way. The suggestion that she had 
not come to a place of honor and privilege by accident, 
but that the Lord had overruled in the matter, is one 
that should appeal to all Israelites indeed. Whatever 
we have is of the Lord's providence; let us use it faithfully 
and as wisely as possible for him and his; thus 
our own blessings and joys will be increased as well as 
our favor with the Lord. 

The queen's answer was that Mordecai, as well as 
all the people, knew that if she or anyone else should 
attempt to go into the king's presence uninvited it 
would mean their death, unless the king chanced to feel 
favorable to them and extended his golden sceptre. 
She remarked, also, that evidently the king was not 
feeling very gracious toward her, because he had not 
called her into his presence for more than a month. 
That her fears were not groundless is evident to those 
acquainted with the history of those times. For instance, 
it is recorded of this very king that when en route for a 
war he rested at Olaenae of Phrygia, where he was the 
guest of Pythias, who entertained him magnificently; 
but when the latter begged as a favor that of his five 
sons in the king's army the eldest might be left with him 



in his old age, the brutal Xerxes in a rage caused that son 
to be slain in the presence of his father, the body divided 
into two parts, the one part placed on one side the road 
and the other on the other side, and the whole army 
marched between them. Of another Persian king it is 
related that to show his skill in archery he shot an arrow 
into the heart of his young cup-bearer, the son of his 
greatest favorite, Prexaspes. It is related of this same 
Xerxes that he allowed one of his previous queens to 
mutilate one of her rivals most horribly. "Her breasts, 
nose, lips, ears, were cut off and thrown to the dogs, her 
tongue was torn out by the roots, and thus disfigured she 
was sent back to her home." 

SEEKING DIVINE GUIDANCE 

Persuaded that no other course was open than to 
risk her life in approaching the king, Esther sent word to 
her uncle and through him to all the Jews of the palace 
city that they should fast with her for three days, and 
this, of course, implied prayer. We cannot suppose that 
they abstained absolutely from food and drink for three 
days, but that they went on short allowance, avoiding 
anything that would be specially pleasurable and all 
luxuries. This prayer and fasting convinces us that not 
all the Jews who had faith in the Lord had returned to 
Palestine, that some of this kind were still scattered 
throughout all Asia. No doubt the exceptional trial of 
this time thus proved a great blessing and strengthening 
to the faith of Esther and her uncle and all the Jews. 

At the close of the three days the queen, attired in 
her best royal robes to appear as attractive as possible, 
approached the king. Thus she used wisdom and sought 
to cooperate with her prayers for divine guidance and 
blessing. The king was very gracious to her and extended 
the golden sceptre, which she touched, and then perceiving 
that only some urgent matter of request had thus 
brought her into his presence he inquired what he could 
do for her, assuring her that it should be done even to 
the extent of half of his kingdom— the latter expression, 
however, being doubtless a mere formality indicating 
great interest. 

The queen's plans were evidently all well thought 
out, although at this time she was only about fifteen years 
of age. Doubtless the Lord granted the wisdom necessary 
for the occasion. She did not communicate her request, 
but rather led on the king's expectancy by inviting him 
first to come to a banquet which she had arranged 
in his honor, and to which also his most trusted officer, 
Haman, was invited. The appointment was kept, and 
at that banquet the queen again parried the inquiry 
as to her real desires by asking that the same two should 
honor her by attending a banquet on the day following 
also, and this was agreed to. Some of the Lord's dear 
people of the spiritual Israel are a little inclined to go 
to extremes and, trusting in the Lord, do nothing to 



forward the cause they wish to serve. We believe that 
Esther's course is a good example of propriety. We 
should both watch and pray, labor and wait, be wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves. We should do all in 
our power while trusting to the Lord for the results, 
assured that he is able to make up all of our deficiencies, 
but at the same time leaving as little deficiency as 
possible. 

Meantime the Lord worked upon the king from 
another standpoint, we know not how— divine providence 
has a thousand ways for its operation. The king passed 
a sleepless night, and seems to have inferred in some 
manner that he had been derelict to some obligation— 
that some one who had done him a favor had not been 
suitably rewarded. He called for the reading of the 
court records as to various incidents, and amongst these 
noted an occasion on which two of his trusted palace 
servants had conspired to take his life and had been 
frustrated by the exposure of their plot by Mordecai. 
No doubt the king was guided to this matter in some 
way by the Lord's providence. He inquired what 
recompense had been made to Mordecai, what had been 
done for him, how had he been rewarded for this faithfulness 
to the king? Finding that no special reward had 
been given he called for Haman to offer suggestions. 

The latter had been grieving over what he considered 
Mordecai's insult to him in not bowing to him, and 
feeling very confident of his influence with the king he 
had already erected a gallows in the court of his own 
house, purposing to have Mordecai hanged thereon by 
the king's decree before another day. He had come to 
the palace for the very purpose of requesting Mordecai's 
life when he was inquired for by the king, and asked to 
suggest what would be suitable honor to be done to a 
man whom the king desired to honor. Thinking that he 
was the person to be honored he suggested the king's 
horse, the king's robe, the king's crown, and one of the 
king's chief men to lead the horse throughout the city 
proclaiming in a loud voice that the king was thus 
honoring the one who rode. To his surprise the king 
directed him to carry out this program with Mordecai 
as the honored man, and himself the king's representative 
leading the horse and proclaiming the king's favor. 

R3658 : page 332 

The king's word could not be disputed or even questioned, 
and the matter was carried out in every detail, 
but Haman, covered with shame and mortification, 
returned to his own house for consolation from his 
friends for his wounded pride. 

In the afternoon the messenger arrived to escort 
him to the banquet with the king and the queen. Thither 
the unhappy man went, little surmising what more 
there was in store for him. In the midst of the banquet 
the king again pressed the queen to know the important 



thing she had to request. Her time had come, and she 
besought the king for her own life and the life of her 
people, telling him that their enemies had inveighed 
against them for their utter destruction. The king, 
evidently failing to comprehend, asked who was the 
wicked person who had thus plotted to kill his queen and 
all her family connections, and she replied, This wicked 
Haman, who is with us at the banquet board. The king 
was perturbed in mind and walked from the banquet 
room into the garden to meditate what course he should 
pursue. 

THE WICKED CAUGHT IN THEIR OWN TRAP 

Meantime Haman perceived that everything was 
going wrong with him, that his life was in jeopardy, 
and that only the queen's word could spare his life; and 
so when the king left the apartment Haman made every 
appeal to the queen for her forgiveness and intercession 
on his behalf. In his frenzy of fear he forgot the circumstances 
and surroundings, and was partly 
stretched upon the couch upon which the queen 
was reclining at the banquet, when the king 
re-entered, and noting the situation his wrath 
knew no bounds. Ascertaining about the gallows, 
he commanded that Haman should be hanged at once 
upon the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. Haman's 
estates were conferred upon the queen by the 
royal decree, and then the queen, explaining that Mordecai, 
who had once saved the king's life, was her uncle, 
requested the royal interposition to counteract the effects 
of the previous edict for the extermination of the Jews. 

It was well understood that no decree or edict of 
the Medes and Persians could be altered, amended, withdrawn 
—once issued it must stand; but the king gave 
permission to Mordecai to arrange the matter with the 
wise men of the palace, so that another decree should 
be issued which would be equally binding, and which 
would, in some measure if not fully, offset the first 
decree. This was done by formulating a decree permitting 
the Jews throughout the entire realm to defend 
themselves, and to do to all their enemies all that their 
enemies were permitted by the first decree to do to them. 
This last decree was similarly sent by messengers, under 
the king's seal, to all parts of the empire, and as a result, 
when the fateful day came which was to have meant the 
extermination of all the Jews, the Jews privileged by the 
second decree to defend themselves were prepared, 
armed, and had favor with the magistrates of all the 
lands, because the second decree was understood to be 
a measurable offset to the first, and it was known that 
Mordecai, a Jew, was now the king's chief counsellor, 
or, as we would say to-day, Secretary of State. The 
result was the slaying of thousands throughout the 
realm, not chiefly the Jews but their opponents, their 
enemies, some eight hundred of the Jews in the palace 



city being destroyed. 

"DO GOOD TO THEM THAT HATE YOU" 

We are not to look back to this record of the slaying 
of enemies as an illustration of what Spiritual 
Israelites are to do. We as Israelites indeed, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, are to love our enemies and to do good 
to those who hate us and despitefully use us and persecute 
us. We are to bless and injure not. We are to 
remember that at this time the Lord had not even revealed 
his own love. He had revealed his justice and 
his power but not his love, for the Scriptures declare, 
"Herein was manifested the love of God, in that he 
gave his only begotten Son," etc. (1 Jno. 4:9)— it was 
never manifested before. It is this great love which God 
has manifested, and which he has inculcated upon 
those who appreciate his love and who have been benefited 
by it, that appeals to us. We love him because 
he first loved us, and we love others because, having 
learned first to love the Lord, we have experienced an 
enlargement of heart and a broadening of sympathies. 
And this breadth of sympathy and love, which is a 
continual growth in the Christian in its relationship to 
the others, is proportionate to its exercise toward God. 
He that loveth God loveth also his brother and his 
neighbor. 

The heart of this lesson is respecting divine providence, 
divine care over the Lord's people. True, God's 
providence has not been manifested in favor of the Jews 
for more than 1,800 years, because they have been cast 
off for a time, rejected from the Lord's favor, their house 
left desolate because of their rejection of Messiah. We 
are glad, however, that the Lord through the apostle 
has made clear to us that this blindness on their part and 
rejection of them are not to last forever— that in due 
time their blindness is to be turned away and the good 
promises of the Lord are still theirs and shall be fulfilled 
to them. The Apostle assures us that their casting off 
is merely until the fulness of the Gentiles shall have been 
brought in to divine favor, until the full number of the 
elect Church to be selected from the Gentiles shall have 
been gathered. With the completion of the elect spiritual 
Israel, the Apostle assures us that divine favor will 
again return to natural Israel, who are still beloved for 
the fathers' sake— these now shall obtain mercy through 
your [the Church's] mercy— through the mercy of the 
glorified Christ. -Rom. 11:25-32. 

When we note the divine providential care over 
God's typical people it increases our faith and trust as 
his spiritual children, for with the Apostle we reason 
that if God so loved us while we were yet sinners as to 
give his Son for us, much more does he love us now that 
we are no more sinners, aliens, strangers, foreigners, but 
consecrated to him and seeking to walk in the footsteps 
of our Redeemer. Likewise we reason that if God 



exercised his providential care in the interests of the 
typical people he is both able and willing to do as much 
and more for his spiritual Israel— Israelites indeed, in 
whom there is no guile— those who have entered into 
covenant relationship with him and are seeking to walk 
not after the flesh but after the spirit. 

Our Golden Text is in accord with this thought, 
"The Lord preserveth all them that love him." True, 
he has a sympathetic love for the world which has led 
him to provide a redemption for all in due time— all the 
redeemed ones will have a manifestation of divine love 
and care over their interests— but now, during the Gospel 

R3658 : page 333 

age, divine blessings are conferred upon those who 
will constitute the Church, the body of Christ, who love 
him more than they love houses or lands, parents or 
children or self. All who can thus affirm to their own 
hearts their loyalty to the Lord, their faith and trust in 
him, may be assured that all things are supervised for 
their good and working out for their welfare, in matters 
temporal and eternal. 



R3658 : page 333 

GATHERING AND WINNOWING. 

-EZRA 8:21-32.-NOVEMBER 12.- 

Golden Text:— "The hand of our God is 
upon all those for good that seek him." 

A PREVIOUS lesson showed us how the rebuilding 
of the Temple had been delayed for about twenty 
years, with various discouragements, by the 
returning exiles from Babylon, but was finally finished, 
the people being spurred on in their zeal through the 
prophesying of Haggai and Zechariah. With the completion 
of the Temple came a lull in the zeal of the people 
and a corresponding deadness in religious matters for 
about fifty years. We must sympathize with the struggles 
of those poor people against the unfavorable conditions 
surrounding them. Their city wall was still unbuilt, 
they were exposed to the malevolence of their 
neighbors, who hated the Jews, largely because of their 
refusal to mingle with the Samaritans, a thing which 
the former were not permitted to do according to the 
law of Moses. 

Added to this unfriendly relationship to their 
nearest neighbor was the fact that they were continually 
subject to trouble, loss of life and loss of property from 
marauding bands. They did not connect these losses 
and disadvantages properly in their minds, nor see that, 



rightly received, all these matters would have been 
working together for good to them, and that anything 
which would not have been for their welfare the Lord 
would have hindered. Instead they grew careless and 
indifferent to religious matters, losing considerably the 
zeal which first brought them from Babylon. Indeed 
many of them concluded that they would affiliate more 
with the Gentiles round about them, thus setting at 
naught the divine counsel— would seek worldly alliances 
for themselves and their children. As a result, with 
many of them religion reached a very low plane— their 
law was disesteemed and disobeyed. 

God, however, still had his eye upon the nation 
which he had chosen, and which, according to divine 
purpose, must be sifted yet kept together until the coming 
of Messiah and the establishment through him of 
Spiritual Israel. In harmony with this we find that at 
this time the Lord stirred up the love and zeal of others 
residing in Babylon, chiefly the children of some who 

R3659 : page 333 

had declined to participate in the first return under 
Zerubbabel or were too young to go or to exercise their 
own volitions at that time. It was nearly seventy-five 
years after the return of the first company of about 
50,000 under the decree of Cyrus that Ezra, a young 
man filled with religious zeal, became the leader of a 
company of the Jews still residing in Babylon, and went 
up with them to inspire and revive those who had first 
returned and their children and grandchildren meantime 
born in Palestine. Our lesson relates to the return 
of this second company. 

THE KING'S ASSISTANCE 

Xerxes, the Persian king who took Esther to be his 
queen, and who exalted Mordecai, her uncle, to be chief 
minister of state in the Persian empire, had been murdered 
by a palace conspiracy, and his son Artaxerxes 
was the reigning monarch at the time Ezra undertook 
the expedition in question. Three things were necessary 
for the success of the project: First, the king's promise or 
decree; secondly, money not only for the expenses of 
the expedition but also to properly forward the work at 
Jerusalem and encourage those who had become discouraged 
there; thirdly, the interest of the Jews required 
to be aroused so that a sufficient number of volunteers 
might be found. The king furnished the money and 
gave the necessary authority. This might seem remarkable 
did we not remember that in the Lord's 
providence his acquaintance at his father's court as a 
boy would more or less associate him with Mordecai and 
other Jews prominent in the empire and inspire him also 
with a respect for the God of the Jews. 

Ezra belonged to the priestly family and evidently 



was very sincere, not only inspiring the king with confidence 
in the project but also enlisting the sympathy 
and cooperation of many of his fellow countrymen to 
the number of about 1,700— probably including the 
families of some of them. These were volunteers— no 
one had a right to insist upon their going. Some may 
have gone with more or less of a spirit of adventure, but 
doubtless having knowledge of conditions at Jerusalem 
the majority were thoroughly enthused with a religious 
ardor for God and for his law. Knowing what we do 
through the records of Ezra's thorough-going character, 
teaching, practices, we may be sure that no other class 
would be attracted to the standard raised by him in this 
expedition. An illustration of his spirit is furnished in 
the first verse of our lesson. 

A certain point for the assembling of those who 
would return with him had been established at the river 
Ahava. The first condition enjoined on the assembly 
was a day of fasting, and we may be sure also a day of 
prayer to the Lord for his blessing upon the expedition— 
"That we might humble ourselves before our God and 
seek of him a straight way for us and for our little ones 
and for all our substance." It was a great undertaking 
in those days to set out upon a journey of over eight 
hundred miles and requiring slow travel, made necessary 
by the presence of women and children in the company 
and the absence of vehicles. The journey required about 
four months' time. True, there was a shorter road 
through the desert, but that would have been much more 
unfavorable in every way, and extra hazardous on account 
of the Bedouin tribes of the desert, who would 
have sought to take from them the treasures of gold and 
silver which they took along and which are estimated at 
between two and three million dollars in our money, 
but really equivalent to much more than this when 
measured by the standard of the value of labor now as 
compared with then. 

R3659 : page 334 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S TESTINGS 

Seeking to apply this lesson to spiritual Israel, we 
see during this Gospel age somewhat similar sittings 
and tests of the Lord's people. We find to-day that some 
of the children of the most devout reformers have lapsed 
into measurable indifference respecting the holy things 
of the Lord and his law, and are disposed, like the Israelites 
of the first return, to not only fellowship the world 
but to amalgamate with it in customs, in habits, in 
social functions. The spirit of separateness and consecration 
which enthused their forefathers is dying out, 
leading to a mixed or Churchianity condition not at all 
pleasing to the Lord and calling for reformation. On 
the other hand we see spiritual Israelites coming forward 
from Babylon with great zeal for the Lord and his 



cause, and if perhaps we wonder, we find a solution of 
the matter to be that some of these inherited a blessing 
from their parents, and we remember the word of the 
Lord that he would show mercy and favor to many 
generations of them that love and reverence him. 

Ezra seems to have been led to the announcement 
of the fast by a realization of his own weakness and of 
the dangers which would beset the Israelites on the 
journey. Relying upon the Lord's promises given to 
natural Israel, that they would be blessed in temporal 
things while obedient to the divine precepts, he had 
almost boasted of this matter to the king Artaxerxes, 
saying, "The hand of our God is upon all them that seek 
him for good, but his power and his wrath are against all 
them that forsake him." It had been on the strength 
of this faith and this testimony that the royal decree had 
gone forth and the moneys had been subscribed, and 
Ezra felt that now to ask the king for a troop of soldiers 
for the protection of himself and his associates would have 
implied at least their doubt of the favor of God toward 
them or of his ability to protect them. 

Realizing the perils of the situation and the danger 
from enemies, and that he was responsible in great 
measure for the lives of those who would be under his 
direction, and that under the circumstances he could not 
ask for soldiers, Ezra felt all the more the necessity for 
going before the Lord in prayer and with fasting, and 
hence the fast was enjoined upon all the people. We 
cannot doubt this did them good, tending to direct 
their hearts to the Lord as the great Captain of their 
Salvation, awakening in them the thought that the whole 
expedition was based upon faith in the Lord and in his 
promises as respects the future and the present life. 

FASTINGS OF SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

That there is an advantage in fasting and prayer to 
the spiritual Israelite is beyond question. Our case is 
not exactly that of the Israelites under Ezra, and yet 
there is some similarity. We are not guaranteed earthly 
blessings or earthly protection against earthly adversaries. 
As spiritual Israelites, however, we have a still 
higher guarantee, for in our estimation our spiritual 
interests as new creatures are higher and grander than 
all of our earthly interests, beyond comparison. We 
have the guarantee that, whatever shall befall us, the 
Lord is able and willing to overrule it for good if we trust 
in him. It is in proportion as this gracious promise of 
the Lord fails to be appreciated by us that we look to 
the world for protection. The very experience of realizing 
danger and feeling timidity may prove indeed a 
superior blessing to us if it will but lead us nearer to 
the Lord— through fasting and prayer. 

Fasting, as we have seen heretofore, signifies self-denial. 
The thought is not the weakening of the 
body by absolute abstention from food, but rather 



a disciplining of the body by abstaining from delicacies, 
relishes, etc. No doubt such fastings 
are profitable to us in other ways than one. 
They not only relieve the physical system of over 
pressure, but with many tend to clarify the mind and 
make it more acute, more spiritually inclined. We all 
recognize this as a fact whether we can explain the 
philosophy of it or not. To all believers, especially to 
all starting upon a course of consecration, of self-devotion 
to the Lord and to his cause, we commend fasting 
in reasonable and proper ways, the denying to one's 
self the gratification of natural passions, and in general 
the living moderately, abstemiously, using this world 
and its comforts and blessings as not abusing them— 
the using of them in so far and in such a manner as will 
be to the highest advantage as new creatures in Christ. 
With the consecrated Christian this is not only the 
incident of a day but the course of a life. His every day 
is a fast day, a day of self-denial as respects any and 
everything sinful, and as respects any and everything 
that would not inure to the spiritual advantage of himself 
or others. 

CONTINUOUS BAPTISM AND FASTING 

Our fasting is like our baptism— it has a definite 
point of beginning and a definite point of ending. It 
begins with our baptism even unto death and it ends 
in death. These self-deniers, these fasters, are the self-sacrificers, 
the overcomers of the world, to whom the 
Lord has promised his special blessing of spiritual favors, 
peace, joy and all the fruits and graces of the Spirit in 
the present time, and by and by the everlasting blessedness 
of fellowship with himself in all the joys and perfections 
and completeness of the Kingdom condition- 
glory, honor and immortality. 

Ezra says, "So we fasted and besought our God for 
this: and he was entreated of us." This verse could be 
applied in full measure to the spiritual Israelites who, 
under the lead of the great High Priest of our profession, 
are travelling to the New Jerusalem. Their fasting 
and prayers to the Lord for protection and help along 
the narrow way and for success to the journey's end are 
heard, and the Lord assures us in advance that all such 
petitions are granted. It is our Father's good pleasure 
to give the holy Spirit to those who ask, and to make all 
things work together for their good, and to bring them 
under the leading of the great Chief Shepherd and ultimately 
to the Kingdom. In other words, "He is faithful 
who has called us, who also will do it." (1 Thess. 5:24) 
—he will do all he has promised to do, exceedingly 
more abundantly than we could have asked of him or 
expected. The whole matter is with us: if our consecration 
is based upon faith in the redemptive work of our 
Lord, if it is a full and complete consecration, and if we 
live it out day by day, the results will be all and more 



than we ever expected. 

"LET EVERYTHING BE DONE DECENTLY AND IN ORDER. 

Our lesson shows that Ezra divided the wealth 
contributed by the Jews throughout Babylonia and 
Persia and by the king amongst twelve prominent men 
of the Levitical tribe, strict count being kept of what 

R3660 : page 335 

each received and he being held responsible for the 
delivery of that amount to the properly constituted 
representatives of the Jews at Jerusalem. Thus our Lord, 
who is the Captain of our journey and who is bringing 
us to the heavenly Kingdom, gives to every one of his 
followers pounds and talents for which they must 
ultimately give account. 

In verse 28 Ezra said to these twelve men, "Ye are 
holy unto the Lord and the vessels are holy, and the gold 
and silver are a freewill offering unto God, the God of 
your fathers. Watch ye and keep them, until ye weigh 
them before the chief of the priests and the Levites and 
the princes of the fathers' houses of Israel at Jerusalem 
in the chambers of the house of the Lord." The chambers 
of the Temple were the little rooms of the court, separate 
from the Temple yet connected therewith. In these 
the officiating priests lived, and in them were stored the 
treasures belonging to the Temple and its service; 
they were, therefore, the safety deposit vaults of that 
time for the Lord's treasury. 

We can see the responsibility that rested upon those 
men, yet still greater responsibility rests upon us who 
have received of the Lord's spiritual gifts and treasures, 
his great Truth. If it was required of those men handling 
earthly treasures that they should be faithful and watchful, 
diligent, much more may this be reasonably required 
of us— "A charge to keep I have, a God to glorify." 
All of these lessons should come to us as fresh reminders 
of our responsibility, not for our discouragement, but 
reversely to make us more watchful, more careful, more 
zealous, more appreciative of the riches of God's grace 
committed to us. Those of old time were to hide their 
treasure, but we are commanded to show ours on every 
occasion— "Let your light so shine before men, that 
they seeing your good works may glorify your Father 
who is in heaven." The more we let our light shine, the 
brighter it will shine; the more we use and display the 
riches of God's grace entrusted to us, the more valuable 
will be our treasure and the more safe we will be, for it is 
a treasure which our enemies will not really covet, and 
our faithfulness in acknowledging the Lord in all our 
ways will assure us of his protection and care. 

AT THE JOURNEY'S END 



Ezra and his company, after a four months' journey, 
arrived safe at Jerusalem, the Lord having indeed kept 
them and delivered them from the marauding bands of 
enemies on the journey. Then it was that Ezra's real 
work began. He found matters at Jerusalem and 
throughout Judea in a much worse condition than he 
had anticipated, and was used of the Lord in instituting 
a very radical national reformation which proved a 
great blessing to the people, though it sifted out some of 
their number. 

Ezra magnified the Law, showing the people how 
the calamities that had befallen them as a nation were 
all foretold in the Law and were all the result of a failure 
to keep that Law, and the proper course now was not 
only to rebuild the Temple, as they had done, but to 
go back to the Law and seek to keep it inviolate to the 
best of their ability. He pointed to the fact that they 
had made unlawful unions with the tribes and nationalities 
surrounding them, and that the only course remaining 
was to separate themselves from all heathen people. 
This involved special trouble and trial in cases where 
Jews had married heathen wives, and Ezra's course would 
be roundly denounced by the entire civilized world to-day; 
but evidently he did the proper thing at the proper 
time in God's estimation, and was the divine instrument 
in sharply separating between the Jews and other 
peoples. This spirit has persisted amongst the Jews 
ever since, and the effect has been what the Lord desired, 
the keeping of that nation and people comparatively 
separate and distinct from all others. True, it 
wrought great hardship upon the wives who were put 
away and the children who were thus alienated, though 
much the same course is to-day prescribed by law against 
the Mormons, and the wives of plural marriages and 
bigamists. 

A lesson for spiritual Israelites may be found 
herein, though not according to the exact letter of Ezra's 
teaching. The spiritual Israelite is directed by the Captain 
of our Salvation, through the Apostle Paul as his 
mouthpiece, to be not unequally yoked together with 
unbelievers in marriage, and to have as little as possible 
to do with the world in general. Nevertheless the 
spiritual Israelite is enjoined that if the unbelieving 
husband or wife remain and it be possible to live together 
in unity even under trying circumstances, they 
should do it; but if the unbelieving one depart, let him 
depart, consider it to be of the Lord's providence that 
the Israelite should be free from a vexatious alliance, 
though he would not be free to remarry. 

"HOW LOVE I THY LAW!" 

The call of Ezra's teaching, enforced by the word 
of the Lord through the Law upon the Israelites who had 
gotten into worldly conditions and alliances, must have 
been very similar to the proclamation of Present Truth 



to-day amongst Protestants. After having come out of 
Babylon to the extent of leaving Roman Catholicism, 
they have become involved with the world in a system 
which may very properly be termed Babylonish— 
Churchianity. The Lord's people have entered worldly 
alliances through worldly sects and parties, contrary to 
the divine injunction and the spirit of the divine law, 
which commands us to be subject in religious matters 
to the Lord and to him alone. These misalliances with 
the daughters of Rome are so general in our day that only 
the Israelites indeed will have the spiritual ears to hear 
the message or the spiritual courage to break off the 
improper union, to stand out separate from all earthly 
alliances as the people of God, recognizing one Head of 
the one Church whose names are written in heaven- 
recognizing as brethren all who are united to that one 
Head, and repudiating all false bodies of Christ (churches) 
as well as the false heads to which they are united. 
This is the particular trial apparently of our day. 
The voice of the Lord is being sounded forth in every 
quarter of Christendom, saying, "Babylon is fallen, is 
fallen, Come out of her, my people, that ye partake not 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." The churchianity 
of Protestantism is but a transplanting of the 
spirit of Babylon to new ground, and brings into bondage 
all those who will associate with these sects and 
parties; and all who would be in full accord with the 
Lord and have his fullest blessing must be faithful to 
his message and stand firm and loyal to him at any cost. 
To such and such alone the message of the Lord is now 
going forth, proving a glorious blessing and uplift, bringing 
them nearer to the Lord and into closer fellowship 
with those who are truly his and most completely under 
the blessings and provisions which he has made for his 
faithful. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 